When Tottenham welcome Arsenal to the Hive on Saturday it would be easy to expect another walk in the park for the league leaders. The Gunners have an impressive record against their north London rivals, having beaten them on the three occasions the teams have met in the Women’s Super League, with an aggregate score of 11-1. In the opening fixture of Women’s Football Weekend, Arsenal are still firm favourites as the only team yet to drop a point after six games. However, Tottenham’s impressive form has caught the eye. Spurs sit third, five points behind their opponents, and under the former England assistant coach Rehanne Skinner have been turned into a team that know how to utilise the sum of their parts. “They’re a well-organised team that are consistent in the way they perform and in what they do,” said Arsenal’s manager, Jonas Eidevall, before reflecting on Tottenham’s 1-1 draw at home to Manchester United last Sunday. “You could see in the game against United, they kept believing, they kept doing the same things over and over again. And that’s usually a very good way to take points or win football matches. They have a clear identity and players who believe in it.” Skinner arrived after the sacking of the widely respected management duo of Karen Hills and Juan Carlos Amoros, who had guided the team into the top flight. There was a feeling that the club were short-sighted, putting short-term gain ahead of the patient work that had allowed the side to climb steadily up the leagues. The recruitment of the US superstar Alex Morgan, making her return after pregnancy with her daughter Charlie, at the start of last season added to a feeling that Spurs wanted to accelerate the pace of their drive to the top. However, with Morgan returned to the NWSL and Skinner in the door, that has changed. There was smart recruitment over shiny big-name signings. Players with WSL experience and young talent such as Asmita Ale and Eleanor Heeps were added. The squad was balanced. A win over Manchester City in their second game and the draw with United speak to the growth under a manager approaching her first anniversary at the club. Breaking the grip of City, Chelsea and Arsenal on the top three spots will not be easy. United went closest last term and Everton have overhauled their squad in an attempt to challenge. But when trying to compete with such long-established clubs upheaval is not necessarily advantageous. “It takes time to build a squad,” Skinner says. “It takes you time to make sure you understand what the direction of travel is of the league, because it’s not just about the players here and now – you’re trying to build for the way that the game is going to actually change. “In the year where we had a lot of Americans coming into the league, for example, the expectation probably wasn’t that they were going to influence the league as much as they did. Sometimes you end up playing a bit of catch-up, but we’re just trying to make sure that we set our stall out for what we want to try and be about as a team, and how we feel that’s going to build us into games and build us into this league.” What matters is time, but patience is in increasingly short supply. Clubs want to see a return on investments, whether that return be financial or sporting. With more and more teams investing to break through into the top three, measuring success on the basis of league position becomes increasingly hard. “We’re not under any illusions that [getting into the top three] is going to happen overnight,” Skinner says. “Those top three have been in this game and in this league for a long, long time and it’s a building process. We obviously all want to try and bridge the gap as fast as possible but it is going to take time.” How then does the manager and do the players manage their expectations and those of fans and directors? “I think the biggest, most important thing for us is our honesty and openness around where we are and what we’re trying to achieve,” says Skinner. “Hopefully the fans can see that there’s been progress and be on board with the fact that you don’t get that overnight. It’s really difficult. “If we’re making statements that we can’t live up to, that creates a challenge. But we’re being really open about the fact that this is a journey. Hopefully if we can keep evolving what that experience is like for our fans, there’s enough within there that they can see there’s progress and they want to back us and they want to support us for the longer term.”This blog is now ending, thanks for following. The Netherlands will return to partial lockdown amid surging Covid cases - the first lockdown in western Europe this winter. Taking effect from Saturday evening for three weeks, restaurants and non-essential shops will close early and spectators will be barred from major sporting events. Brazil’s Supreme Court has suspended a government order that prevented companies from requiring employees to provide proof that they have been vaccinate against Covid-19 and stopped dismissals of those not immunised, Reuters reports. Elderly and vulnerable people must get their booster jabs if a rise in Covid cases in the UK is to be prevented, the British prime minister said, as he warned of “storm clouds” forming over parts of Europe where infections are surging. Story here. AstraZeneca has started signing commercial contracts to supply its Covid-19 vaccine next year as the pandemic moves to an “endemic phase” – in a major shift away from the drugmaker’s not-for-profit pricing. Story here. One in three Americans aged 65 and above has received a Covid-19 booster jab, data from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed on Friday. The Russian government has published a draft proposal to require QR codes as proof of immunity to Covid-19 from air and railway travellers up to June 1. Latvia’s parliament voted to ban lawmakers who refuse to get a Covid vaccine from voting on legislature and participating in discussions and to dock their pay. Germany’s health minister, Jens Spahn, said the country faces a “bitter December” if immediate measures are not taken to try to control the spread of coronavirus. The head of Germany’s Robert Koch Institute advised Germans to avoid large gatherings amid the record surge in coronavirus infections, saying: “It’s five minutes past midnight.” Austria’s government is likely to decide on Sunday to impose a lockdown on people who have not been vaccinated against coronavirus as daily infections have surged to record levels. Story here. Norway will offer a third Covid vaccine dose to everyone aged 18 or older and will give municipalities the option of using digital “corona passes” as a way to beat back an ongoing surge in infections, the government said. Mauritius imposed a series of Covid-19 curbs today as it confronts a surge in cases despite a high vaccination rate. Mexico reported 242 new confirmed deaths from Covid-19 on Friday, Reuters reports. It brings the country’s official death toll from the pandemic to 290,872, according to health ministry data. One in three Americans aged 65 and above has received a Covid-19 booster jab, data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed on Friday. The country had administered 437,352,000 doses of Covid-19 vaccines in the country as of Friday morning and distributed 551,000,705 doses. Those figures are up from the 434,486,889 vaccine doses the CDC said had gone into arms by Nov. 10 out of the 541,361,525 doses delivered. The agency said 225,606,197 people had received at least one dose while 194,747,839 people had been fully vaccinated as of 6:00 a.m. ET on Friday, Reuters reports. Brazil’s Supreme Court has suspended a government order that prevented companies from requiring employees to provide proof that they have been vaccinate against Covid-19 and stopped dismissals of those not immunised, Reuters reports. Brazil’s far-right President Jair Bolsonaro, a vaccine skeptic, has criticised vaccine passports required in other countries. Justice Luis Roberto Barroso said the pandemic had killed 610,000 Brazilians and it was reasonable to surmise that the presence of unvaccinated employees poses a threat to the health of the others. “The lack of vaccination interferes with the rights of others,” he wrote in his judgment, issuing an injunction sought by four opposition parties. Brazil had 14,598 new cases of coronavirus reported in the past 24 hours and 267 deaths, the country’s health ministry said. The South American country has now registered 21,939,196 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 610,491, according to ministry data, Reuters reports. The Russian government has published a draft proposal to require QR codes as proof of immunity to Covid-19 from air and railway travellers up to 1 June. The government will decide later on the date when the rule would be implemented, transport minister Vitaly Savelyev said at a briefing broadcasted on Friday, Reuters reports. “Specific medical documentation... will have to be presented during the purchase of tickets and at the boarding whether it is a plane or a railway carriage,” Savelyev said. The proposed laws, which have yet to be approved by the parliament, suggest that, starting from 1 February, QR codes may be also needed to enter public places, including restaurants, but this set of restrictions may differ from region to region depending on the local infection rate. The UK government does not expect the pandemic to be over for at least another year and in a worst case scenario lockdowns could be needed until 2026, according to the i newspaper. It said officials are working to three scenarios of how the pandemic might play out - optimistic, middle and pessimistic. In response, a government spokesperson said: “As a responsible government, we prepare for all eventualities, regularly reviewing risk and contingency planning in light of the current situation and developments, and prioritising operations accordingly. “This is necessary to identify and prepare for any potential risks which could emerge in the future”. Austria’s government said it wanted a nationwide lockdown for those not vaccinated against or recovered from the coronavirus while Vienna authorities said they would start vaccinating children as young as five, AFP reports. Only around 65 percent of the population is fully vaccinated in Austria, a rate described by chancellor Alexander Schallenberg as “shamefully low”. Salzburg and Upper Austria states, which have seen some of the worst case rates, are already introducing a lockdown for the unvaccinated from Monday. This means they will not be able to leave the house except for reasons such as buying essential supplies, exercise or seeking medical care. “The aim is clear: we want on Sunday to give the green light for a nationwide lockdown for the unvaccinated,” Schallenberg told a press conference. He said lockdowns across the country would be enforced with “random” spot checks. A group of around 100 anti-lockdown protesters in The Netherlands gathered outside the government building in The Hague. Several people were detained for setting off fireworks and throwing objects at the police, Reuters reports. It comes after the government announced it will return to a partial lockdown from Saturday after the government ordered restaurants and shops to close early and barred spectators from major sporting events. Supermarkets and non-essential retailers will also close earlier and social distancing measures will be re-imposed. The government recommended that no more than four visitors be received at home, effective immediately. Queensland in Australia may have passed its 80% first-dose milestone, bringing a string of freedoms for the vaccinated there, but those stuck across the border still face a lengthy road back home this Christmas. The only way in is by air until the next vaccination targets are due to be met on 17 December, leaving thousands of residents stuck interstate with their cars. Even then, a question mark remains over how border checks will be implemented once Queensland reopens to interstate travellers. If you are planning a trip to Queensland, it would pay to read the fine print. Here’s what you need to know. More than 27 million Americans have had a Covid-19 booster shot, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said, Reuters reports. Psaki added: “In the past week, we’re averaging nearly 300,000 first shots per day for people aged 12 and over”, up from less than 250,000 first jabs per day in mid-July, before president Biden first discussed vaccine requirements. Here is a recap of some of the main developments from today: The Netherlands will return to partial lockdown amid surging Covid cases - the first lockdown in western Europe this winter. Taking effect from Saturday evening for three weeks, restaurants and non-essential shops will close early and spectators will be barred from major sporting events, as the country tackles record infections and intensive care admissions. Social distancing will be reintroduced, as many people as possible should work from home, and no more than four visitors over the age of 13 will be permitted in people’s homes, the prime minister, Mark Rutte, announced. Elderly and vulnerable people must get their booster jabs if a rise in Covid cases in the UK is to be prevented, the British prime minister said, as he warned of “storm clouds” forming over parts of Europe where infections are surging. Speaking in a broadcast clip, Boris Johnson said the situation was of concern. “I’m seeing the storm clouds gathering over parts of the European continent. And I’ve got to be absolutely frank with people: we’ve been here before. We remember what happens when the wave starts rolling in,” he said. Story here. AstraZeneca has started signing commercial contracts to supply its Covid-19 vaccine next year as the pandemic moves to an “endemic phase” – in a major shift away from the drugmaker’s not-for-profit pricing. Britain’s biggest pharma firm expects the vaccine to move to “modest profitability” as new orders are received. But the chief executive, Pascal Soriot, insisted that it was offering affordable and tiered pricing, depending on countries’ ability to pay. He said the vaccine, developed with Oxford University, would not become “a huge profit earner”. Story here. Latvia’s parliament voted to ban lawmakers who refuse to get a Covid vaccine from voting on legislature and participating in discussions and to dock their pay. Latvia has one of the lowest vaccination rates in the EU. The restrictions on vaccine-rejecting MPs was supported by 62 of its 100 lawmakers, and will last from Monday until mid-2022. Germany’s health minister, Jens Spahn, said the country faces a “bitter December” if immediate measures are not taken to try to control the spread of coronavirus. Against a backdrop of record infection rates, Spahn announced a return to free testing from Saturday and plans to introduce a so-called 2G-plus rule, according to which people would have to be vaccinated or recovered in addition to producing a negative test in order to attend cultural, sporting and other gatherings. The German government also declared Austria, the Czech Republic and Hungary as high-risk areas and advised Germans to avoid travelling there. The head of Germany’s Robert Koch Institute advised Germans to avoid large gatherings amid the record surge in coronavirus infections, saying: “It’s five minutes past midnight.” Germany’s weekly infection rate has soared to an all-time high of 263.7 per 100,000 people, and intensive care beds are filling up rapidly. With Christmas market season approaching, Wieler said large gatherings “must be viewed very critically” and in some situations “clearly should be cancelled”. Prof Lothar Wieler added that he would be skipping next month’s New Year’s parties, “but I urge people not to wait until then to think about their actions”. Austria’s government is likely to decide on Sunday to impose a lockdown on people who have not been vaccinated against coronavirus as daily infections have surged to record levels, the chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, said. He did not say when the lockdown would take effect, but the two provinces hardest hit by this wave of infections, Upper Austria and Salzburg, have already said they will introduce the measure for themselves on Monday. Story here. Norway will offer a third Covid vaccine dose to everyone aged 18 or older and will give municipalities the option of using digital “corona passes” as a way to beat back an ongoing surge in infections, the government said. The country is not going back into lockdown, but new measures include a requirement for adults who have been in contact with a positive case to be tested, and unvaccinated health workers will have to be tested twice a week and wear masks. Mauritius imposed a series of Covid-19 curbs today as it confronts a surge in cases despite a high vaccination rate. A month after reopening its borders to international visitors, schools were closed this week, with all classes to be held online, while bars and discos have been ordered to shut and concerts and sporting competitions banned. The government is also limiting numbers of people attending gatherings such as weddings, funerals and rallies, but said beaches would be open, although picnics are prohibited. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, has announced western Europe’s first partial Covid lockdown of this winter, with three weeks of restrictions for shops, sport and catering. Ruttee said the move was in response to record infections and rising intensive care cases. Much of the continent is facing a surge in cases, in part to be blamed on low vaccine take-up and vaccine hesitancy in several countries. Rutte said that fortunately the vast majority of people in the Netherlands had been vaccinated. But the three-week partial lockdown will start on Saturday evening. Non-essential shops will have to close at 6pm; cafes, restaurants and hotels at 8pm. Professional sport will continue but behind closed doors, including the Netherlands’ football World Cup qualifier against Norway on 16 November, and cinemas and theatres will stay open. Social distancing of 1.5 metres will be reintroduced, and a maximum of four guests over the age of 13 will be allowed at people’s homes. As many people should work from home as possible. Elderly and vulnerable people must get their booster jabs if a rise in Covid cases in the UK is to be prevented, the prime minister said, as he warned of “storm clouds” forming over parts of Europe. Germany, Austria, Slovakia and Croatia are among countries that have recently had a surge in coronavirus cases, with the former recording its highest coronavirus case numbers since the start of the pandemic. Speaking in a broadcast clip, Boris Johnson said the situation was of concern. “I’m seeing the storm clouds gathering over parts of the European continent. And I’ve got to be absolutely frank with people: we’ve been here before. We remember what happens when the wave starts rolling in,” he said. The World Health Organization’s Europe head, Hans Kluge, has said a lack of uptake of Covid vaccines is behind the increase. While Johnson noted that cases in the UK had been “drifting down for a while”, he said it was unclear if the trend was set to continue. “I’m looking at what’s happening overseas, and I’m simply saying to the British people … this is the moment to get your booster,” he said. The full story is here: World Health Organization (WHO) officials said on Friday they were hoping to convene a meeting soon to set guidelines on the use of Covid antiviral pills, saying they offered “very attractive” new prospects for clinical care. The UK became the first country to approve one of the potentially game-changing pills earlier this month. Janet Diaz, the WHO’s top official for clinical care responses, said that a meeting of its guidelines development group would consider the question of coronavirus pills in a forthcoming meeting in three weeks. Another WHO official Mike Ryan said preliminary findings on the pills was “very, very welcome”, adding that a “careful process” was required before the therapies should be expanded more broadly. “Clearly, having a second-line approach of being able to treat those who do get infected is very attractive and being able to save lives in that manner is very attractive,” he said. Last week Pfizer said its experimental antiviral pill to treat Covid cut by 89% the chance of hospitalisation or death for adults at risk of severe disease. At the same briefing, the WHO principal legal officer, Steven Solomon, said that talks on an international treaty to boost pandemic preparedness were advancing before a major meeting of the body later this month. “There is good reason to believe they [WHO members] will come to a successful conclusion,” he said. Discussions are also advancing on a potential emergency use listing for Russia’s Sputnik V vaccine, the WHO’s Mariangela Simao said, adding that further inspections were required. “The process is moving again, which is very good news,” she said. The UK has reported 40,375 more cases of Covid-19 and 145 further deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to official data. On a seven-day basis, cases are down 6.5% on the week before, while deaths are down 8.9%. Boris Johnson has said that the rising Covid cases in Europe could be seen in the UK if people do not get their booster jabs fast enough. The prime minister said: I’m seeing the storm clouds gathering over parts of the European continent and I’ve got to be absolutely frank with people, we’ve been here before and we remember what happened when a wave starts rolling in. The UK has built up a huge amount of protection thanks to the vaccine rollout and people’s amazing willingness to come forward and get jabbed. What I’m saying today is the urgency of getting that booster jab is more prevalent than ever. If you can get it, it’s a great thing, the levels of protection it gives you are terrific, so over 50s we’re now calling forward, they should come and get it. What I’m also saying is if we don’t do it fast enough we can see the potential risks to the state of the pandemic and what’s happening in other parts of Europe. Sky News has the story. Rates of infection, hospital admissions and deaths in the UK from Covid could remain high for many weeks or months even if a natural peak has been reached, a leading coronavirus expert has said, as data suggests the decline in cases may have stalled. According to the latest figures from the Office for National Statistics an estimated one in 60 people in the community in England had Covid in the week ending 6 November – about 925,400 people. That’s a decline since late October, when one in 50 people in England were thought to have a Covid infection. A drop has also been recorded in Wales, although in Scotland the rate of people testing positive has remained level and the trend is unclear in Northern Ireland. While the decline in England was across all age groups and in most regions of the country, it appears the trend is strongest among older children. However, the question remains whether infection levels will rise once more now schools have returned from recent half-terms, or whether – as some have argued – growing levels of immunity in children could mean a peak has been reached. “With a marked decrease in infections among secondary schoolchildren in England, the half-term break may have played a part, though infections were decreasing prior to this time,” said Sarah Crofts, the head of analytical outputs for the Covid-19 infection survey. “Over the next few weeks we will see if this decline continues.” More on this story here: Enrico Rossi was among the protesters in Bardonecchia when the Italian government decided in February to maintain a Covid shutdown on ski resorts just hours before the slopes were due to reopen. Rossi described the loss of the ski season as a tragedy for the small town and others in Susa valley, Piedmont, especially after the 2020 season had also been cut short. But as the resort prepares to reopen in early December, he is cautiously optimistic. “Three times during last year’s season we were ready to start – we prepared the slopes, hired staff – only for it all to get cancelled,” said Rossi, who is vice-president of Bardonecchia’s tourism consortium. “It was very disappointing. But the prospects for this year are looking good. Bookings are coming in, mainly from Italy, and the pandemic situation is different; let’s hope nothing changes.” Some Italian ski slopes have already opened, albeit with the requirement to present the Covid-19 health pass when using ski lifts, reduced capacity in cabins and social-distancing measures at ticket offices. Masks must be worn on ski lifts and in “common areas” as part of the protocols agreed by the Italian ski industry. “Customers aren’t complaining – the desire to ski is much greater than the annoyance of having to abide by the rules,” said Herbert Tovagliari, the president and chief executive of Cervinia Spa, a travel and tourism company in Aosta valley. Read the full story here: Latvia’s parliament voted on Friday to ban lawmakers who refuse to get a Covid vaccine from voting on legislature and participating in discussions, Reuters reports. The country, which has one of the lowest vaccination rates in European Union, was the first in the bloc to reimpose a lockdown this autumn as a surge in Covid cases threatens to overwhelm its health system. The restrictions on vaccine-rejecting lawmakers, which includes docking their pay, was supported by 62 of its 100 lawmakers, and will last from Monday until mid-2022. State television reported that nine MPs have rejected the vaccine. The ban on unvaccinated MPs in parliament was necessary to promote public confidence in the government’s policies to control Covid infections, the legislation’s sponsor, the lawmaker Janis Rancans, was cited as saying by the parliamentary press service. The country of 1.9 million people has reported 236,765 infections and 3,646 coronavirus-related deaths since the pandemic began. Britain’s GSK and its partner, Vir, said on Friday their antibody-based Covid drug was shown in trial to work as well when given as a shot in the arm as via the standard infusion, potentially offering more convenience, Reuters reports. GSK said it would now speak to global regulators, including the US Food and Drug Administration, about potential approval for the new method of administration, known as intramuscular injection, which can be carried out by family doctors and spare patients a trip to hospital. Sotrovimab is authorised for emergency use in the US to prevent mild or moderate cases of Covid from worsening. The European Medicines Agency has given its go-ahead for use by member states, though EU-wide approval is still outstanding. Similar products are offered or being developed by Eli Lilly, Regeneron and AstraZeneca. Eli Lilly’s therapy is so far given only by infusion, or drip. AstraZeneca’s antibody drug, under review to possibly prevent infections, is delivered by intramuscular shot only. Regeneron and Roche’s product can be given as an infusion or injection under the skin, typically in the abdomen. Germany’s outgoing health minister, Jens Spahn, has said the country faces a “bitter December” if immediate measures are not taken to try to control the spread of coronavirus. Spahn announced a return to free testing from Saturday and plans to introduce a so-called 2G Plus rule, according to which people would have to be vaccinated or recovered in addition to producing a negative test in order to attend cultural, sporting and other gatherings. The government declared neighbouring Austria, Czech Republic and Hungary to be high-risk areas, recommending Germans avoid travelling there. Germany recorded a record infection rate for three days in a row this week. On Friday a further almost 49,000 cases were registered, slightly down on the previous day. But numbers are doubling every week and some hospitals are reporting being on the verge of not being able to cope. The government’s disease control agency, the Robert Koch Institute, called for the cancellation of major events, just as the carnival season gets under way and the Christmas markets are about to open. Its head, Prof Lothar Wieler, speaking at a joint press conference this morning in Berlin with Spahn, said the fourth wave “is rolling on full power” describing the situation as “five minutes past 12”. He added: “I for one will not be going to any New Years Eve party.” In an effort to boost a flagging vaccine campaign, including encouraging top-up jabs, Spahn said doctors would receive €28 instead of €20 per jab, and a further bonus of €8 for jabs given at the weekend. In the Netherlands, the government was expected to announce new lockdown measures on Friday after a record number of daily infections there – 16,364 – were registered. According to media reports, there are plans for a three-week raft of restrictions including a 7pm closing time for restaurants, pubs and non-essential shops and a restriction on the size of private gatherings in households to just four additional people. In Saxony, eastern Germany, where some of the highest numbers are being registered and the state with the lowest number of vaccinated people, similar to Thuringia and Bavaria, most unvaccinated there was anger on Friday after the state leader, Michael Kretschmer, called for the cancellation of Christmas markets for the second year in a row, which were due to open from next week. This is recognised as potentially politically disastrous as the markets have a symbolic value in Germany as high as foreign holidays and a huge economic clout. Meanwhile, in Cologne, the mayor has defended her decision to allow the carnival season to begin. Carnival-related events were seen as mass spreader opportunities at the start of the pandemic. As more focus turns to administering a booster campaign - public messaging on which has been virtually non-existent so far, the Max Planck Institute said a rollout could help to break this fourth wave, which, owing to the spread of the Delta variant, is more aggressive than any previous wave. Meanwhile, the Marburger Bund, the association representing a large number of German doctors has reported that its members are facing increasing aggression from patients in hospitals, particularly from those who have chosen not to be vaccinated. There are growing reports of patients attacking doctors verbally and physically and of some demanding a range of alternative therapies that are not usually available under the public healthcare system. Germans should avoid large gatherings amid a record surge in coronavirus infections, the country’s health agency chief said on Friday, adding that he would be skipping next month’s new year’s parties. “It’s five minutes past midnight,” said Prof Lothar Wieler, the head of the Robert Koch Institute (RKI), as the country was braced for new restrictions to contain a ferocious fourth Covid wave. Related: Scholz pushes new measures to tackle Germany’s rising Covid cases Germany registered more than 48,000 new cases over the past 24 hours, RKI data showed, a day after breaching the 50,000 mark for the first time since the start of the pandemic. The weekly infection rate has soared to an all-time high of 263.7 per 100,000 people, and intensive care beds are filling up rapidly. Several German cities kicked off months-long carnival celebrations on Thursday, with revellers required to prove they are fully vaccinated or have recovered from Covid before entering the party zones. The country’s much-loved Christmas market season is also on its way. Related: German Christmas markets face second year of closures as Covid rates soar But Wieler said large gatherings “must be viewed very critically” and in some situations “clearly should be cancelled”. Indoor celebrations especially can act as super-spreader events “and everyone must really think about whether they want to expose themselves to that risk,” he told reporters in Berlin. I personally won’t be attending New Year’s Eve parties. But I urge people not to wait until then to think about their actions. Germany’s Covid surge has been blamed on a relatively low vaccination rate, with just over 67% of the population of 83 million people fully inoculated. Related: Covid: Germany enveloped in ‘massive’ pandemic of the unvaccinated Other European countries are battling similar Covid resurgences. Austria has introduced rules that bar unvaccinated people from certain events and indoor venues. The Netherlands is planning a renewed “partial lockdown” as cases hit record levels. The German health minister, Jens Spahn, speaking alongside Wieler, said the situation in the country “is serious”. He recommended that large gatherings be made safer by requiring the vaccinated and recovered to test negative before taking part, while barring the unvaccinated altogether - a system known as 2G Plus in Germany. Germany would re-introduce free rapid coronavirus testing for all in coming days, he added [see 10.07.am.]. The federal government and leaders of Germany’s 16 regional states are meeting next Thursday to discuss joint measures to combat the pandemic, after criticism of a confusing patchwork of different restrictions emerging. Among the proposed measures are stricter curbs on the unvaccinated, for instance by excluding them from indoor dining or venues such as cinemas, gyms and theatres , which some states are already doing. “We must do everything needed to break the current trend,” Spahn said, adding: Otherwise the nation will experience a bitter December. AstraZeneca has said it would begin to earn a modest profit from its coronavirus vaccine as the world learns to live with the virus and the drugmaker is in talks with several countries about new orders for delivery next year, Reuters reports. AstraZeneca made a commitment to sell the shot developed with Oxford University at cost during the pandemic, and in a press conference on Friday it said low-income countries would continue to receive the vaccine on a no-profit basis, while a post-pandemic commercial approach would apply to other new orders even as infections in Europe rise again. The Anglo-Swedish company’s third-quarter results showed the vaccine contributed one cent to core earnings per share of $1.08, a rise of 14%. Total product sales jumped 49% to $9.74 billion, as its vaccine sales topped $1bn. “We started this project to help ... but we also said that at some stage in the future, we will transition to commercial orders,” the chief executive, Pascal Soriot, told journalists. It will never be high priced. Because we want the vaccine to remain affordable to everybody around the world. Soriot said the virus was becoming endemic, a term for a background level of infections that is part of everyday life. Talks about new orders with undisclosed countries were under way, mainly for delivery next year, with some prospective customers focusing on booster shots, he said. AstraZeneca announced plans this week to set up a separate unit to focus on its coronavirus efforts and other respiratory infections. It said on Friday the unit would independently manage production and distribution. Shares of the FTSE 100 drugmaker were down 3.4% at about £91.22 at 1209 GMT as overall third-quarter profit fell short of analysts’ expectations. AstraZeneca said a profit boost from the vaccine in the fourth quarter would make up for costs related to its antibody cocktail for preventing and treating Covid, as it stuck with its earnings forecast for the year. AstraZeneca’s vaccine has had a tumultuous journey, with its not-for-profit strategy and challenges around efficacy data, supplies and links to rare blood clots, fuelling speculation on whether it would want to keep the business in the long term. The drugmaker and its Indian manufacturing partner, Serum Institute, have supplied more than 1.5bn vaccine doses as of the end of September, compared with more than 2 billion from the rival alliance of Pfizer/BioNTech. Pfizer this month forecast 2021 and 2022 sales from its Covid vaccine of at least $65bn overall, topping estimates. However, Moderna slashed its 2021 sales outlook for its shot by as much as $5bn owing to production hiccups. Including sales from the vaccine in the fourth quarter, AstraZeneca expects 2021 revenues to grow by a mid-to-high 20s percentage. It previously expected sales to grow by a low-20s percentage excluding the shot. Analysts, on average, were expecting third-quarter profit of $1.28 per share on sales of $9.4bn, according to Refinitiv IBES data. Austria’s government is likely to decide on Sunday to impose a lockdown on people who have not been vaccinated against the coronavirus as daily infections have surged to record levels, the chancellor Alexander Schallenberg said on Friday. Schallenberg did not say when the lockdown would take effect, but the two provinces hardest-hit by this wave of infections, Upper Austria and Salzburg, have said they will introduce the measure for themselves on Monday. Roughly 65% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against Covid, one of the lowest rates in western Europe. Many Austrians are sceptical about vaccines, a view encouraged by the far-right Freedom Party, the third-biggest in parliament. “The aim is very clear: that we give the green light this Sunday for a nationwide lockdown for the unvaccinated,” Schallenberg told a news conference, adding that intensive-care units are increasingly strained. “The development is such that I do not think it is sensible to wait ... We will take this step now and my wish is that we take this step on Sunday and nationally for all nine provinces.” Schallenberg said on Thursday those not fully vaccinated would face the same restrictions on their daily movements that the whole country endured in three lockdowns last year. He said he wants to avoid a repeat of such restrictions on the whole population. More on this story here: Covid-19 infection levels continue to fall across the UK, according to new data. Figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show that about one in 60 people in private households in England had Covid-19 in the week to 6 November, down from one in 50 the previous week. One in 60 is the equivalent of about 925,400 people and is slightly below the proportion who were estimated to have coronavirus at the peak of the second wave in early January, suggesting infection levels are still high. In Wales, about one in 45 people is estimated to have had Covid-19 in the week to 6 November, down from one in 40 the previous week. In Northern Ireland, the figure is about one in 75 people, down from one in 65 the previous week. In Scotland it is one in 85, down from one in 80 the previous week. The ONS said rates in England have decreased in the latest week for all age groups, except for those from school year 12 to age 24 and for people aged 35 to 49, where the trend is uncertain. Rates remained highest for those in school years seven to 11, at 4.8%. Norway will offer a third Covid vaccine dose to everyone aged 18 or older and will give municipalities the option of using digital “corona passes” as a way to beat back an ongoing surge in infections, the government has said. In late September, Norway ended the last of its coronavirus lockdown measures, which for 18 months had restricted social interaction and hobbled many businesses. The country is not going back into lockdown however, Støre, told a news conference. The new measures include a requirement for adults who have been in contact with a positive case to be tested, and unvaccinated health workers will have to be tested twice a week and wear masks. Local restrictions had reappeared in recent days in Norway, with daily cases at around 1,500 in a country of 5.4 million people. The government will also propose a third vaccine dose for people over 18. According to data from the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, 87.2% of the adult population has been fully inoculated against Covid-19, and 91.5% have had a first dose, but infections and hospitalisations are rising rapidly. Norway uses vaccines made by BioNTech, Pfizer and Moderna in its national rollout, which since September includes everyone aged 12 and over. • This post was amended on 12 November 2021 to correct the vaccination rates for Norway. Mauritius has imposed a raft of Covid-19 curbs today as it confronts surge in cases despite a high vaccination rate, Agence France-Presse reports. The prime minister, Pravind Jugnauth, announced the restrictions in a televised address to the country on Thursday, blaming people who were not abiding by health protocols for the increase in infections. He said: The state alone will not be able to contain the spread of Covid-19. Mauritius had fully opened its doors to international visitors at the start of October, hoping to rebuild its vital tourism industry after months of isolation because of the pandemic. But according to latest figures reported to the World Health Organization on Friday, Mauritius has registered 18,979 cases and 240 deaths compared with about 15,695 infections and 84 deaths on 1 October. Many of the new cases are linked to the Delta variant, according to the health ministry. Schools were closed this week, with all classes to be held online, while bars and discos have been ordered to shut and concerts and sporting competitions banned. The government is also limiting numbers of people attending gatherings such as weddings, funerals and rallies, but said beaches would be open, although picnics are prohibited. In his address, Jugnauth highlighted the importance of the Covid jab and urged people to receive booster shots. The health minister, Kailesh Jagutpal, said last week that more than 67% of the population had received two vaccine doses. But he told parliament on Tuesday that since the start of the year, 61 fully vaccinated people had died in hospital in Mauritius. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ The Netherlands will become the first western European country to impose a partial lockdown since the summer, Dutch media have reported, introducing strict new measures from Saturday after record numbers of new Covid-19 infections. The restrictions, to be announced by the prime minister, Mark Rutte, on Friday evening and to last at least three weeks, include the closure of bars, restaurants and non-essential shops from 7pm, the public broadcaster NOS said. Austria is to place millions of people not fully vaccinated in lockdown within days as infections soar to record highs and intensive care units experience increasing strain. The worst-affected province of Upper Austria plans to introduce a lockdown for the unvaccinated from Monday after recommendations from medical experts. Germany’s health minister, Jens Spahn, has made a series of announcements. Covid tests will become free again from Saturday, and from Tuesday doctors will be given greater financial incentive to administer vaccines. From Sunday visitors from Austria will be classed as “high-risk” and must enter quarantine upon arrival in Germany unless they have been vaccinated or have recovered from Covid-19. The Czech Republic reported 10,395 new Covid-19 cases for 11 November, surpassing 10,000 for the third time this week. Denmark has reintroduced its digital Covid pass from today, after it declared coronavirus was once again “a socially critical disease” amid an increase in domestic cases. Dr Bharat Pankhania, a senior clinical lecturer at Exeter University College of Medicine and Health, has said in western Europe the large pool of unvaccinated people combined with a widespread post-lockdown resumption of socialising and a slight decline in immunity for people who got their shots months ago is driving up the pace of infections. Russia’s case and death numbers remain at similar levels to yesterday with 40,123 new cases and 1,235 deaths. Media reports suggest a database of Russians who purchased fake coronavirus vaccine certificates has leaked online. China has reported the first Covid-19 cases among foreign athletes at preparatory events for the Beijing 2022 Winter Games, as stringent measures to control any outbreaks are put to the test. The port city of Dalian has recorded China’s highest daily Covid count as the country continues to battle a fresh outbreak. The growing Covid-19 cluster has spurred the north-eastern port city to limit outbound travel, cut offline school classes and close a few cultural venues after being told by national authorities to contain the outbreak more quickly. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to continue bringing you the latest Covid news from the UK and around the world. I will see you on Monday – have a good weekend, take care and stay safe. China has reported the first Covid-19 cases among foreign athletes at preparatory events for the upcoming Beijing 2022 Winter Games, as stringent measures being put in place to control any outbreaks are put to the test. Two lugers of the same nationality tested positive, said Huang Chun, an official of the Games organising committee. Both were transferred to quarantine hotels, he told a news briefing in the Chinese capital. Reuters reports that Beijing’s vice-mayor previously said coronavirus would be one of the biggest challenges to the city’s hosting of the Games. The Games will run from 4-20 February, with all participants subject to daily Covid-19 tests, and no international spectators. The Winter Paralympics will follow in March. Athletes and other Games-related personnel will also be enveloped in a “closed loop” bubble. “We will still let the person take part in training and activities related to the games, but (the individual) needs to go though strict health monitoring and Covid-19 testing every day,” Huang said, referring to the first athlete who tested positive. There’s been another announcement from Germany’s acting health minister Jens Spahn, that from Sunday visitors from Austria will be classed as “high-risk”. People travelling from Austria must enter quarantine upon arrival in Germany unless they have been vaccinated or have recovered from COVID-19 Denmark has reintroduced its digital Covid pass from today, after it declared the coronavirus once again “a socially critical disease” amid an increase in domestic cases. The pass must be used for a month to enter nightclubs, cafes, party buses and to be seated indoor in restaurants. It was originally introduced on 1 July but was removed on 10 September, when the outbreak was apparently under control because of a high rate of vaccination. People aged 15 and over must also use the pass when attending outdoor events where the number of people exceeds 2,000. Associated Press reports that Denmark, like many other countries, has recorded an increase in cases, with health authorities saying the number of infections and hospitalisations has risen faster than expected. On Tuesday, the Danish parliament’s all-party epidemic committee unanimously approved a decision to once again call the outbreak “a socially critical disease” and approved the reintroduction of the pass. In addition, the Danish broadcast DR has said the government, the confederations of trade unions and employers have reached a deal making it possible for employers to demand that employees show the digital pass at work. The deal must be approved by parliament, most likely next week. A very quick snap from Reuters here. Germany’s acting health minister, Jens Spahn, has made two announcements this morning at a news conference. Germany will reintroduce free Covid-19 tests from Saturday. Doctors will get higher reimbursements for administering Covid-19 vaccinations from Tuesday. In the Netherlands, the caretaker prime minister Mark Rutte’s cabinet will take a final decision on new Covid restrictions during a meeting today, and he will announce the measures during a televised news conference scheduled for 1800 GMT. It is expected that bars and restaurants will be ordered to close early, and sporting events will be held without audiences under a three-week partial lockdown. The move would mark a drastic turn in policy for the Dutch government, which until last month thought a relatively high vaccination rate would mean it could further ease measures towards the end of the year. It is unclear whether the government will adopt a more politically sensitive recommendation by its leading pandemic advisory panel to limit access to public places to people who have been fully vaccinated or have had Covid-19 after the lockdown period. Bart Meijer sums up the situation in the Netherlands for Reuters, where new coronavirus infections in the country of 17.5 million have increased rapidly after social distancing measures were dropped in late September and hit a record of about 16,300 in 24 hours on Thursday. Russia’s case and death numbers remain at similar levels to yesterday, as authorities wait to see whether the enforced week’s holiday last week has made any impact on the chain of transmission within the country. In the last 24 hours there were 40,123 new cases and 1,235 deaths. In another development, the Moscow Times reports that there has been a data breach of information on people who purchased fake vaccination QR codes. They write: A database of Russians who purchased fake coronavirus vaccine certificates has leaked online, the Kommersant business daily reported Friday, with experts warning that the buyers are now at risk of both blackmail and jail time. With vaccine scepticism rampant, many Russians have turned to the black market to purchase counterfeit QR code passes that prove one’s vaccination or negative Covid-19 status. Nearly every Russian region now requires the passes in order to access public areas and events amid a record-breaking fourth wave of the pandemic. The issue gained further urgency as lawmakers announced plans Thursday to mandate the QR codes nationwide and the Kremlin warned that these and other restrictions will only be lifted after the end of the coronavirus pandemic. British pharmaceutical giant AstraZeneca, which is selling its Covid vaccine at cost price, said it had fallen into a loss in the third quarter. The company posted a net loss of $1.65bn (£1.23bn) compared with a profit after tax of about $650m (£486m) in the third quarter last year. Agence France-Presse reports that AstraZeneca said it experienced higher costs in the latest July-September period after its takeover of the US biotech company Alexion, as well as increased research and development expenses across multiple programmes, including its Covid treatments. The group added that revenue from its Covid vaccine totalled $2.22bn in the year to date after the delivery of about 580m doses worldwide. A quick snap from Reuters that the Czech Republic reported 10,395 new Covid-19 cases for 11 November, surpassing 10,000 for the third time this week, Health Ministry data showed on Friday. The number of patients hospitalised with the illness dropped slightly to 3,557, with 542 in serious condition, in the country of 10.7 million. Dr Bharat Pankhania, senior clinical lecturer at Exeter University College of Medicine and Health, has told Associated Press that in Western Europe the large pool of unvaccinated people combined with a widespread post-lockdown resumption of socializing and a slight decline in immunity for people who got their shots months ago is driving up the pace of infections. Many European countries now use Covid passes — proof of full vaccination, recovery from the virus or a negative test result — to access venues like bars and restaurants. Pankhania warned that the passes can give a false sense of security since fully vaccinated people can still get infected — though their chances of dying or getting seriously sick are dramatically lower. Thanks largely to vaccination, hospitals in Western Europe are not under the same pressure they were earlier in the pandemic, but many are still straining to handle rising numbers of Covid patients while also attempting to clear backlogs of tests and surgeries with exhausted or sick staff. Mike Corder for Associated Press writes that the question now is if countries can tamp down this latest upswing without resorting to stringent shutdowns that devastated economies, disrupted education and weighed on mental health. Experts say probably — but authorities can’t avoid all restrictions and must boost vaccination rates. “I think the era of locking people up in their homes is over because we now have tools to control Covid — the testing, vaccines and therapeutics,” said Devi Sridhar, chair of global public health at the University of Edinburgh. “So I hope people will do the things they have to do, like put on a mask.” Spain, once one of Europe’s hardest hit nations, perhaps offers an example of how the risks can be managed. It has vaccinated 80% of its population, and while face masks are no longer mandatory outdoors, many people still wear them. While infections have ticked up slightly recently, Rafael Bengoa, one of Spain’s leading public health experts, said that given the high vaccination rate, “the virus won’t be able to dominate us again.” Pankhania says that no single measure will control the pandemic. “To really control it, it has to be multi-layered ... avoid crowds, avoid poorly ventilated places, be immunized, wear your mask,” he said. Here’s the map of the latest caseloads across Europe. You can see that what started as a new wave of Covid in the east of the continent has now spread to a darker band that runs through Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany, with Austria, the Czech Republic, Croatia and Slovakia now at the highest case level. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London, taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. Just a little bit more on the situation in the Netherlands, which looks set to announce a three-week partial lockdown at a televised press conference tonight. The DutchNews.nl website has this further detail this morning: A three-week partial lockdown is more than recommended by government health advisors, but is being seen as a trade off against other advice. The government is not planning to close cinemas and theatres – which had been suggested by the Outbreak Management Team. Sports matches can go ahead but without supporters, NOS said. This means Tuesday evening’s World Cup qualification game between the Netherlands and Norway would take place in an empty stadium. In the meantime, the cabinet wants to anchor other measures – such as the return of social distancing – in law, NOS said. It will take one or two weeks to get that through both houses of parliament. The Chinese port city of Dalian has reported China’s highest daily Covid count as the nation continues to battle the most recent outbreak since mid-October. The growing Covid-19 cluster has spurred the northeastern port city to limit outbound travel, cut offline school classes and close a few cultural venues after being told by national authorities to contain the outbreak more quickly, Reuters reports. Dalian reported 52 locally transmitted infections with confirmed symptoms on Thursday, more than doubling from 21 cases a day earlier, official data showed on Friday. A total of 1,149 local cases were found in China between 17 October and 11 November. While the number is tiny compared with many outbreaks outside the country, local authorities have exerted resources to put out the flare-up with Beijing not expected to change its zero-tolerance policy any time soon. “Various measures should be quickened and their quality should be improved, in order to get the outbreak under control in a shorter amount of time and to minimise the outbreak’s impact on manufacturing and life of the general public,” the National Health Commission said on Thursday, citing a meeting chaired by the commission’s director in Dalian. The Dutch government is considering whether to impose a partial lockdown to curb a surge in Covid infections. The Netherlands reported another 16,364 new cases and 26 deaths on Thursday, jumping to the highest level since the start of the pandemic. The surge follows the lifting of social distancing measures in late September. The government’s pandemic advisory panel has recommended imposing a partial lockdown, shutting down theatres and cinemas, scrapping large events and closing cafes and restaurants earlier, broadcaster NOS reported. Schools would however remain open. Hospitals in the southern province of Limburg — the hardest-hit Dutch region — sounded the alarm earlier this week in a letter to the health ministry, saying: “We are heading straight for a healthcare blockage and the entire system is grinding to a standstill.” Prime Minister Mark Rutte’s cabinet will discuss the advice during an emergency meeting on Thursday night, and will announce its decisions during a televised press conference scheduled for Friday, Reuters reports. Welcome back to our live Covid coverage. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the top headlines from around the world for the next few hours. For the past few weeks, many European countries have been eyeing Covid case numbers with mounting trepidation and concerns over whether to reinstate lockdowns. Austria and the Netherlands may be the first to do so in western Europe with the former set to place millions of people not fully vaccinated against Covid-19 in lockdown in a matter of days as infections soar to record highs and intensive care units face an increasing strain. The country’s worst-affected province of Upper Austria plans to introduce a lockdown for the unvaccinated from Monday next week Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg said: “I don’t see why two-thirds should lose their freedom because one-third is dithering. For me, it is clear that there should be no lockdown for the vaccinated out of solidarity for the unvaccinated.” A summary of recent developments: The Netherlands recorded more than 16,364 new coronavirus infections in 24 hours, the highest number since the start of the pandemic. Dutch health experts have called on the government to impose a partial lockdown to fight the increase in cases. Germany’s chancellor-in-waiting Olaf Scholz has pushed ahead with a plan to phase out a state of national emergency by the end of the month, despite the country recording a record-high number of 50,196 new daily coronavirus cases on Thursday. Australia passes the 90% first dose vaccination milestone for those aged 16 and over. Brazil reports 188 Covid deaths in past 24 hours and 15,300 new cases of the coronavirus. Sweden has seen a sharp decline in Covid testing this month after its health agency said vaccinated Swedes no longer need to get tested, even if they have symptoms. Russia reported 1,237 Covid deaths, close to a record one-day toll recorded the previous day, amid a nationwide surge in cases. Authorities said they are preparing new restrictions. Protests continue in Zagreb, Croatia, for the fourth day against obligatory certificates for the public sector as the country’s Covid-19 cases hit a record high. The UK reported another 42,408 Covid cases and a further 195 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. Morgues are filling up in Romania and Bulgaria as the countries record the EU’s highest daily death rates from Covid-19, after superstition, misinformation and entrenched mistrust in governments and institutions combined to leave them the least vaccinated countries in the bloc. EU drug regulator lists rare spinal condition as side-effect of Johnson &amp; Johnson Covid shot. The European Medicines Agency (EMA) said it was also assessing reports of a rare blood condition known as capillary leak syndrome (CLS) following inoculation with Moderna’s vaccine. Moderna has offered to sell its vaccines to the African Union at $7 a shot, the head of the Africa Centres for Disease Control said. Covaxin, the first Covid-19 vaccine developed in India, is “highly efficacious” and presents no safety concerns, according to a recent study published in the Lancet. Austria saw a record high of daily infections as intensive-care units are increasingly strained. About 65% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against the coronavirus, the lowest rate of any western European country apart from Liechtenstein. The UK government’s vaccine mandate for care home workers came into effect as about 50,000 care home staff have not been fully vaccinated in England and will not be allowed to work from Thursday. Israel holds world’s first “war game drill” in case of an outbreak of a new lethal variant of Covid-19. Israeli Prime Minister Naftali Bennett and senior aides holed up in a nuclear command bunker to simulate an outbreak, describing such an eventuality as “the next war”.At the last federal election, the Coalition faced challenges from a string of hopeful independents in rural and city seats, largely running on climate issues. With two exceptions – Zali Steggall in Warringah and Helen Haines in Indi – they came up short. Next year the independents will be back for another shot, focusing on heartland Coalition seats in New South Wales and Victoria. The difference this time is there is a road-tested model of how to mobilise the local community and run a campaign, and a $3.6m war chest on offer from Climate 200, a group established by the climate activist Simon Holmes à Court. Inspired by Steggall, Haines and her predecessor in Indi, Cathy McGowan, “Voices of” or “Voices 4” community groups have proliferated, turbocharged by the Liberals’ slowness in adopting a net zero target for 2050 and the rolling scandals in federal politics. Will the outcome be different this time? “We are at an inflection point,” Holmes à Court says. “A lot of the services provided by a major party are not needed to run a campaign any more.” He points to the success of online meetings, crowdfunding and social media to spread the word and organise. Climate 200 offers to add large-scale fundraising, legal and political support, polling and campaign strategy. This time around the target is not a just an independent voice in parliament but the balance of power. If independents threaten to make serious inroads the Coalition will face a nightmare scenario as it simultaneously defends a raft of marginal electorates from Labor in Queensland, western Sydney and Western Australia. The Coalition now has 76 seats in the 151-seat parliament. Labor needs to win eight seats to govern in its own right. “If we can just win two or three seats it’s highly likely there will be a minority government,” Holmes à Court says. “We will be back in the situation in 2010, where the independents will have a tough decision to make and, whichever way they go, they will give the government of the day the backbone to deal with the issues we care about.” The flashpoints There are many seats with “Voices of” groups, but among the main ones to watch are five in Sydney – Warringah, Wentworth, Mackellar, North Sydney and Hughes – and three in Melbourne – Kooyong, Goldstein and Flinders – as well as Hume in regional NSW and Indi and Nicholls in regional Victoria. Action on the climate emergency remains the No 1 issue for the community-based groups, followed closely by concerns about integrity in politics and the lack of gender diversity. MPs facing independent challenges including Jason Falinski in Mackellar and Tim Wilson in Goldstein have dismissed the Voices movements as simply Labor and Greens supporters masquerading as independents and point out that that they have sprung up only in conservative seats. But Falinski acknowledges they are a threat. “Any group that is well-funded by big tech billionaires and trust fund kids from Sydney’s eastern suburbs or inner Melbourne you have to take seriously,” he says. “But when it comes to ideas, policy and serving the community it is a lot less clear what alternative they are providing. And even less clear what they can action once in parliament.” But Holmes à Court says the impetus for the groups comes from the grassroots. “We are not starting any campaigns, we are helping to turbocharge them. They rise up in seats where people feel very strongly they are being misrepresented.” Some local Liberals, including the MP for the NSW state seat of Pittwater, Rob Stokes, have engaged with Voices of Mackellar, perhaps wary that the 1,000 people who have attended its events are ignored at their peril. Anne Capling, a retired professor of politics from Melbourne University, who is spearheading the campaign for an independent in Kooyong, says Labor has already faced one watershed moment among its supporters, losing voters in the 1990s and 2000s to the Greens on the left and to One Nation on the right. “I think the same thing is happening to the Liberals. Progressive voters are looking at independents. On the right, the Liberals are still tethered to the Nationals and the Christian right is gaining traction in the party.” No-so-blue ribbon Wentworth Undeterred that the previous independent, Kerryn Phelps, failed to hold the seat by about 2,300 votes in 2019, a group of wealthy citizens have been working for months to recruit the ideal candidate to connect with the progressive voters of Wentworth, formerly held by Malcolm Turnbull – now one of Scott Morrison’s fiercest critics on climate. It’s believed the group have identified a candidate – someone with deep roots in Sydney’s eastern suburbs and the pizazz of Steggall – to be announced before Christmas. They have an office and staff, and have already amassed close to $500,000. “Our biggest issue is that the Liberal party no longer represents this community,” says Lyndell Droga, spokesperson for Wentworth Independents. “Both parties lack the ambition required on climate change to really set up Wentworth and Australia for the new economic opportunities.” The MP, Dave Sharma, is on the moderate wing of his party, as are most of the other Liberals in seats targeted by independents. Sharma led the charge to nudge the party towards a more ambitious emissions target for 2030. In a speech at the University of NSW in September, he called for it to commit to 40% to 45% reductionby 2035. But, as Droga points out, nothing has happened. “Even when the local member advocates for modest action on climate policy, he is quite clearly ignored. It is quite clear to us now that a vote for the Liberal party in Wentworth is simply giving the casting vote on climate change to Barnaby Joyce and the National party. “We believe that, with the right candidate, we will give the people of Wentworth a genuine choice of someone who reflects their values.” Sharma declined to comment. Northern beaches exposure The Liberals have searched for a star candidate to unseat Steggall in Warringah but so far have come up empty-handed. The barrister Jane Buncle is said to be the current frontrunner but, with preselections still to be held, the launch ramp for an unknown Liberal is short and Steggall’s profile is high. The mood of optimism for independent campaigns has infected neighbouring seats. Kylea Tink has announced her candidacy in Trent Zimmerman’s seat of North Sydney, supported by a strong local campaign machine and Climate 200. In Mackellar, on the northern peninsula, the search is on for a candidate. Anyo Geddes of Mackellar Rising says “incredible people at the peak of their careers” have offered to stand. “It’s clear that the so-called [Liberal] ‘moderates’ are impotent, particularly against the influence of Barnaby Joyce,” she says. “There’s a huge trust deficit with our local member saying one thing, then voting the same way as the Nationals and the right faction within his party.” One local issue is also proving potent – whether the government will formally extinguish the petroleum exploration licence PEP-11, which extends offshore from Newcastle to Wollongong. The licence is about to expire, but so far the minister responsible, the Nationals’ Keith Pitt, has not acted, prompting a ferocious campaign on the northern beaches. Falinski says PEP-11 is “dead in the water” and that Steggall’s bill to kill it off risks opening the federal government to compensation claims. “No one has been stronger in the opposition to PEP-11 than I have,” he says. “I have been critical of the minister, the permit holder and the Labor government who introduced this in 1999.” But Geddes says there is “enormous demand” to shut down the licence for good. “Pep-11 is clearly a bargaining tool that Keith Pitt is holding onto in the same way that the Nationals held the Scott Morrison to ransom over setting a 2050 target,” she says. ‍Drum beats in Victoria The latest independent threatening a rural National party seat is Greater Shepparton’s deputy mayor, Rob Priestly – he owns a string of dry-cleaning businesses – who is running for the regional Victorian seat of Nicholls. The area has experienced independent representation at state level – and the renewed attention it brings from the major parties – after Suzanna Sheed’s win in 2014. Damian Drum has held Nicholls since 2016 with a healthy 20% margin, making it one of the safest seats in Australia. But there are rumours that he may retire, and it is understood Priestly was sounded out by the Nationals before he decided to run as an independent. Deep fissures between the Victorian and Queensland Nats have been exacerbated by the debate about emissions. “Barnaby Joyce is not liked in this part of the world,” Priestly says. “This is a conservative seat but they are also serious about climate change … “Farmers in this electorate know that the climate is changing. Our food processors know we need a meaningful climate and energy policy for the future, not something dusted off from the 1950s, and setting the target is not enough.” The Melbourne push Sue Barrett of Voices of Goldstein says the group has about 1,000 people on its database and more than 200 volunteers. It is close to choosing its candidate, likely to be a high-profile woman. Goldstein, based around the bayside suburb of Brighton, is held by the Liberal Tim Wilson, who seems unfazed by the prospect of an independent challenger. “They’re just the same faces who turn out at elections wearing a green or red T-shirt, and now they’re wearing purple looking for a puppet candidate to pretend they’re independent,” he says. The result, he says, will be a sharp decline in the vote for the Greens and Labor, pushing down their electoral funding and their Senate vote – “so I wish them well in that endeavour”. Wilson says potential candidates have been “shocked that they have to sign up to a rigid policy platform that would mean they’d just be a puppet”. This is strongly disputed by Barrett, who says potential candidates are asked to commit to advancing the group’s two main goals – action on climate change and integrity in politics – as well as a more general statement on promoting social cohesion and economic prosperity. They are also asked sign the politicians’ pledge drafted by the St James Ethics Centre, which sets out an ethical framework for elected representatives. “We certainly have not said we would dictate policies – we are not a party. But to receive our endorsement, they must support the two key areas that our supporters have identified as important to them.” In the seat held by the treasurer, Josh Fydenberg, the Kooyong Independents have advertised for a candidate in the Age and the Australian Financial Review. Climate 200 polling by Community Engagement in October had the Liberals comfortably ahead with 34.4% of first preferences, compared with just 7.5% for an independent and 13.5% for the Greens. But with a notional candidate of the calibre of Steggall or Haines, the independent vote rocketed up to 26.3%, while the Liberal vote fell to 25.9%. Holmes à Court, who lives in Kooyong, says: “The people who are most passionate here are the lapsed Liberals.” Wilson, whose seat showed a similar trend, says the polling is “rubbish” and “designed to assist Climate 200’s fundraising”. Hume and Hughes hopefuls Independents are also planning to run in Hume, the seat of the energy minister, Angus Taylor. Penny Ackery, a special education teacher from Goulburn, was announced as a candidate on Saturday at Goulburn showgrounds. The nature of the seat makes the task harder: it stretches from Sydney’s outer fringe to Bowral and Mittagong, which are increasingly home to retirees and tree changers, and through to prime National party territory around Goulburn. Hughes, the southern Sydney seat held by Craig Kelly, who defected from the Liberals to the Palmer United party, is set to face a messy multi-horse race. As well as Labor, Liberals and Kelly, there will be two independents spawned by the community group We Are Hughes. The corporate lawyer Georgia Steele has already announced her candidacy and another member of the group is expected to stand. So what does it mean for the Liberals if independents sweep out some of its most prominent moderates? Holmes à Court says the long-term effect would be positive. “The Liberal party might lose three MPs who say they care about climate change but who have delivered nothing in the last three years. The price for that is the Coalition will spend a few years in the wilderness, re-evaluating their opposition in dealing with these issues.”Liz Cheney and Bennie Thompson, the chairs of the congressional committee investigating the 6 January attack, have said the indictment of Steve Bannon shows “no one is above the law”. The committee also criticized former Trump chief of staff Mark Meadows for refusing to cooperate with its investigation. “Mr Meadows, Mr Bannon, and others who go down this path won’t prevail in stopping the select committee’s effort getting answers for the American people about 6 January.” A federal grand jury has indicted Steve Bannon on two counts of contempt of Congress, after the former adviser to Donald Trump refused to comply with a subpoena issued by the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The indictment sends a clear message to Trump allies that they could face criminal consequences for ignoring the committee’s demands. The committee warned it may also hold Mark Meadows in criminal contempt for refusing to appear for a scheduled deposition this morning. Meadows, Trump’s former chief of staff, has cited the former president’s questionable claims of executive privilege to justify his lack of cooperation with the committee. The leaders of the committee said, “Mr Meadows’s actions today – choosing to defy the law – will force the select committee to consider pursuing contempt or other proceedings to enforce the subpoena.” Joe Biden will name an “infrastructure coordinator” to oversee the implementation of the $1.2tn infrastructure bill, the White House press secretary said. Jen Psaki did not name the coordinator, but she noted it will be “someone from outside the administration”. Biden is scheduled to sign the infrastructure bill on Monday. Biden announced he will nominate Robert Califf to serve as the next commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration. But Democratic Senator Joe Manchin has already said he will oppose the nomination of Califf, who led the FDA during the final months of Barack Obama’s presidency. In order to get Califf confirmed, the White House will need to convince at least one Republican to support his nomination. – Joan E Greve and Dani Anguiano Americans are continuing to quit their jobs in record numbers, the Associated Press reports. The news comes after last week’s jobs report showed employers added 531,000 jobs in October and the unemployment rate fell to 4.6%, from 4.8%. Most people quit their jobs for a new position and it is typically a signal of worker confidence when employees leave their jobs, according to the AP. Americans quit their jobs at a record pace for the second straight month in September, in many cases for more money elsewhere as companies bump up pay to fill job openings that are close to an all-time high. The Labor Department said Friday that 4.4 million people quit their jobs in September, or about 3% of the nation’s workforce. That’s up from 4.3 million in August and far above the pre-pandemic level of 3.6 million. There were 10.4 million job openings, down from 10.6 million in August, which was revised higher. The figures point to a historic level of turmoil in the job market as newly-empowered workers quit jobs, often for higher pay or better working conditions. Incomes are rising, Americans are spending more and the economy is growing, and employers have ramped up hiring to keep pace. Rising inflation, however, is offsetting much of the pay gains for workers. The House committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has criticised Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, for refusing to cooperate with its investigation. “Mr Meadows has failed to answer even the most basic questions, including whether he was using a private cellphone to communicate on 6 January, and where his text messages from that day are,” the committee said Friday. The House select committee warned earlier today, just after the indictment of Steve Bannon was announced, it may also move to hold Meadows in contempt for defying its subpoena. Meadows was scheduled to testify before the committee Friday morning, but refused to show. “And while we’re determined to get all the information we’re seeking, Mr Meadows, Mr Bannon, and others who go down this path won’t prevail in stopping the select committee’s effort getting answers for the American people about 6 January.” Cop26 reveals limits of Biden’s promise to ‘lead by example’ on climate crisis The crucial UN climate talks in Scotland have produced landmark commitments to phase out coalmining, to call time on the internal combustion engines and to compensate poorer countries for damage caused by the climate crisis. The United States, which has trumpeted its regained climate leadership at the summit, has not joined any these pledges as the talks draw to a close. This disconnect has provided the world with a muddled sense of America’s willingness to confront the unfolding climate catastrophe, with the fate of historic legislation to lower planet-heating emissions still uncertain ahead of an expected vote in Congress next week. Joe Biden arrived in Glasgow vowing the US will “lead by example” on climate change and avoid disastrous global heating beyond 1.5C, dispatching his entire cabinet to the Cop26 talks and making widely praised new promises to cut methane, a potent greenhouse gas, and to end deforestation. But the US is bedeviled by its recent past and – many delegates of other countries fear – its potential future, following Donald Trump’s embrace of climate science denialism and American isolationism. Read more: Liz Cheney and Bennie Thompson, the chairs of the congressional committee investigating the 6 January attack, have said the indictment of Steve Bannon shows “no one is above the law”. The former Trump adviser had refused to comply with subpoenas from the committee. “Steve Bannon’s indictment should send a clear message to anyone who thinks they can ignore the select committee or try to stonewall our investigation: no one is above the law. We will not hesitate to use the tools at our disposal to get the information we need,” Cheney and Thompson said in a statement. Britney Spears’s conservatorship terminated after almost 14 years In non-Washington news, Britney Spears has regained her independence after a judge approved the termination of the conservatorship that denied the pop star any right to make key decisions about her life. More from my colleague Sam Levin: A judge has approved the termination of Britney Spears’s conservatorship, freeing the pop star from the controversial legal arrangement that has controlled her life for nearly 14 years. The ruling marks an extraordinary victory for the singer who had fought for years to regain her independence from the courts, which in 2008 took away her rights to make basic decisions about her finances, career and personal life. Friday’s decision to dissolve the conservatorship, a form of court-appointed guardianship, means that Spears will retake control of her estate and will no longer be required to pay a team of professionals and attorneys to oversee her affairs. “The conservatorship of the person and of the estate of Britney Jean Spears is hereby terminated,” said the Los Angeles judge Brenda Penny, announcing the ruling. Hi everyone. I’m Dani Anguiano and I’ll be taking over our live US politics coverage for the rest of the afternoon. Former Trump adviser Steve Bannon is expected to turn himself in on Monday after being indicted on two counts of contempt of Congress. Bannon had failed to appear before a congressional committee investigating the 6 January attack on the Capitol. His case has been assigned to Judge Carl Nichols, Politico reported, a Trump appointee who clerked for supreme court justice Clarence Thomas. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Dani Anguiano, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: A federal grand jury has indicted Steve Bannon on two counts of contempt of Congress, after the former adviser to Donald Trump refused to comply with a subpoena issued by the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The indictment sends a clear message to Trump allies that they could face criminal consequences for ignoring the committee’s demands. The committee warned it may also hold Mark Meadows in criminal contempt for refusing to appear for a scheduled deposition this morning. Meadows, Trump’s former chief of staff, has cited the former president’s questionable claims of executive privilege to justify his lack of cooperation with the committee. The leaders of the committee said, “Mr Meadows’s actions today – choosing to defy the law – will force the select committee to consider pursuing contempt or other proceedings to enforce the subpoena.” Joe Biden will name an “infrastructure coordinator” to oversee the implementation of the $1.2tn infrastructure bill, the White House press secretary said. Jen Psaki did not name the coordinator, but she noted it will be “someone from outside the administration”. Biden is scheduled to sign the infrastructure bill on Monday. Biden announced he will nominate Robert Califf to serve as the next commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration. But Democratic Senator Joe Manchin has already said he will oppose the nomination of Califf, who led the FDA during the final months of Barack Obama’s presidency. In order to get Califf confirmed, the White House will need to convince at least one Republican to support his nomination. Dani will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Mark Meadows’ attorney has argued that it would be inappropriate to testify before the select committee until the courts reach a final decision on Donald Trump’s claims of executive privilege over materials related to the Capitol insurrection. But in their new statement, the Democratic chair of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, and the Republican vice-chair, Liz Cheney, dismissed the validity of those claims. “[T]he record will reveal the wide range of matters the Select Committee wished to discuss with Mr. Meadows until his decision to hide behind the former President’s spurious claims of privilege,” the lawmakers said. “Many of those matters are not even conceivably subject to any privilege claim, even if there were one.” According to Thompson and Cheney, Meadows has refused to answer “even the most basic questions, including whether he was using a private cell phone to communicate on January 6th, and where his text messages from that day are”. They concluded, “And while we’re determined to get all the information we’re seeking, Mr Meadows, [Steve] Bannon, and others who go down this path won’t prevail in stopping the Select Committee’s effort getting answers for the American people about January 6th, making legislative recommendations to help protect our democracy, and helping ensure nothing like that day ever happens again.” Moments after the indictment of Steve Bannon was announced, the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection warned it may also move to hold Mark Meadows in contempt for defying its subpoena. Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, was scheduled to testify before the committee this morning, but he refused to show. The Democratic chair of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, and the Republican vice-chair, Liz Cheney, said Meadows’ refusal to appear may result in a contempt resolution. “Mr Meadows’s actions today – choosing to defy the law – will force the select committee to consider pursuing contempt or other proceedings to enforce the subpoena,” Thompson and Cheney said. “It’s unfortunate that Mr Meadows has chosen to join a very small group of witnesses who believe they are above the law and are defying a select committee subpoena outright.” Adam Kinzinger, one of two Republicans serving on the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, said the indictment of Steve Bannon was “great news”. Speaking to CNN moments ago, the Illinois lawmaker argued that the indictment sent a “chilling message” to other witnesses who may consider following Bannon’s example by defying committee subpoenas. “You cannot ignore Congress,” Kinzinger said. “You’re not going to be able to avoid it.” Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, was scheduled to testify before the Capitol attack select committee this morning, but he refused to appear. Meadows’ attorney has argued that it would be inappropriate to testify until the courts deliver a final ruling on Trump’s claims of executive privilege over materials linked to the Capitol insurrection. However, the White House and the Democratic chair of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, have argued that Trump’s executive privilege claims do not withstand legal scrutiny. The select committee has not yet indicated whether members plan to recommend contempt charges against Meadows, as they did with Steve Bannon. The news of Steve Bannon’s indictment comes on the same day that Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, refused to appear for a scheduled deposition before the select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. Bannon’s indictment sends a clear signal to Meadows and other Trump allies that they could face criminal consequences for defying subpoenas from the committee. Attorney general Merrick Garland said the indictment of Steve Bannon demonstrated the justice department’s commitment to “equal justice under the law”. “Since my first day in office, I have promised Justice Department employees that together we would show the American people by word and deed that the department adheres to the rule of law, follows the facts and the law and pursues equal justice under the law,” Garland said in a statement. “Today’s charges reflect the department’s steadfast commitment to these principles.” Steve Bannon, a former senior adviser to Donald Trump, has now been indicted for refusing to comply with a subpoena issued by the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. According to a statement from the justice department, Bannon has been indicted by a federal grand jury on two counts of contempt of Congress. “Bannon, 67, is charged with one contempt count involving his refusal to appear for a deposition and another involving his refusal to produce documents,” the statement says. “An arraignment date has not yet been set in the US district court for the District of Columbia.” The blog will have more details coming up, so stay tuned. Joe Biden argued that the passage of the bipartisan infrastructure bill demonstrated how a democracy can still benefits its citizens. “The American people sent us here to deliver,” the president said at the start of his cabinet meeting today. “The American people sent us here to make the government work. And they sent us here to make a difference in their lives. And I believe we’re doing that.” Biden pledged all the $1.2tn in funds from the bill will be used “efficiently and effectively,” and he indicated he will name a coordinator to oversee implementation of the proposal sometime next week. Kamala Harris, the US vice-president, has thrown her support behind a plan to stage risky and unprecedented parliamentary and presidential elections in Libya next month, even though human rights groups have warned the conditions for fair elections may not exist. Harris attended a conference in Paris on the future of Libya attended by more than 30 countries and hosted by the French president, Emmanuel Macron; the German chancellor, Angela Merkel; and the Italian prime minister, Mario Draghi. Human Rights Watch said elections were a much-needed chance for a reset in the country but warned “free and fair elections will hardly be possible without rule of law, justice, and accountability that are currently sorely lacking”. The US – and the bulk of the international community at the Paris summit – took the view that Libya was more likely to slide into chaos if the elections were not held, starting on 24 December. Joe Biden is now holding a meeting with his cabinet to discuss the implementation of the bipartisan infrastructure bill, which he will sign on Monday. Kamala Harris joined the meeting by telephone, as the vice-president has been in Paris this week to meet with French President Emmanuel Macron and mark Veterans Day there. At the start of the meeting, Biden emphasized that the passage of the infrastructure bill represented a moment of “immense hope and possibilities” for America. “It’s hard, but we can still come together to get something big done for the American people,” Biden said. As she concluded the White House press briefing, a reporter shouted a question at Jen Psaki about Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers and his false claims about coronavirus vaccines. “You know how we feel about misinformation. We’re against it,” the press secretary told reporters. Rodgers tested positive for coronavirus last week and then revealed that he had not gotten vaccinated, partly due to concerns about potential fertility issues with the treatments. However, health experts have said the vaccines are safe for couples trying to have children. Jen Psaki would not provide details on who Joe Biden will name as the “infrastructure coordinator” to oversee implementation of the bipartisan infrastructure bill, which he will sign on Monday. The White House press secretary would only say that the coordinator will be “someone from outside the administration”. Biden similarly named Gene Sperling, a former Obama administration official, to oversee the implementation of the coronavirus relief package earlier this year. White House press secretary Jen Psaki said Joe Biden will name an “infrastructure coordinator” to oversee the implementation of the $1.2tn infrastructure bill. The House passed the bill last week, sending the legislation to the president’s desk. The White House has said Biden will sign the bill on Monday, and he will be joined by a bipartisan group of lawmakers who helped craft the proposal. Asked how many Republicans will attend the bill-signing ceremony on Monday, Psaki said, “We will see. We’ve invited a broad group of Republicans -- some in Congress, governors, mayors, individuals who played a role in helping move the infrastructure bill forward.” The press secretary added that the White House will provide a list of expected ceremony attendees on Monday. Jen Psaki announced that Joe Biden will pardon a turkey next Friday, continuing a decades-old White House tradition for the Thanksgiving holiday. The press secretary noted that two turkey lives will actually be spared thanks to the tradition, as there is always an alternate turkey in Washington for the pardoning. This year, the two birds will be coming from a farm in Indiana, Psaki told reporters. Last year, Donald Trump presided over an awkward turkey pardoning ceremony, which came weeks after Biden was declared the winner of the presidential election: The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing, marking her return to the briefing room after testing positive for coronavirus. Psaki noted that she was originally scheduled to join Joe Biden for his trip to Europe a couple weeks ago, during which the president met with Pope Francis, attended the G20 summit and participated in the Cop26 climate change conference. She obviously did not do so after she tested positive for coronavirus. Prior to testing positive, Psaki had last seen Biden five days earlier, and they wore masks at the time. Psaki told reporters that she experienced “mild symptoms,” including fatigue, and she said she is “incredibly grateful” for coronavirus vaccines, which helped protect her against severe illness and potential hospitalization. Republican Lisa Murkowski confirmed today that she will seek another term representing Alaska in the US Senate. Murkowski made the announcement in a campaign video, saying she will “work with anyone, from either party, to advance Alaska’s priorities”. “I’m running for reelection to continue the important work of growing our economy, strengthening our Alaska-based military and protecting our people and the natural beauty of our state,” Murkowski said. Murkowski is one of seven Senate Republicans who voted to convict Donald Trump for inciting the Capitol insurrection, and she is only member of that group who is seeking reelection next year. Trump has already endorsed Murkowski’s primary challenger, former Alaska commissioner of administration Kelly Tshibaka, and he has pledged to campaign against the incumbent. But Murkowski does have the support of Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell and the National Republican Senatorial Committee, per Politico, setting up a potentially close race next year. The newly announced virtual summit on Monday evening between Joe Biden and Xi Jinping comes one day after the Chinese president warned against a return to cold war-era tensions in the Asia-Pacific. “Attempts to draw ideological lines or form small circles on geopolitical grounds are bound to fail,” he told a virtual business conference on the sidelines of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit. “The Asia-Pacific region cannot and should not relapse into the confrontation and division of the cold war era.” Xi’s remarks seem to refer to recent US efforts with allies and partners to dampen what Washington sees as China’s growing economic and military influence in the region. Joe Biden will hold a virtual summit with China’s president, Xi Jinping, on Monday evening, amid rising tensions since the US president took office earlier this year. “The two leaders will discuss ways to responsibly manage the competition between the United States and the PRC [People’s Republic of China], as well as ways to work together where our interests align,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said in a statement on Friday. “Throughout, President Biden will make clear US intentions and priorities and be clear and candid about our concerns.” At the recent Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow, Biden criticized Xi for failing to show up. Tensions between Washington and Beijing have also been exacerbated by the Chinese military’s recent sorties near Taiwan, the democratically-governed island claimed by Beijing. US secretary of state Antony Blinken said this week that the US would ensure Taiwan can defend itself to avoid anyone “trying to disrupt the status quo by force”. Here’s where the day stands so far: Mark Meadows, former chief of staff to Donald Trump, did not appear for his scheduled deposition before the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. Meadows’ attorney has said he will not testify until the courts determine the validity of Trump’s claims of executive privilege over documents linked to the Capitol attack. But the select committee and the White House have said Trump’s claims do not withstand legal scrutiny. It remains unclear whether the select committee will move forward with holding Meadows in criminal contempt. The House has already referred one of Trump’s former advisers, Steve Bannon, to the justice department for refusing to comply with a subpoena issued by the select committee. The justice department has not yet said whether it plans to prosecute Bannon. Joe Biden announced he will nominate Robert Califf to serve as the next commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration. But Democratic Senator Joe Manchin has already said he will oppose the nomination of Califf, who led the FDA during the final months of Barack Obama’s presidency. In order to get Califf confirmed, the White House will need to convince at least one Republican to support his nomination. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Joe Biden has just officially announced he plans to nominate Robert Califf as the next commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration. “Dr. Robert Califf is one of the most experienced clinical trialists in the country, and has the experience and expertise to lead the Food and Drug Administration during a critical time in our nation’s fight to put an end to the coronavirus pandemic,” Biden said in a new statement. “Dr. Califf had strong bipartisan support in the Senate in 2016, and I urge the Senate to swiftly confirm Dr. Califf so he can continue the important work being done at this critical moment.” But Califf’s confirmation is somewhat in doubt now that Democratic Senator Joe Manchin has indicated he will not support the nomination. Given the 50-50 split in the Senate, Califf’s nomination will need to attract some Republican support in order to get approved. Senator Joe Manchin has said he will oppose Robert Califf’s nomination if Joe Biden selects him to lead the Food and Drug Administration. Manchin argued that Califf’s inadequate response to the opioid epidemic made his nomination “an insult to the many families and individuals who have had their lives changed forever as a result of addiction”. The West Virginia senator noted he previously opposed Califf’s nomination when Barack Obama chose him to lead the FDA for the final months of his presidency. (Califf was ultimately confirmed in a vote of 89 to four.) “I could not support Dr. Califf’s nomination in 2016 and I cannot support it now,” Manchin said. “I urge the Administration to nominate an FDA Commissioner that understands the gravity of the prescription drug epidemic and the role of the FDA in fighting back against the greed of the pharmaceutical industry.” Given the 50-50 divide in the Senate, Biden will need to convince at least one Republican to support Califf’s nomination in order to get him confirmed. Donald Trump defended rioters at the Capitol on 6 January who threatened to “hang Mike Pence”, his vice-president, according to recorded remarks released on Friday. Trump said it was “common sense” when asked about the chants. Trump was speaking to the ABC chief Washington correspondent, Jonathan Karl, for his book Betrayal: The Final Act of the Trump Show, which will be published on Tuesday. The recording was released by Axios. Karl asked Trump if he was worried about Pence during the attack on the Capitol by rioters who aimed to stop the certification of electoral college results and thereby overturn Trump’s defeat by Joe Biden. “No,” Trump said. “I thought he was well-protected, and I had heard that he was in good shape. No. Because I had heard he was in very good shape. But, but, no, I think – ” Karl interjected: “Because you heard those chants – that was terrible. I mean – ” Trump said: “He could have – well, the people were very angry.” Karl said: “They were saying ‘hang Mike Pence’.” “Because it’s common sense, Jon,” Trump said, repeating baseless claims about election fraud. The Democratic chair of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, has previously made clear that he is open to holding Mark Meadows in criminal contempt for defying the panel’s subpoena. In his letter yesterday to Meadows’ attorney, Thompson argued there is “no valid legal basis for Mr Meadows’s continued resistance to the Select Committee’s subpoena”. “The Select Committee will view Mr. Meadows’s failure to appear at the deposition, and to produce responsive documents or a privilege log indicating the specific basis for withholding any documents you believe are protected by privilege, as willful non-compliance,” Thompson wrote. “Such willful noncompliance with the subpoena would force the Select Committee to consider invoking the contempt of Congress procedures in 2 U.S.C. §§ 192, 194—which could result in a referral from the House of Representatives to the Department of Justice for criminal charges—as well as the possibility of having a civil action to enforce the subpoena brought against Mr Meadows in his personal capacity.” The House select committee will now have to decide whether to pursue criminal contempt charges against Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump. If the committee votes to recommend holding Meadows in criminal contempt, the full House will vote on the matter. If the House approves the contempt measure, which is likely given that Democrats control the chamber, the justice department would then have to decide whether to prosecute Meadows. The House voted last month to refer Steve Bannon to the justice department for refusing to comply with the committee’s subpoena, but the department has not yet said whether it will prosecute the former Trump adviser. Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, did not appear for his scheduled deposition before the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. Meadows had been expected to start testifying at 10 am ET, but that time came and went without any appearance of the former administration official. Select committee aides were seen leaving the conference room where Meadows was supposed to testify after it became clear he would not show up. Asked whether the committee would immediately move to bring criminal contempt charges against Meadows, one of the committee counselors declined to comment. In case you missed it yesterday: The federal appeals court in Washington DC granted Donald Trump’s request to temporarily block the National Archives from releasing records to the bipartisan House select committee analysing the Capitol insurrection and the conduct of Trump and senior aides in his administration in relation to it. He had asked the appeals court on Thursday morning for a temporary injunction that followed US district judge Tanya Chutkan’s ruling earlier that Trump could not claim executive privilege over the White House documents subpoenaed by the committee. As is customary, the DC circuit court randomly assigns three judges to a panel to consider the appeal. It was announced that the three judges who will hear Trump’s appeal following the granting of the temporary stay will be Patricia Millett, Robert Wilkins and Ketanji Brown Jackson. All three were nominated by Democrats. The court has set a hearing for 30 November to hear oral arguments in the case, granting a request for an expedited schedule. The latest statement from Mark Meadows’ attorney, George Terwilliger, seems to indicate the former White House chief of staff will not be appearing for his scheduled deposition before the select committee this morning. Terwilliger once again argued that the clash between Meadows and the committee investigating the Capitol insurrection represented a “sharp legal dispute”. “Legal disputes are appropriately resolved by courts,” Terwilliger said. “It would be irresponsible for Mr Meadows to prematurely resolve that dispute by voluntarily waiving privileges that are at the heart of those legal issues.” But the chair of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, and White House lawyers have said there is no legal basis for Meadows to ignore the panel’s subpoena. In his latest letter to Terwilliger, Thompson said Donald Trump’s sweeping claims of executive privilege over the materials sought by the committee do not withstand legal scrutiny. “[A]s you know and, as explained in my letter dated October 25, categorical claims of executive privilege run afoul of caselaw requiring that any claim of executive privilege be asserted narrowly and specifically,” Thompson said. “Simply put, there is no valid legal basis for Mr. Meadows’s continued resistance to the Select Committee’s subpoena.” The move to threaten criminal prosecution for Mark Meadows amounts to an abrupt and sharp escalation for the select committee as it seeks to enforce its subpoena against one of Donald Trump’s closest aides first issued in September. But despite the threat of criminal prosecution, Meadows was not expected to attend his deposition, scheduled to take place with select committee counsel in a nondescript House office building on Capitol Hill, according to a source familiar with the matter. The select committee is targeting Meadows since his role as Trump’s former White House chief of staff means he is likely to hold the key to uncover Trump’s involvement in efforts on 5 January to stop the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s election victory. The select committee also believes that Meadows remained by Trump’s side for most of 6 January, and was therefore in a unique position to know what the former president was privately thinking and doing at the White House as the deadly attack on the Capitol unfolded. One of Donald Trump’s former advisers, Steve Bannon, is already facing potential contempt charges over his refusal to comply with a subpoena from the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. Bannon has used his popular podcast to continue spreading lies about widespread fraud in the 2020 election. The day before the insurrection, he told listeners, “All hell is going to break loose tomorrow.” When Bannon refused to comply with the committee’s subpoena, the House voted last month to refer him to the justice department for potential contempt charges. Now the justice department has to decide whether to prosecute Bannon over the matter. The department has not yet announced any decision in the case. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, is scheduled to testify today before the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. But Meadows’ attorney, George Terwilliger, has indicated to the committee that the former administration official feels “duty bound” to disregard the panel’s subpoena because of Trump’s claims of executive privilege over the information sought by investigators. In a letter to Terwilliger yesterday, the chair of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, warned that Meadows could face criminal contempt charges if he does not appear for his deposition. “Simply put, there is no valid legal basis for Mr. Meadows’s continued resistance to the Select Committee’s subpoena,” the Democratic chair said. “The select committee will view Mr Meadows’s failure to appear at the deposition, and to produce responsive documents or a privilege log indicating the specific basis for withholding any documents you believe are protected by privilege, as willful non-compliance.” So will Meadows show up to testify, or will he join Trump adviser Steve Bannon in facing potential contempt charges? Time will tell. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Days of heavy rain across south-eastern Australia have caused rivers to surge and break their banks, flooding swathes of New South Wales and Victoria. The focus in NSW had turned to areas around the Lachlan River, with major flood warnings issued for Forbes and Nanami, where the State Emergency Service was assisting with sandbagging. The SES said it had responded to more than 280 calls for assistance, with the busiest areas being around Armidale, Bathurst and Orange, the latter two of which had more than 90mm each over three days. It had also made 21 flood rescues statewide, about half of which were cars stuck in flood waters. Since the weather event began, the SES had responded to nearly 800 calls for assistance. Senior hydrologist Alex Clifton said the river rises at Forbes were “pretty significant”, as the town braces for flash flooding. “The major impacts that we’re seeing at the moment are in the Lachlan River Valley,” he said. “There is major flooding that’s likely to occur later today at Nanami and major flooding that we’re forecasting for Forbes and Cotton’s Weir, which is downstream, from Monday.” There were 12 flood warnings in place across the state, including for the Lachlan, Macquarie, Belubula, Gwydir and Castlereagh rivers, after some areas were lashed by up to 200mm of rain since Thursday. The Macquarie river peaked at just above five metres by 9pm on Friday, while a peak of more than 12 metres had been recorded at the Lachlan River. The Bureau of Meteorology had forecast major flooding at the Lachlan River, with the flood peak currently at Cowra and expected to reach Nanami on Saturday night. Damaging winds were also forecast for the northern tablelands in NSW, with gusts of more than 90km/h possible around elevated areas. Mark Uebergang has seen the floods affect his farm in North Star, NSW, with wheat and grain winter crops both affected, although he said it was still too early to know the extent of the damage. “We’re still seeing the extent of the flood’s progress, we don’t know how much it’ll affect cropping land, but it has the potential of impacting many thousands of acres of winter crop ready for harvest. “We’re just waiting for it to dry out to continue our harvests, and to see what damage the rainfall has done in terms of grading the quality of the crops. It might be a significant time before we can get machinery on it.” Uebergang said his farm had seen between 100mm and 120mm in rain in the past five days, but that his farm had seen worse during the flooding in April. “We’re just waiting and seeing. It’s not much different to the drought, no point complaining. Everything goes in cycles.” Daniel Austin from the NSW SES told Weekend Today that volunteers had to make 21 flood rescues so far. “Over the last few days, we’ve performed some 21 flood rescues, for a range of isolated by rapidly rising flood reasons, whether it’s people being [in the] waters or some people isolated by rapidly rising floodwaters, or driving into floodwaters. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Our focus is on the minor flood warning still in place, we are watching the central part of the state, particularly the Lachlan River and Forbes. We are also looking to the south coast, where we will see very strong winds and heavy rainfall.” It comes as a major flood warning was also issued for the Mitchell River in Victoria, with Glenaladale and Bairnsdale expected to be affected by Saturday evening. Between 30mm and 70mm of rain was recorded in the Mitchell Rover catchment in the 24 hours to 7am on Saturday, with isolated totals up to 116mm observed at Reeves Knob. Gippsland alone saw 30mm-95mm of rain from Friday, with an isolated total of 125mm recorded at Mt Moornapa. Tim Wiebusch, chief officer at the Victoria SES, told Channel Nine there had been more than 400 requests for help so far and he specifically requested people avoid camping along the river. “We now have a major flood warning on the Mitchell River in Gippsland and in the north-east of Gippsland,” he told Weekend Today. “So we’re asking people this weekend not to be camping alongside the river.” Wiebusch also implored people to avoid driving through floodwaters, warning it could be the “last decision you make”. The extreme weather was the result of a deep low-pressure system over NSW that was crossing the border into Victoria, before moving out into the Tasman Sea. The system interacted with humid air across eastern NSW, bringing with it heavy rainfall and flash flooding.Protektorat, a Grade One-winning novice at Aintree in April, is the class act in the field for the Paddy Power Gold Cup at Cheltenham on Saturday, a contest that is as competitive – and bewildering – as ever. Dan Skelton’s chaser also has winning form over Saturday’s course and distance but it is still a tall task to give weight to 18 opponents, including the first, second and third from 12 months ago. Several promising second-season chasers also lurk towards the bottom of the weights. Of the latter group, Farinet and Dostal Phil are interesting at decent double-figure odds but both have been absent since the spring so Midnight Shadow (2.15) could be a stronger option at around 10-1. Sue Smith’s lightly raced eight-year-old ran well in Grade One company in his novice season two years ago and made a promising return to action in the Old Roan at Aintree last month. Cheltenham 1.40 A couple of Third Time Lucki’s market rivals were below their best when he made a successful chase debut at the October meeting here, but he put up an impressive display all the same with the promise of better yet to come. Cheltenham 2.50 Dragon Bones made a solid return from six months off to finish a length behind the useful Bardenstown Ladat the October meeting. An opening mark of 132 could prove very fair on that form. Lingfield Park 3.05 Good Effort, who struggled to translate his high-class all-weather form to turf over the summer, is unbeaten in three starts at Lingfield. Early interference cost him his chance in a US Grade Two last time but he should be a different proposition back on his favourite track. Cheltenham 3.25 Unexpected Party made short work of his handicap debut last month, quickening eight lengths clear without being asked for a serious effort. He is up 11lb in the weights but looks more than capable of taking that in his stride. Lingfield Park 3.40 Pyledriver is unraced since a battling success in the Group One Coronation Cup and it would be no surprise if he needs this outing. He also faces a tough opponent in Felix, who proved himself one of the best middle-distance horses on the all-weather last winter. Blackmore stays in saddle to claim dramatic win Rachael Blackmore’s heroics at the Festival meeting here in March played out to an empty house, but there was a big crowd in the grandstands on Friday to gasp and then cheer her home as she played a starring role in an extraordinary moment of drama at Cheltenham’s second-last fence. The two-runner novice chase, between My Drogo, the odds-on favourite, and Blackmore’s mount Gin On Lime, had been written off by one bookmaker as unfit for ITV coverage. It proved to be anything but, however, as Blackmore somehow managed to stay aboard Gin On Lime after a terrible mistake two out, a split-second after My Drogo, who jumped it a length to the good and seemingly going clear, had suffered a sliding fall which launched Harry Skelton from his saddle. Gin On Lime also slid on landing, with her legs going in all directions. Blackmore, though, did not even wobble, maintaining perfect balance in the saddle as her partner sank towards the turf. Gin On Lime came to a halt, then rose back to her feet to a huge cheer from the crowd before jumping the last and cantering home for a memorable victory. A video clip of the moment quickly drew interest on social media. My Drogo and Skelton, meanwhile, emerged unscathed from their fall and the six-year-old looks certain to be a major player at next year’s Festival. After the race, Blackmore was typically understated about her gravity-defying feat. “It’s very unfortunate for the Skeltons what happened, but the ball bounced right for me, I suppose,” she said. “She just crumpled under me, it was quite a slow-motion one and those ones are ok. But she’s just an extremely honest mare to go down and then jump the last and canter to the line.” Henry de Bromhead, Gin On Lime’s trainer, was as astonished as anyone that he was welcoming his mare back to the winner’s enclosure. “It was mad, wasn’t it?” he said. “We looked beaten, I don’t think the favourite deserved [the fall], he’d jumped brilliantly throughout. You wouldn’t believe it would you?” Gin And Lime is now likely to get a rest before returning to Cheltenham in March for the Mares’ Chase.It was inspiring to watch activists – especially young people and those from the global south – as this Glasgow Cop limped towards its mushy end. They were on top of every twist in the text, and they won significant concessions from the big polluting countries. At the time of writing, it looks as if the phasing out of coal and subsidies for fossil fuels will be mentioned in a Cop document for the first time, and that there will be more money for nations of the global south to “adapt” to the climate crisis. The activists’ anger echoed through the halls, and was heard in whatever parts of the world were listening. To the extent that this Cop worked at all, it’s a tribute to their perseverance and creativity. But was this a sea change in the way we deal with the global climate crisis? No –Glasgow moves us down the track a little and boxes in national governments a little more, but it has changed not nearly enough. After 26 iterations, the truth about these Cops is pretty clear: the results are largely determined before they even begin. Yes, there’s an endless succession of concerts, marches, seminars, negotiating sessions, speeches, ultimatums, declarations, photo-ops; and yes, everyone works hard to build a sense of drama (the media especially). But history would suggest that the parties rarely go beyond what they’d intended to do before they arrived. This is not, I think, a cynical take; rather, it’s always seemed to me that the best way to understand the process of the annual Cops – especially the big ones like Copenhagen or Paris or Glasgow – is to view them as scoreboards rather than contests. They reflect how much of an effect civil society has managed to have over the nations engaged in the negotiations, and the strength of civil society relative to the power of the fossil fuel industry and its friends in the financial community. Copenhagen failed because there was too little movement building in the years preceding it, allowing a leader like Barack Obama to go home empty-handed and pay no political price. The global climate movement remedied that deficiency before Paris: many governments had no choice but to reach some kind of credible deal and hence a workable framework emerged, albeit without the actual pledges to make it capable of the task. Glasgow was supposed to be the place where countries lived up to the resolutions they’d proudly announced in France, and the decidedly mixed results reflect, at least in part, the difficulties activists have faced over the last few years. September 2019 may have been the high point to date in climate organising. Millions upon millions of mostly young people took to the streets around the world as the school strike movement opened hearts and minds on every continent. Vanessa Nakate, Xiye Bastida, Greta Thunberg, Luisa Neuberger, Alexandria Villaseñor, Jerome Foster and an almost endless list of very young climate leaders captured imaginations like no one before. Together they formed a wave that seemed as if it would continue cresting. But then came Covid-19 – and it turned out that while it’s possible to do good organising on Zoom, it’s not easy. In any event, the world faced a different crisis for a while, one that understandably took up the most energy. The pandemic illustrated certain useful principles for the climate fight (pay attention to science, flatten curves early). On balance, though, it focused attention elsewhere. Even before Covid, the landscape for activists had begun to shrink. The rise of illiberal governments around the world – Trump’s America, but also Xi’s China (more restrictive even than its predecessors were on civil society), Bolsonaro’s Brazil, Erdoğan’s Turkey, Putin’s Russia. Much of the world is largely off limits to activism, especially the global kind exemplified by the climate movement. (The leader of the youth climate movement in India, for instance, spent several weeks behind bars; now she’s awaiting trial, and the police wouldn’t permit her travel to Glasgow.) Most of the world’s biggest countries are now beyond the reach of protest, and to a large degree unresponsive even to international pressure. China issued a joint statement with the US vaguely pledging future action, but it also made clear that it didn’t look forward to the annual revisions of its climate targets that activists – and scientists – have demanded. And no one really has an idea how to counter this, any more than they know how to counter the fact that American polling finds Republican voters even more resistant to the reality of climate change than they were a few years ago. Since there’s a very good chance that Republicans will control Congress by the time of next year’s Cop in Egypt, it’s hard to see what leverage there will be to move the process forward. But still. As vaccines spread, activism is spreading again too: the marches in Glasgow were as spirited as any I have ever seen, and Thunberg – with her superb gift for saying and doing the right thing at the right time – helped everyone understand the meaning of Glasgow with her “blah, blah, blah” framing. Yes, the other side is also better at its game: greenwashing has become steadily more complex, and taking apart claims like “net zero by 2050” has become a full-time occupation. But since these are lies, they will look steadily more shabby, exposed by each flood and hurricane. My guess is that movements will adapt to the blockages in the Cop process, and powerfully. I think there’s going to be ever more attention on the financial industry, in part because it’s crucial to the fossil fuel machine, in part because it’s located in places like New York and London, where protest of all kinds can still be carried out. And as Covid recedes, that rejuvenated activism will combine with the continuing horror of the climate crisis to produce more pressure for change. It had better – Glasgow’s finish makes clear that when activists aren’t able to push as hard as we need, inertia and vested interest remain powerful forces. The idea that the world’s governments will simply do what needs to be done is just a fairytale. In that sense, the Cop tells us not just what we’ve done in the past few years, but what we have to do in the ones ahead. The planet is out of its comfort zone; we had best be even further out of ours. Bill McKibben is the Schumann distinguished scholar at Middlebury College, Vermont, and leader of the climate campaign group 350.orgAnd a full match report from tonight’s match can be read below: Not much to report from the televised postgame interviews. Crowd good. Rivalry good. Healthy Pulisic good. Summing up from a more distant vantage point -- Steffen’s saves were vital in a first half in which Mexico’s counterattack posed problems, and then the US attack hit another gear, keeping Mexico pinned in its own half. Goals are never inevitable, but Weah’s class finally overwhelmed the Mexican defense, and his cross to a fresh Pulisic was the breakthrough. A few minutes later, McKennie got a golden opportunity and converted. Another USA-Mexico World Cup qualifier in Ohio. Another dos a cero. Next up: a trip to Jamaica on Tuesday. Dropping points there would take a bit of the shine off this win, but the Americans’ form is strong, and Jamaica isn’t Mexico. Thanks for following along with me tonight. Until next time ... Concacaf qualifying standings and tonight’s results ... 14 USA (2-0 v MEX) 14 Mexico (0-2 @ USA) 13 Canada (1-0 v CRC) 11 Panama (3-2 @ HON) 6 Costa Rica (0-1 @ CAN) 6 Jamaica (1-1 @ SLV) 6 El Salvador (1-1 v JAM) 3 Honduras (2-3 v PAN) Is it too early to say the top four has been decided, and it’s just a question of the order? Three meaningful wins in this rivalry this year, none more meaningful than this. World Cup qualification hasn’t been clinched just yet, and it won’t be for some time to come in this format. But this will make everyone in U.S. soccer feel very good. 90 min +1: Richards replaces the outstanding Weah in an understandable move to boost the defense. And yet the USA remains the attacking team, with Ferreira hitting just wide. Here’s why it’s dos a cero: Hirving Lozano leaves Miles Robinson in the dust with a quick cutback move, and the young US center back gives chase. He grabs Lozano’s shoulder, and that’s his second yellow. He’ll miss the next game, and US supporters will hope it won’t affect anything here. Four minutes of stoppage time. 88 min: Pulisic and Weah conspire to possess the ball on the right, and a frustrated Herrera plows through Pulisic. Chelsea supporters will wince upon seeing Pulisic writhe around in apparent pain, but he’s fine. Dos a cero. Again. Several short passes unlock the Mexican defense. A McKennie pass attempt deflects right back to him, and he’s all alone. His composed finish tucks inside the post. 85 min: Weah crosses to the far post for McKennie, giving the USA some activity in the box. 83 min: Mori for Alvarez will be the third Mexican substitution. Meanwhile, Mexico is getting a bit more possession, as one might expect when a team suddenly finds itself behind, and Steffen has to come out to punch clear on a free kick. Then he smothers a promising cross. 80 min: Substitutions for Mexico ... Moreno for Romo Alvarado for Corona Substitutions for the USA ... Acosta for Musah Ferreira for Pepi 79 min: Herrera drives the ball through traffic, but Steffen gathers easily. Tata Martino, having seen what can be accomplished through substitution, starts to consider making one of his own. And we have confirmation, as English commentators like to say when a graphic appears: Pulisic provides the finishing touch with a close-range header a couple of minutes after coming on the field, but it’s that man again, Timothy Weah, beating two men on the flank and putting that cross right where it needs to be. The breakthrough at last. 74 min: A couple of set pieces for Mexico. 70 min: So to sum up -- Mexico should be playing with 10 men now, and Christian Pulisic is in. Naturally, Mexico gets its first spell of possession in the US half in the last 20 minutes or so. 68 min: Aaronson tries to take a free kick quickly and finds himself the victim of some MMA-style ground-and-pound. Both teams are mad. Both cards remained pocketed. Oops ... spoke too soon. It’s a yellow for Zack Steffen, who walked all the way up the field to argue, another for Weston McKennie, who’ll be suspended for the next game, and another for Luis Rodriguez, who poked Aaronson in the eye and probably would’ve earned sterner punishment if we had VAR. Yes. I said it. We need VAR. Aaronson was already slated to exit in favor of ... Christian Pulisic. 65 min: That’s MY throw-in! MINE! A dispute over which team has the right to toss the ball back into play yields some shoving. I forget -- are soccer teams allowed to make substitutions? (I’m kidding. I’m not Gregg Berhalter.) 64 min: The biggest difference between halves isn’t so much the dazzling US attack but the fact that Mexico has done nothing to trouble the US back line. 61 min: The crowd doesn’t like Ochoa, whose tenure in this rivalry dates back to the Bush administration, and he seems to revel in it, taking his time to play the ball forward while the US attackers decide to ease up on the pressure for a moment. 59 min: Yellow card. Remember a few minutes ago when I said I’ve been saying “Antonee Robinson” instead of just “Robinson” because the USA also features Miles Robinson? Miles has had a quiet game, which is often a good sign for a center back, but a hockey-style check at midfield earns him a yellow. 58 min: Aaronson streaks through the box but only makes partial contact on a short cross from, you guessed it, Weah. Elsewhere in Concacaf, Canada has taken a 1-0 lead over Costa Rica, increasing the likelihood that the USA will slip to third tonight, and it could be a tie for third thanks to Panama’s heroics: 54 min: Weah, who is displacing Steffen as the USA’s man of the match, hits a long shot that’s deflected to Pepi, who can’t quite get solid contact. The first 10 minutes here have been fantastic for the Americans. 51 min: Raul Jimenez attempts some high-speed chiropractic work on Tyler Adams’ back. The US captain takes a while to get back up. Jimenez comes over for a half-hug to apologize. We resume with a Mexican free kick.I’ve seen youth soccer referees forget which way the game was restarting after a 49 min: CHANCE for the USA! No surprise -- Weah is the one who set it up, dropping a ball back to the onrushing McKennie, who tries to drill the ball straight through Ochoa. The veteran keeper knocks it away for a corner. Unfortunately, US corners have not looked inviting on this occasion. 47 min: Weah continues to be industrious, involving himself in two consecutive semi-promising attacks. Antonee Robinson (we keep saying Antonee because there’s also a Miles Robinson on the team) has a shot at an acute angle that’s blocked. Theatrics. Through qualifying thus far, the USA has scored one goal in the first half and eight in the second. Also, the latter part of halftime took place in partial darkness that we’ll assume was intentional. Still chilly. Rain resumed. Kickoff. The reversal from years gone by is stark: The optimist’s way of looking at it from a USA point of view: The attackers are making life difficult for the Mexican defense, and Christian Pulisic may yet be riding in with the second wave. The pessimist’s view: Yeah, all that possession and pressure is cool, but does this team have the grit and savvy to cope with Mexico’s counterattack? The minute-by-minute commentator’s view: What’s in the kitchen? 45 min +1: Yellow card to Luis Romo for an unnecessary clip of McKennie’s heels at the center line. 44 min: Nifty attack, no dangerous shot. Aaronson collapses theatrically in the box and pops up looking for a penalty that was never going to be called. 41 min: Nifty attack, no dangerous shot. Nifty attack, no dangerous shot. Repeat. The last went to Antonee Robinson, who is filling in for Dest very nicely -- lively in the attack, less than solid on defense. I’m waiting for someone to start calling the Barcelona man “Est” because he has no D. And ... Panama just took the lead. Free kick to Mexico, cleared easily. Taylor Twellman, the ESPN commentator, thinks it’s a strange decision to hit the outswinging cross rather than an inswinger that could veer in toward goal, and he’s not wrong. Meanwhile, Honduras leads Panama 2-0 ... oh, wait, it’s 2-2. Wow. That was fast. Panama is far from a traditional power in Concacaf, but they might just hang around in contention long enough to make the Big Two (plus the newly invigorated Canada) nervous. 38 min: Musah falls near the top of the arc. Unfortunately, he wasn’t fouled. Robinson follows with a terrific cross to Pepi in the middle of the box. He lays it off to Musah, who fires his shot over the bar. 35 min: Musah slices through the Mexican defense several times, as if making the mark of Zorro, but he has no help. Fun players to watch, these young Americans. They just leave themselves more exposed than a hermit crab between shells. 33 min: Weah has been an attacking spark, and he wins a corner with a quick move on the right. The USA retains possession until it doesn’t. 30 min: CHANCE for Mexico. US attackers press and press, and it looks promising until Mexico pops it forward with a couple of clean passes. Lozano plays a long diagonal ball to Corona, who has a step on Robinson but can’t finish. I think the word I’m seeking for the US approach thus far is “naive.” 29 min: Can’t shake the feeling here that the USA has the better of possession but Mexico still looks more likely to score. Corner to the USA, taken quickly and short and pointlessly. 25 min: Antonee Robinson has turned into a bit of a pest for the Mexican defense. His cross here is cleared, but Mexico has to devote a lot of resources to get out of danger. 23 min: While both teams kick around a bit and catch their breath, here’s a stat: Here’s that chance for Mexico: 19 min: CHANCE FOR MEXICO on the counter, with Steffen diving to his left to stop a near-breakaway. That’s the second time Mexico has sprung an attacker into space with just one US defender keeping him company. Remember when the USA was the counterattacking team in this rivalry? 17 min: Corona takes out McKennie, and it’s a 40-plus-yard free kick for the USA. That’s headed clear, but the ball pings around and eventually falls to Aaronson for an easily saved shot. 15 min: Corner to the USA ... Not quite sure what Dunny means here, but Mexico is indeed having trouble playing out of the back, like an Under-12 team under strict orders to do so for the sake of development even if it hurts the result. 11 min: SHOT for Mexico’s Alvarez from the top of the box, and it requires a diving save from Steffen, who couldn’t be sure whether it was going wide. The sequence started with a bad pass in midfield. Zimmerman alertly stopped the counter, but Mexico kept possession as both teams raced into the fray. 9 min: That free kick is headed wide by somewhere between one and three people. 8 min: Weah’s shot from 25 yards is perhaps a bit impetuous. Antonee Robinson drives up the left flank, dives and picks up a free kick. 7 min: Most of the action has been in the Mexican half, but Gallardo surges down the left side of the field and wins a corner. The ball is knocked out, and the rebound goes roughly 33 feet (10 meters) over the goal. Mexican coach Tata Martino appears to be dressed for a polar expedition. 5 min: The USA is managing a good bit of possession here, and Pepi gets the first half-chance on an alert cross from Weah. 1 min: Antonee Robinson makes a promising run down the left before being tripped by an unseen force. It’s a lively crowd. U.S. Soccer has made a point in this century of scheduling this game farther away from the border to ensure a good ratio of USA-to-Mexico fans, and it seems to have worked. Is everyone enjoying the college football game featuring the startlingly high-ranked Cincinnati team? Well, eventually, maybe you’ll get to see this game. (It’s available on ESPNews and ESPN’s various apps. And in Spanish on TUDN.) KICKOFF! The top three will make it to the World Cup. The fourth-place team has to go to a playoff. It’ll be a lot easier when these two countries and Canada co-host the 2026 World Cup, by which time the field will have expanded to so many teams that we will be hoping to bring in countries from as-yet-undiscovered planets to round out the numbers. Anyway, through six games out of 14: 14 Mexico 11 USA 10 Canada 8 Panama 6 Costa Rica 5 Jamaica 5 El Salvador 3 Honduras So the USA could fall to third tonight with a loss/draw and a Canadian win over Costa Rica, but Panama seems unlikely to move ahead due to a five-goal margin in goal difference. Actually, upon checking the scores, it’s even less likely -- Panama trails Honduras 1-0 at the half, a score that should make USA and Canada fans quite happy. For now. The non-graphical version of the lineups ... USA: Zack Steffen (Manchester City) in goal. Back line of Antonee Robinson (Fulham), Walker Zimmerman (Nashville), Miles Robinson (Atlanta) and DeAndre Yedlin (Galatasaray). Captain Tyler Adams (RB Leipzig) is in midfield with Weston McKennie (Juventus) and Yunus Musah (Valencia). The frontline has Brendan Aaronson (RB Salzburg) and Tim Weah (Lille) alongside the newest, brightest light for the USA, Ricardo Pepi (FC Dallas), who has three goals in his first four appearances. Mexico: Guillermo Ochoa (Club America) in goal. Back line of Jesus Gallardo (Monterrey), Johan Vasquez (Genoa), Cesar Dominguez (Cruz Azul) and Luis Rodriguez (UANL Tigres). Midfield: Edson Alvarez (Ajax), Hector Herrera (Atletico Madrid) and Luis Romo (Cruz Azul). Up front, it’s Jesus Corona (Porto), Raul Jimenez (Wolves) and Hirving Lozano (Napoli). Mexico has a massive edge in experience. Most of the team has at least 50 caps. The notable exception is Vasquez, who’s getting his third. Guillermo Ochoa, hoping for his fifth trip to the World Cup, starts in goal. If you’re English, you’ll love the weather. It’s chilly (about 43 degrees in American measurement and 6 degrees Celsius) in Cincinnati. And it’s raining. The oft-injured Christian Pulisic will not start. Sergiño Dest, the Barcelona left back who keys the attack while occasionally remembering to play defense, is not with the team due to his own injury concerns. But Tim Weah is healthy and ready to go. Good evening to all of our readers in the Americas, and a good early morning to those watching out of curiosity in Europe. This is a big one. USA-Mexico games are always hot tickets no matter what’s at stake, but this time around, everything is at stake. That’s especially true for the USA, which beat Mexico twice this year to win the Concacaf Nations League and the Gold Cup but is still shaken by their failure to qualify for the 2018 World Cup. A sputtering start in the new Octagonal (eight-team final round), with a 0-0 draw against El Salvador and a 1-1 home draw against Canada didn’t settle the nerves. A 4-1 win at Honduras calmed things a bit, but the October window had a 1-0 loss at Panama. As it stands now, the USA are second in the group. But a loss tonight will cause national hand-wringing and social media outrage. Beau will be here shortly. In the meantime, here is Cesar Hernandez’s preview of tonight’s match: It began with a corner kick. If you’re looking for a starting point for the US men’s national team’s failure to book a spot at the 2018 World Cup, there may be no better moment than a set-piece for Mexico on 11 November 2016. After four consecutive 2-0 World Cup qualifying wins over Mexico in Columbus, Ohio, the US suddenly found themselves with an unfamiliar 1-1 scoreline against their old rivals at the Mapfre Stadium. Then, in the 89th minute, that corner from Miguel Layún found the head of veteran defender Rafael Márquez, who perfectly redirected the ball into the back of the net. The crowd of 24,000 in Columbus were stunned as Mexico not only took a 2-1 lead, but also secured their first World Cup qualifying away win against the Americans since 1972. The loss to Mexico foreshadowed a dismal run against Concacaf opponents and the US failed to make the World Cup for the first time since 1986.Australia has been accused of “hiding behind others” at the Cop26 Glasgow climate summit while opposing an agreement necessary to keep alive a chance of limiting global heating to 1.5C, the threshold above which scientists warn climate breakdown would rapidly become catastrophic. Australia is one of several nations that does not support an agreement at the Cop26 talks requesting all countries to return to the negotiating table next year with stronger commitments to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 2030. The issue remains a key sticking point between the more than 190 countries at the talks, which extended past their Friday night deadline and will continue into Saturday, local time, as negotiators fight over the details of a potential deal. The Australian government delegation has maintained a largely low-key public presence at the talks since the emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, returned home with a week to go at the summit. But several sources told Guardian Australia the Morrison government was opposed to parts of an updated draft negotiating text released on Friday by the British hosts of the summit that would be crucial to maintain a chance of limiting global average heating since the industrial revolution to 1.5C. Bill Hare, the chief executive of Climate Analytics, who has been attending climate summits for 30 years, said Australia was “hiding behind others” including Brazil, Russia and Saudi Arabia, which were all trying to weaken the negotiating text. “The overall view of Australia is it’s the worst I have seen it in my career,” he said. “It’s not exposing its position publicly but it’s clear that it doesn’t want a process next year for all countries to come back and close the emissions gap for 2030.” The draft document requests countries revisit and strengthen their 2030 targets so by the end of next year they align with the temperature goal expressed in the landmark 2015 Paris agreement – to hold global heating to well below 2C above pre-industrial times, and to “pursue efforts” to limit it to 1.5C. It includes the caveat that those strengthened commitments should “take into account different national circumstances” – seen by observers as a potential get-out clause that underlines the non-binding nature of commitments at UN climate talks. But it goes further than the Paris agreement in other ways. It says countries recognise – based on work by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change – that the impacts will be significantly worse at 2C than at 1.5C, and that limiting heating to the lower level will require “rapid, deep and sustained” cuts in emissions. That includes reducing global carbon dioxide emissions by 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 and reaching net zero by “around mid-century”. With an assessment this week having found under existing targets the world would actually increase emissions by 13% this decade, the text suggests countries should recognise that accelerated action is needed “in this critical decade”. The Morrison government rejects that position. It was one of only a handful of significant emitters to refuse to increase its 2030 goal. Its official target, set when Tony Abbott was prime minister six years ago, remains a 26-28% emissions cut compared with 2005 emissions levels. Many comparable countries have pledged to cut emissions in half by 2030. Australia’s plan to reach net zero by 2050, released two days before Morrison left Australia to attend the Glasgow talks, included no new policies and relied on voluntary action from business and consumers and technology development to reach the net zero goal. Cuts in emissions would largely be pushed back until after 2030 and 2040. The modelling underpinning the plan, released on Friday, aligned with 2C of heating, not 1.5C. It fell short of explaining how net zero would be reached and assumed a long life for fossil fuel industries, including that the gas export industry would be bigger in 2050 than today. Australia’s opposition to wording in the draft text that requested countries to increase 2030 targets next year is consistent with the position outlined by the prime minister before he flew to Glasgow – that the government would not lift its 2030 goal now or at next year’s federal election despite projections suggesting the country would exceed the target. Whether and how countries will revise their national plans for 2030 – known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs) – are now at the heart of the talks, with an updated draft negotiating text set to be released by the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, at 8am Saturday in Glasgow. The text aims to clarify and build on the Paris agreement, and is meant to be the main outcome at the summit. Some countries have tried to argue that revising 2030 targets next year is contrary to the Paris agreement, which requires revisions only every five years, but others have argued the Paris treaty allowed for this to be escalated. Research by the Climate Action Tracker found current NDCs presented by countries in Glasgow would lead to at least 2.4C of heating. Rob Hales, director of the Griffith University Centre for Sustainable Enterprise, said the Morrison government appeared to be “sitting on its hands” at Cop26 while supporting positions consistent with 2C of heating, not 1.5C. He said the country’s reputation for supporting rule-based international relations would be “severely tested” if it were to play a part in watering down an outcome in Glasgow. Using a “fair share” approach, Hales said Australia had already released 42% of its remaining allowable fossil fuel emissions since 2013, leaving only 58% between now and 2050. “Without increasing ambition in targets and plans to reduce fossil fuel emissions, it is almost certain that Australia will overshoot its budget,” he said. Erwin Jackson, director of policy at the Investor Group on Climate Change and a veteran observer of climate talks, said institutional investors responsible for managing more than half the world’s assets had called on governments to avoid a catastrophic temperature rise of more than 1.5C. Australia’s position did not match that. He said its 2030 target was well below the average of its competitors, major trading partners and allies, and even further below what the science demanded. “Business as usual on Australia’s current 2030 emissions target remains an acute financial risk to the Australian economy,” Jackson said. Taylor’s office declined to comment on Saturday. In a statement on Thursday, the minister said Australia was “an active and constructive participant in the negotiations to ensure a positive outcome”. Guardian Australia revealed this week the Morrison government had also tried to block a Unesco recommendation that countries should aim to limit heating to 1.5C to protect world heritage sites from the impacts of the climate crisis. As reported by the Guardian, other sticking points at Cop26 include: A shortfall in climate finance to help developing countries adapt. A long-promised US$100bn a year from public and private sources was supposed to be delivered by 2020, but is not expected until 2023. Developing countries want discussions over a much bigger pool. How to deal with “loss and damage” from climate impacts that cannot be avoided through preparation or adaptation. The G77 + China bloc of developing nations wants to keep alive the potential for a “loss and damage facility” through which the wealthy would pay compensation for climate disasters. How countries measure and report greenhouse gas emissions. Article 6 of the Paris agreement, which deals with carbon trading. Some countries including Australia want to use carbon offsetting to meet commitments. Others fear a flood of cheap carbon credits that do not represent genuine emissions cuts.For the third time this year Concacaf’s fiercest rivals faced each other. On Friday night in Cincinnati the stakes were at their highest, with crucial World Cup qualifying points on the line. And, as ever when the two neighbors meet, so was pride, dignity, and the future of both teams. For an hour before kickoff on a frigid November night, the rain poured down. Fans in the sold-out stadium chanted “U-S-A” and “Mex-i-co” back and forth. Fireworks marked the start. The teams took to the field in a familiar formation: 4-3-3 on either side. Mexico had experience, an aging staff and a formidable front line. The US had two 18-year olds, potential, athleticism and speed. Mexico dominated possession in the opening minutes of the first-half, and their pass completion eclipsed that of the United States. As the clock ticked toward half-time, the US fought their way to parity in possession. They also took more shots, and created far more chances. But for all the improvements, they couldn’t finish their chances. They didn’t capitalize on the set-pieces they won, many of which were thanks to Timothy Weah and Yunus Musah moving the ball forward from the right. Meanwhile, Mexico’s threatening forward line poked holes in the US defense. Zack Steffen, starting in goal over Matt Turner, needed to be at his best and came up huge with a pair of big saves. In the second-half, the USA had the possession and momentum. The match became scrappier, and the fouls and shoving that are often a defining characteristic of this rivalry started to break out. Intensity reached a fever pitch just past the 60th minute when Brenden Aaronson was flattened. A scuffle ensued and Steffen, Weston McKennie and Luis Rodriguez were booked as a result. Aaronson was soon subbed off and replaced by Christian Pulisic, who ran on the field to the uproarious approval of a fanbase that hadn’t seen their star since his injury in the September qualifiers. Within five minutes of his introduction, Pulisic provided the answer to his team’s inability to finish chances. A beautiful run and well-timed cross from Weah found Pulisic in front of goal and he knocked home the header. The decibels from the home crowd increased and the US upped their tempo. Eleven minutes later, McKennie’s cool finish ended Mexico’s hopes of a comeback. The crowd sang out the familiar Dos A Cero chant, a long-time fixture of this rivalry – and World Cup qualifiers in Ohio. It was a deserved victory for Gregg Berhalter’s team. They ended the match with 18 shots to Mexico’s eight. They also created more chances, won more challenges and again strengthened the argument that the US are the superior footballing nation of the two at the moment. The one blemish for the USMNT came when Miles Robinson was sent off after a second booking in the final minutes. Both he and McKennie will now miss Tuesday’s qualifier against Jamaica through suspension, the latter’s coming after picking up his second booking of the qualifiers. Mexico, meanwhile, have questions to answer, and have lost all three of their matches against the United States in 2021. The Americans’ victory put them top of the Concacaf qualifying table – both the US and Mexico have 14 points from seven games, but the USMNT lead due to their superior head-to-head record. Canada occupy the third automatic qualifying spot after they beat Costa Rica on Friday night. The US can now head to Kingston for Tuesday’s match with heads high and their tickets to Qatar looking ever more secure.It was around midnight when Kittichai Boodchan heard two loud crashes coming from in front of his home. He knew immediately what was happening. An elephant was outside, and it wanted the family’s stash of bananas. Boonchuay, a local bull from the nearby Kaeng Krachan national park notorious for his habit of raiding the village in search of snacks, had come to call. Kittichai had earlier bought 200kg of bananas to sell and, although stored inside, the sweet scent had undoubtedly piqued Boonchuay’s interest. Kittichai leapt out of bed and began slamming the door and shouting to try to scare the elephant away. Boonchuay, undeterred, continued to ram his head into the wall, cracking through the structure. He stopped only after about 10 or 15 minutes, when, unable to reach the fresh fruit, he sauntered off down the road. That visit, in June last year, was the first of many for Kittichai’s family. Since then, Boonchuay has returned several times, entering their home and breaking parts of the wall. During his most recent break-ins, in June and July this year, he managed to barge his head into the kitchen, pinching plastic bags, cooking oil, instant noodles and flour. “I’m not sure I have the right to be angry at them because we stole their space,” says Kittichai. “They lived here before.” Beside him, a pole shows fresh earth marks left by an elephant’s trunk. The elephants pass through every few days, he says. Across Thailand, and Asia, humans have increasingly expanded into forest areas, fragmenting elephants’ traditional habitats, and often disrupting their access to resources. For communities in these areas, coexisting is a delicate and dangerous struggle. Conflict between animals and people can be financially devastating for humans, distressing and, at worst, deadly for both species. In Thailand last year, eight elephants and eight people were killed in conflict, according to Bhichet Noonto, a specialist in the subject at the Human Elephant Voices network. Researchers warn that the competition for resources will intensify. “In Thailand the forest areas are still decreasing, and we have many, many projects that try to make developments inside the forest,” says Bhichet, adding that in 1933, 43% of Thailand was forested; by 2019 this had fallen to just under 32% of the country. Kittichai’s village, Chalermkiat Pattana, close to Kaeng Krachan national park, is one of many on the frontline of the struggle to coexist. Signs outside a local homestay warn guests not to leave fruit in their cars. Residents, including Kittichai, have put wires strung with cans up outside their homes as a rudimentary alarm to warn of break-ins. Park rangers patrol the main road that leads to the village every evening, using a truck to steer elephants – usually either Boonchuay or another male, Boonmee – back into the forest. Bull elephant Boonchuay has broken into Kittichai Boodchan’s house a number of times, stealing noodles and oil. Local authorities helped to repair the building Kittichai, like many in the village, is now accustomed to being woken up every couple of nights by the elephants, or by the sound of other residents trying to scare them away. “Once an elephant enters [your home] you have to do everything you can to push them out,” he says. Many residents have stories of Boonchuay and Boonmee’s escapades. Restaurant owner Nongyao Kaewsulesai describes how one of the elephants raided her kitchen cupboard and made off with a 25kg bag of sugar. “They like sugar, noodle packets, and if you have papaya they will eat it all,” she says. Every night she moves boxes of crisps into the back room as a precaution. Her fridge has been knocked over several times by the elephants. Nongyao Kaewsulesai prepares food in her restaurant, which has been raided by elephants on several occasions. Photograph: Jack Taylor/The Guardian “I feel like I’m a security guard,” says Supa Taengthong, who sells fried banana and lives down the road. During several visits this year an elephant – she isn’t sure which one – managed to break through two walls, passing through the living area and the children’s bedroom to the kitchen at the back of the house. “The elephant ate everything, not only bananas, but the rice – the cooked rice in the rice cooker, the uncooked rice – the sugar, everything,” she says. The authorities helped her rebuild the front wall of the house, but the inside is still damaged and she has not received compensation for the food that was stolen. Monitoring cameras show that specially constructed fences are not always effective, as the range of fence-hopping techniques displayed by these elephants show Supa has lived in the village for two decades, but says it is only in the past three years that the elephants have become a problem. “I want the two of them to be moved out of this area. It’s only these two that are the problem,” she says. Simply removing them, though, could make matters worse – they may be replaced by another, more aggressive elephant, or even a herd. “Maybe the enemy of the enemy is a friend,” says Itthipol Thaikamol, head of Kaeng Krachan national park. He believes there is sufficient food in the park for the elephants. “We also planted a lot of food and make a lot of salt lick. But sometimes, especially in the dry season, it might be harder for the elephants,” says Itthipol. It is also probably the case, he adds, that durian and jackfruit taste a lot better than grass. Supa Taengthong sits outside her home, the walls of which have been knocked down by wild elephants on numerous occasions. Photograph: Jack Taylor/The Guardian For farmers, the elephant raids can prove costly. The worst local case Thongbai Charoendong is aware of cost 150,000 baht (£3,400) in lost fruit. Thongbai, pictured below, is a project coordinator for human elephant conflict monitoring and mitigation at Wildlife Conservation Society Thailand, and has worked in the area for 17 years. “In one night six elephants raided a pineapple farm and ate everything,” he says. Hungry elephants also have an expensive habit of knocking over durian trees, farmers report, possibly so they can reach all the best fruit. There are various theories as to why the elephants are increasingly invading Chalermkiat Pattana village – which was established as a royal project in 1977 – and straying on to nearby farms. Some question if the opening of a nearby pineapple canning factory, which prompted more local farmers to grow the fruit, might have lured the elephants out of their usual habitat. Others say that people used to leave leftover pineapple in the forest and that this might have led elephants to lose their fear of humans. Once elephants had explored further, it is also possible that they developed a taste for human food and crops. According to Bhichet, research suggests that the encroachment of forest areas, the development of nearby farms with high nutrition foods, and the possibility that male elephants, for evolutionary reasons, are increasingly willing to take more risks to get at those foods, are all likely factors. “Now in Thailand we see this phenomenon in many places. Many male elephants just move further than in the past,” he says. “I think they changed their habits to eat more human food.” This behaviour also seems to be extending across the elephant family, he adds, and the journeys they take are becoming less predictable. He cites the example of a herd in China that travelled for 15 months, far from their natural habitat, as a more extreme example of this trend. Tactics for scaring off the elephants and reducing raids include (clockwise from top left) noise-making wires, ping pong ‘bombs’, warnings not to feed the elephants; and trenches with fencing. Photographs: Jack Taylor/The Guardian Any solutions need to empower people and educate communities so that they better understand elephants, says Bhichet. Compensation or funding for people to adapt, or better protect their homes, will also help. “Many people want to change livelihoods but they have no money. They want to change from mono-crop to herbal plants, but they have no confidence that they have a good market to sell the product,” he says. Near to Kaeng Krachan national park, communities have experimented with various ways of deterring the elephants – from setting off firecrackers to leaving sheets rubbed with chilli oil in the fields, building fences and digging ditches. Thongbai says that fencing has been the most effective measure for reducing the raids on crops. A semi-permanent fence, which still allows small animals to pass, is being reinforced by tamarind trees in some areas, which will form a natural barrier. It needs to be planned carefully to avoid unintended consequences, such as cutting off access to water, he adds. “It definitely helps because the incidents have been reduced,” says Thongbai, though he admits that it won’t stop the most inquisitive elephants. Back along the main road that leads to Chalermkiat Pattana, the park rangers drive around looking for signs of Boonchuay. “He is the star of this road,” jokes one of the rangers, Sangat Jamjaeng, from the top of the truck. They often shout at the elephant to get back in the forest, and he will pretend to comply, Sangat says. “Then when the truck passes he will come out again.” Rangers say Boonchuay will pretend to return to the forest if they shout at him, but will come back onto the road once the patrol has passed. Photograph: Jack Taylor/The Guardian Boonchuay appears on the main road, blocking cars. “Get back in the forest,” the rangers shout. They throw a firecracker, but Boonchuay doesn’t even flinch. He is refusing to obey. Darkness begins to fall, and a grey shadow can be seen lurking among the trees at the side of the road. They shine a bright light in his direction. Branches sway and rustle. Eventually he seems to have retreated from the road and the truck drives on. Minutes later, a motorcyclist rides past: the elephants are back, they warn. The patrol truck turns round and makes its way back up the road. By the time they arrive, all that is left is a pile of elephant dung. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresAt twilight, by silvered illumination of a gibbous moon, I ease stiff limbs along Y Ffordd Ddu – the black road that contours round under the northern slopes of Cadair Idris. A flickering moon-shadow leads me to the stony, sunken track that descends past Cyfannedd to Cors Arthog and the rail and footbridge across to Abermaw. All is silent as I enter the woods. Gnarled and writhing branches of sessile oak are latticed across the hunchbacked moon. I glimpse the light of Ynys Enlli (Bardsey island), flashing from far across the bay at the end of the northern peninsula of Wales. One by one on this clear night the stars are coming out, as though switched on, Venus brightest among them. At this time of day four months before, the air would have been alive with the scolding and disputation of birds returning to nest or roost. Now all is still. Screams of swifts that scoured air in summer are now amplified within the walls of Pyrenean or Anti Atlas gorges, redstarts and flycatchers providing soft accompaniment there. Here the rhythm section is a susurrus of sere leaves shifting against each other, the slightest of onshore breezes rattling and riffing among them. Mice scutter through fallen leaves. These subtleties of wood silence are counterpointed, accentuated, by two startling paired sounds which are characteristic of this quiet season. From somewhere among the boulders of Craig Cwm Llwyd a vixen’s demonic high scream raised echoes from the mountain wall, is repeated, and from far away on the Tir Stent comes the dog fox’s answering bark. There will be cubs in the spring. Owlets too – for, as I make my way down towards the estuary, the yearning quaver of a tawny owl stretches out across the silence to be end-stopped by his mate. Foxes and owls in the silence of an autumn wood, telling of life’s coming renewal. On Morfa Mawddach, the sound of my steps across the bridge is drowned out by the hiss of ebbing water round wooden piles. I imagine shipworms gnawing them, unheard. A solitary curlew call choruses me into the pub-and-chip-shop hubbub of dear old Barmouth. • This footnote was added on 17 November 2021 to make clear that the Barmouth bridge is currently closed for restoration and using it is not advised. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThousands of demonstrators descended on to Melbourne’s central business district on Saturday, protesting against the Victorian government’s new pandemic powers and vaccine mandates. The protest, which included signs advocating violence against politicians and a man carrying a prop gallows with three nooses hanging from it, came as the state recorded 1,221 Covid-19 cases and four deaths. Wet weather did not deter the crowd, which chanted “kill the bill” and “sack Dan Andrews” as it blocked tram lines and marched from the Victorian State Library to Parliament House in Spring Street. Many held signs that likened the Victorian government to oppressive regimes and former Liberal MP and current head of the United Australia party Craig Kelly addressed the crowd outside Parliament House, denouncing vaccine passports and the vaccination of children. Kelly said Australia was being “governed by medical bureaucrats that are part of a mad, insane cult” and claimed the party would “bring Daniel Andrews to his knees” at the next federal election. The new pandemic laws, which will replace the state-of-emergency powers that expire on 15 December, will allow the premier and health minister to declare a pandemic and make public health orders. The new laws will also curtail the role and responsibilities of the chief health officer. The protesters also singled out vaccine mandates, as the mandate for construction workers took effect on Saturday. The mandate, which sparked violent protests across Melbourne in September, required all tradies to have had two vaccine doses by Saturday. The requirement will extend to residential aged care workers on Monday. About 1 million of the state’s essential workers in total will be required to be double-jabbed by 26 November. Anyone with a valid medical exemption will be able to continue working. Liberal upper house leader David Davis called the premier’s pandemic legislation a “grab for power” but urged protesters not to resort to violence. “I would encourage Victorians to fight on every level against Daniel Andrews’ terrible pandemic bill ... but they should make their views known in a peaceful and calm and sensible way,” he told reporters. The protest came a week after about 3,000 people attended a protest last Saturday, calling for the resignation of the Victorian premier. So far, 86% of eligible Victorians have now received both doses of the Covid vaccine, with 92% receiving the first dose. The state is managing 16,671 active Covid cases, some 405 of them in hospital care. Seventy-seven patients are in intensive care, 51 of them requiring ventilation. New South Wales recorded no new deaths from Covid for the first time in months on Saturday, recording 250 new locally acquired cases. The health districts with the most cases were in south-western Sydney, where 54 people tested positive, and western Sydney, where there were 42 new cases. In the state’s regions there were 39 new cases in the Hunter New England region and 32 in the Murrumbidgee area. In a video released by NSW Health, Dr Jeremy McAnulty urged families to vaccinate their children, with 80.5% of children aged between 12 and 15 receiving one dose, and 72.4% fully vaccinated. “We really need to get those children vaccinated, even though we’ve got high rates in older adults.” McAnulty said now the state had passed the 90% double-dose vaccination milestone, it was important for anyone aged 18 and over who had been vaccinated for six months to seek out a booster shot. “While the risk of infection and disease is much higher in unvaccinated people, we do sometimes see outbreaks occurring among vaccinated people, particularly in indoor settings like gyms, bars and pubs,” McAnulty said on Saturday. “Early testing, if you have the symptoms, is really critical.” The high vaccine numbers and dropping case numbers have meant the NSW government has moved to change restrictions for international students, who will no longer need to quarantine upon their return to the state from next month. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said it was a “significant milestone” for the state. “They don’t just make a significant contribution to our economy but international students play a role in our culture and contribute to our community and lifestyle.” The first plane with international students will arrive in Sydney on 6 December, and will include about 250 students from countries such as Indonesia, Singapore, Vietnam, China and Canada. A second flight bringing students from South Asia is also scheduled. NSW Vice-Chancellors’ Committee convenor Barney Glover welcomed the move and said there would hopefully be 500 fully vaccinated students returned to NSW and ACT universities by the end of the year. From Monday, elective surgery will begin to return to full capacity in Greater Sydney.Cop26 climate talks were closing in on a global deal aimed at limiting devastating global warming, with UK organisers hoping for a final agreement to the marathon negotiations on Saturday. Delegates from nearly 200 nations are tasked with keeping alive the 2015 Paris goal of limiting temperature rises to 1.5C, as warming-driven disasters hit home around the world. Developing economies led by India have balked at demands to do more to curb emissions without financial support to transition away from fossil fuels and to adapt to the accelerating impacts of climate change. The deadline for the fortnight-long talks to finish came and went as leading figures took to the floor for what they hoped would be the final time, to exhort each other to cooperate in the interests of people threatened by the climate crisis around the world. Summit organisers confirmed that a new draft text would not be published for scrutiny until early Saturday in Glasgow. “I envisage formal plenary meetings in the afternoon to adopt decisions and close the session on Saturday,” said the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma. The EU commission vice-president, Frans Timmermans, said: “If we fail [my one-year-old grandson] will fight with other human beings for water and food. That’s the stark reality we face. So 1.5C is about avoiding a future for our children and grandchildren that is unliveable.” John Kerry, the US climate envoy, said: “We believe this is existential and, for many of you, existential today. People are dying today.” The head of delegation from Tuvalu, a Pacific island nation, was rousingly cheered when he warned that his country was sinking beneath the waves. Kenya’s representative warned that heating of 1.5C on average around the world was likely to equate to 3C in many parts of Africa, a rise that would cause frequent heatwaves and devastating drought. Earlier on Friday, the UK as host nation of the talks circulated a second draft text for the outcome. This included a resolution for countries to start to phase out “unabated” coal power and “inefficient” fossil fuel subsidies, and a request for countries to return to the negotiating table next year to strengthen their national plans on cutting greenhouse gas emissions. Whether and how countries will revise those national plans – known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs) – is now at the heart of the talks. Research earlier this week by the Climate Action Tracker, an analyst organisation, found that current NDCs presented by countries in Glasgow would lead to at least 2.4C of heating, a disastrous level. Some countries have tried to argue that revising NDCs next year was contrary to the Paris agreement, which requires such revisions only every five years. However, the three architects of the Paris agreement – Laurent Fabius, the French foreign minister who presided over the talks; Laurence Tubiana, his chief diplomat; and Christiana Figueres, the UN climate chief at the time – told the Guardian the treaty allowed for a faster return and called on countries to come back to the negotiating table next year with revisions in line with 1.5C. This provision for an amendment next year, currently paragraph 29 of the second draft outcome text, is likely to be one of the clauses most strenuously fought over in the closing stages. However, there are other outstanding problems, still the subject of frantic shuttle diplomacy by Sharma. These sticking points include: Developing country concerns that their needs for finance to adapt to the impacts of the climate crisis are being overlooked. They want at least a doubling of the finance available for adaptation, and want to open up discussions on how to vastly increase the $100bn a year in climate finance, from public and private sources, that was promised them in 2009 for delivery from 2020, but which on current estimates will not be fulfilled until 2023. Loss and damage, the term for the impacts of the climate crisis too severe for countries to prepare for or adapt to them. The G77-plus-China bloc of developing nations – which represents 85% of humanity – are very unhappy about current plans for this subject, which they see as the compensation for climate disasters that rich nations have a moral duty to pay. The Guinea delegate, speaking for the bloc, wants the establishment of a “loss and damage facility”, likely to mean an actual fund rather than a measure to work towards one. Article 6 of the Paris agreement, which deals with carbon trading. Some countries want to use carbon offsetting to make up some of their commitments to reduce emissions, but others fear that the proposed rules would lead to a flood of cheap carbon credits that do not represent genuine emissions reductions. Disagreements over how countries should measure and report their greenhouse gas emissions. Known as the transparency and accountability provisions, these are also regarded as crucial because some countries are suspected of under-reporting their emissions. Jennifer Morgan, executive director of Greenpeace International, said the commitments on fossil fuels in the current text were too weak and should be strengthened. But she added: “There’s wording in here worth holding on to and the UK presidency needs to fight tooth and nail to keep the most ambitious elements in the deal. We’ve moved from richer nations largely ignoring the pleas of developing countries for promised finance to tackle climate change, to the beginnings of a recognition that their calls should be met. Now we need developed countries to scale up their offer of support and finance.” She added: “Negotiators in Glasgow simply have to seize the moment and agree something historic, but they need to isolate the governments who’ve come here to wreck progress and instead listen to the calls of youth and vulnerable nations.” Tracy Carty, head of Oxfam’s Cop26 delegation, said: “Emission reduction targets over the next decade have us careering towards climate catastrophe. We need an unambiguous deal in Glasgow that commits governments to coming back next year, and every year after that, with improved targets that will keep the goal of 1.5 degrees alive. This is the final countdown. Negotiators should come back to the table armed with commitments that are equal to the challenge that millions of people around the world are facing every day.” Tasneem Essop, executive director of the Climate Action Network, said it was essential that Cop produced concrete decisions to alleviate the suffering of millions of people worldwide coping with the double impacts of Covid and climate breakdown. “We will continue fighting for this because this is the litmus test for the success of Cop26,” she said.Chris Christie’s comeback tour will continue next week with publication of a book, Republican Rescue, in which the former New Jersey governor seeks to present himself as the face of the party after Donald Trump, and a plausible contender for the presidential nomination in 2024. Such efforts have already seen the one-time presidential candidate clash with Trump, who did not take kindly to Christie warning in a speech in Nevada last weekend: “We can no longer talk about the past and the past elections – no matter where you stand on that issue, no matter where you stand, it is over.” In a statement, Trump, who is likely to run again in 2024, claimed Christie was “absolutely massacred by his statements that Republicans have to move on from the past, meaning the 2020 election fraud”. Christie then told Axios, in an interview due to run on Sunday, he was “not going to get into a back-and-forth” with the longtime friend he helped prepare for debates with Joe Biden and who nearly made him White House chief of staff. But Christie’s book seems guaranteed to anger Trump further. In a copy obtained by the Guardian, Christie writes that Republicans “need to renounce the conspiracy theories and truth deniers, the ones who know better and the ones who are just plain nuts”. The former governor does not say if he thinks Trump knows better about his claims of electoral fraud, or is one of those who is “nuts”. But he adds: “We need to give our supporters facts that will help put all these fantasies to rest, so everyone can focus with clear minds on the issues that really matter. We need to quit wasting our time, our energy and our credibility on claims that won’t ever convince anyone or bring fresh converts onboard.” Condemning the likes of Marjorie Taylor Greene, a hard-right Georgia congresswoman who has expressed support for conspiracy theories, Christie says Trump indulges such figures because he likes “anyone who says nice things about him”. Discussing the QAnon conspiracy theory, which holds that high-profile Democrats are involved in satanic child abuse, Christie writes that such beliefs “would be ridiculous” if they were not “so sad”. The FBI considers QAnon a potential terrorist threat. Trump, however, has said its followers share his concern about crime, “love our country” and “like me very much”. Told last year that QAnon supporters believe he is “secretly saving the world” from a “satanic cult of paedophiles and cannibals”, Trump said: “I haven’t heard that but is that supposed to be a good thing or a bad thing?” “Many in our society,” Christie writes in Republican Rescue, “use these wild, untrue conspiracy theories to advance their political agendas.” Christie left office in New Jersey under the cloud of the Bridgegate payback scandal and with historically low approval. Regardless, he continues to tout his pugnacious Jersey persona – a political proposition roundly rejected by Republican voters in the presidential primary in 2016 – writing that “everyone knows I never pull my punches” and “I call things as I see them”. Some observers, however, question Christie’s sincerity in his stand against Trumpism, given his longstanding closeness to Trump. Eric Boehlert, author of the Press Run newsletter, wrote critically on Friday about a CNN special, Being Chris Christie, due for broadcast on Monday. “Today,” Boehlert wrote, “Christie is promoting himself, with the help of CNN, as a brave truth-teller who’s standing up to Trump and his Big Lie about the 2020 election … but Christie may have had the longest delayed conversion to the anti-Trump crowd of any Republican in America. “Just last year Christie helped Trump prep for a presidential debate. After watching Trump get impeached, Christie still jumped at the chance to be near the center of power to help the maniac get re-elected … Days after helping with Trump’s prep, where everyone was unvaccinated and unmasked, Christie was hospitalised with Covid.” In his book, Christie describes both his role in Trump’s debate prep and the bout with Covid which sent him to intensive care. On the debate stage, in Cleveland, Trump notoriously refused to condemn the far-right Proud Boys, instead telling them to “stand back and stand by”. The New Jersey columnist Charles Stile said then Christie’s defence of Trump’s words “served to remind us of his own trajectory” as a “one-time truth-telling, center-right darling of the GOP [who] embraced his role as a trusted adviser in Trump’s orbit”. Another Jersey columnist, Alan Steinberg, called Christie “a person of irrepressible ambition, without limits or guard rails … and an essential component of that ambition is an obsessive quest to be relevant”. Republican Rescue will be published on Tuesday. • This article was amended on 14 November 2021 to correct a second mention of Christie’s book. Its title is Republican Rescue, not Republican Revival.Robbie Savage: Making Macclesfield FC 11pm, BBC One “Idiots buy football clubs … but I’m an idiot.” Businessman Rob Smethurst bought Macclesfield FC with ex-footballer Robbie Savage last year. This film documents what it’s like to build a new club from the ashes. Far from being just about the great game, it tells the story of the community behind it, such as Jimbo the groundskeeper who refuses to leave, and hardcore fan Harry whose memories of his late mum are tied to the club. Hollie Richardson Monty: Our WW2 Hero 6.30pm, Channel 5 Winston Churchill said Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery was “in defeat, unbeatable; in victory, unbearable”. This film examines the life of the hero of El Alamein, and his role in the allies’ eventual triumph. A picture emerges of a man whose intelligence and dynamism were matched by his arrogance. Phil Harrison Strictly Come Dancing 6.40pm, BBC One The twinkle-toed celebrities have reached week eight. With the Glitterball in touching distance, will Rose and Giovanni continue to wow? And who will make it to the musicals special? Hannah J Davies Michael McIntyre’s The Wheel 8pm, BBC One The Marmite comedian is back with another edition of the slow-moving but intermittently vertigo-inducing gameshow. Celebrities helping or hindering ordinary members of the public in pursuit of a big cash prize are Michael Ball, Tom Allen, Lulu, Joe Marler, Maisie Smith, Anita Rani and Raj Bisram. Jack Seale Royal British Legion Festival of Remembrance 2021 9pm, BBC One Cynthia Erivo, Alexandra Burke, Alfie Boe, Gregory Porter and Jack Savoretti perform at London’s Royal Albert Hall for the annual event, and spoken-word artist Tomos Roberts reads his specially commissioned poem to commemorate 100 years of the poppy as the symbol of remembrance. HR The Jonathan Ross Show 9.30pm, ITV Jeremy Renner and Hailee Steinfield – the stars of new Marvel TV series Hawkeye – join Wossy. Bake Off’s Paul Hollywood, comedian Guz Khan and Kylie Minogue also drop in for a chat, while Jessie Ware provides the music. HR Film choice The Salesman, 12.55am, BBC Two Asghar Farhadi, the Iranian director of A Separation, is a master at luring you in with the everyday, only for the weight of events to take their toll later on. In this 2016 film, the plot offers an early dramatic hit, but its deepest effects are cumulative. Married actors Emad (Shahab Hosseini) and Rana (Taraneh Alidoosti) are staging a production of Arthur Miller’s Death of a Salesman. One night, while alone in their new flat, Rana is attacked. They discover the previous occupant was a sex worker, so Emad takes it upon himself to find the assailant, presumed to be a client. How this connects to Miller’s play only gradually becomes clear, as the couple’s relationship fractures over their reactions to the incident. Simon Wardell Live sport International Rugby Union: Scotland v South Africa. 1pm, Amazon Prime Video. Action from Murrayfield, followed by England v Australia at 5.30pm. Women’s Super League Football: Tottenham Hotspur v Arsenal 1.15pm, BBC One. The north London derby at the Hive Stadium. Grand Slam of Darts 2pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Day one at Aldersley Leisure Village, featuring world champion Gerwyn Price (pictured). International Rugby Union: Ireland v New Zealand 2.45pm, Channel 4. From Aviva Stadium, Dublin. World Cup Football: Wales v Belarus 8pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The Group E qualifying game from Cardiff City Stadium. Wales v Belgium follows on Sky Sports Main Event on Tuesday.The Republic of Yemen lies on the south-western edge of the Arabian peninsula, bordered by Saudi Arabia to the north, Oman to the east and the Red and Arabian Seas to the west and south. Dwarfed by Saudi Arabia, it is nevertheless the second largest country in the peninsula, covering an area slightly bigger than France or Spain. Like its neighbours, much of Yemen has a mainly arid climate, with little or no rain – especially in the Rub al-Khali desert in the east, and the long, coastal plain in the south. But other areas – including the western highlands, which rise to more than 3,600 metres (almost 12,000 feet) above sea level – have a far more varied climate. In the summer months, the monsoon from the south-west brings the highest rainfall in the whole of the Arabian peninsula: with annual totals of 750 to 1,000mm (roughly 30 to 40 inches), about the same as many parts of the UK. In lowland coastal and desert areas, however, rainfall is very sparse: below 100mm a year; along the coast conditions are also very humid. Tragically, in recent years, severe droughts have occurred, exacerbating already extreme food shortages caused by war, and making conditions for Yemeni people even worse.As the United Nations Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow winds down, many world leaders and corporate boards are embracing an increasingly popular idea to solve climate change: trees. The United Arab Emirates – one of the biggest oil producers in the world – promised to plant 100m mangroves by 2030. India said it aims to plant enough trees to cover a third of its land area with forests. Earlier this month the Amazon founder, Jeff Bezos, announced a $1bn fund towards planting trees, “revitalizing” grasslands in Africa and restoring landscapes across the US. And at the start of the conference, more than 100 countries pledged to halt and reverse deforestation by 2030. “These great teeming ecosystems – these cathedrals of nature – are the lungs of our planet,” Boris Johnson said, exalting the effort. Trees and forests, which absorb carbon dioxide, are indeed crucial to slowing global heating. But environmental groups and climate change researchers say there’s a serious problem with overrelying on such pledges: there just isn’t enough land on Earth to plant enough trees to soak up all the carbon that big polluters keep spewing into the atmosphere. To achieve “net zero” by 2050 using “land-based” carbon removal methods – a category that includes tree-planting, reforestation projects and land management techniques that help lock more carbon in soil – “would require at least 1.6bn hectares of new forests, equivalent to five times the size of India or more than all the farmland on the planet”, a recent analysis by Oxfam found. The oil company Shell would need to use 28.6m hectares (70.7m acres) of land – an area roughly the size of Italy – to offset 35% of its emissions by 2050 using such techniques, the report found. Ethiopia would need to use 50–60% of its land to meet current offset goals, Switzerland could need more than 830,000 hectares, and the EU could need up to 90m hectares. “Nature and land-based carbon removal schemes are an important part of the mix of efforts needed to stop global emissions, but they must be pursued in a much more cautious way,” said Nafkote Dabi, the climate change lead for Oxfam International. The idea of harnessing trees to solve the global climate crisis has long been appealing. In the US, tree-planting schemes have broad, bipartisan support, with 90% of Americans favoring planting about a trillion trees around the world to absorb carbon emissions, according to a 2020 Pew survey. As Mark Benioff, the billionaire CEO of Salesforce, put it last year after promising funds to plant 100m of them: “Nobody is against trees.” The growing enthusiasm for such planting schemes was bolstered by a 2019 study in Science, which estimated that 900m hectares of available land around the world could hold more than a trillion more trees, which could be harnessed in the fight against global heating. But critics soon pointed out that the study made flawed assumptions about what land was “available” for tree planting, how many trees that land could hold, and how much carbon those trees could take in. The journal published five responses outlining concerns, one of which concluded: “The emerging global political myth of massive tree planting and restoration as a panacea for global warming requires an unrealistically large area” – far more than the study suggested. At worst, tree planting schemes – beyond being ineffectual – can harm or displace vulnerable communities. In Pakistan, a “Billion Tree Tsunami” project launched in 2014 destroyed the pasturing lands of nomadic Gujjar goat-herders. “Conservation appears to be promoting further marginalization,” wrote Usman Ashraf, a political ecologist who documented the impacts of the project in Pakistan’s Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. As the zeal for tree planting projects grows, so does the backlash against them. Last week, Indigenous activists at Cop26 called carbon offset schemes “a new form of colonialism”. And before walking out of a conference event on offsets, activist Greta Thunberg urged attendees: “Stop greenwashing.”Shirts can be an everyday staple, ready and reliable for any occasion, or the star of the show in a bold print or colour. Vintage and rental are probably the best places to find statement shirts. The secondhand market lends itself to the more extrovert print, whether it’s a classic autumnal pumpkin plaid on a lumberjack, or something more unusual. Renting a shirt can also be a good way to experiment with more fashion-forward prints: the one from Burberry to rent at Selfridges is a bolder choice. Men’s rental sites often focus on the formal, but they are also a good place for everyday shirts. But as these are something you will wear a lot, it’s a good item to invest in. Fabrics such as denim and corduroy are a shrewd autumn choice – warm and seasonal. Lauren Cochrane Buy Micro cord, £29.50, marksandspencer.com Part of the Big &amp; Tall range (S-4XL), this comes in five shades. Wear it unbuttoned over a plain T-shirt. Organic cotton, £129, oliverspencer.co.uk Try with an unstructured blazer and chinos for a relaxed office look. Sustainable denim, £105, asket.com This brand tracks each step of the manufacturing process. Wear under a plain bomber jacket. Rent Button-down by Polo Ralph Lauren, £79 a month subscription for five items, thedevout.com Team with loose-fit chinos and baseball cap. House check, by Burberry, from £36.27 for four days, selfridgesrental.com Perfect for an event under a black suit with a heavy brogue. Wide stripe, two pieces on rotation £65 a month subscription, mossbocunlimited.co.uk Freshen up your work wardrobe with this retro corporate look. Thrift Retro print, by Love Moschino, £50, thrifted.com Wear with a silver chain, dark denim and trainers for a night out. Gingham with smiley, by Ami, £50, cudoni.com For a modern mod look, style this with black trousers and white leather trainers. Flannel check, by Pendleton, £28, beyondretro.com Pair with a puffer jacket, black jeans and a chunky boot for a weekend walk.Zardi on Nadia What were you hoping for? A laugh and a fun time, and that the conversation would flow nicely. First impressions? Attractive, smart, easy to talk to. What did you talk about? Food, for a long, long time. We also talked about travelling, musical instruments and the things we did during lockdown. Any awkward moments? I drew a blank when asked what my best dishes were to cook. I also confused a gooseberry with something else. Good table manners? She did send a fork flying at one point, but apart from that very good. Best thing about Nadia? She was very easy to talk to and opened up about life which was nice . Would you introduce her to your friends? Yes, I think they would get along. Nadia and I share similar interests and so do my friends. Describe Nadia in three words Interesting, affectionate, kind-hearted. What do you think she made of you? I think she thought I was rather nervous, and spent too much time talking about living in China. Did you go on somewhere? We talked about going to a karaoke bar and singing Adele songs all night long, but in the end we just headed to the tube station. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? I don’t think so. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? That we had gone to the karaoke and sung Adele all night long. Marks out of 10 8.5. Would you meet again? We exchanged numbers, so who knows. Nadia on Zardi What were you hoping for? Someone tall, dark and handsome to sweep me off my feet. First impressions? Not what I was expecting – a bit shy. What did you talk about? Travelling, living abroad, where we’d like to go next. He is a chef and I like to bake, so we also talked about food. Any awkward moments? When he told me his go-to karaoke song was Adele (I’m more into classic rock and metal). Also he mentioned that he is trained to butcher animals right after I told him I was a vegetarian. Good table manners? Yes, though I was a bit of a germ freak about sharing tapas. Best thing about Zardi? He’s friendly and laughed at my jokes. Would you introduce him to your friends? Not as a love interest. Describe Zardi in three words Shy, polite, friendly. What do you think he made of you? I don’t think we had any chemistry but hopefully he thought I was fun. Did you go on somewhere? No, it was long enough. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? No, he wasn’t my type. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? A restaurant a bit easier to get to. Marks out of 10? I had fun, and the restaurant had a great vibe, but as a date 5/10. Would you meet again? Not likely. • Zardi and Nadia ate at the Tapas Room, Brixton, London SW9. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comI believe that all beauty fans have at least one item they buy over and over, in the search for product nirvana. Among mine is nude lipstick, specifically, about 200 near-identical peachy-pinky-beigey shades, acquired in the impossible belief that each will prove, finally, to be the nude to rule them all. So when the British brand Code8 invited me to try its Bespoke Lipstick service (£75 for 45 minutes), nothing could keep me away. Lipstick maker Juan immediately understood my brief of “an almost-matte nude, darker and punchier than my natural lip colour, as appropriate with little other makeup and jeans as with a full face and frock”. He promptly heaped white, brown, yellow and purple creams on to a mixing slab and blended them, sampling and adjusting until we both felt satisfied with the very slightly peach-stained, mid-tone rose. The cream is then divided between a luxury lipstick bullet and a sample for the Code8 archives, to make reordering (£28) straightforward (the brand can also copy any favourite discontinued lipstick from the remaining dregs). I adore my shade, which I’ve now worn several times a week for a month. For those to whom lipstick is more like a religion than a passion, YSL’s new Rouge Sur Mesure device (£250) is the ultimate gift. This slick, dressing table-top digital device can create 4,000 lipstick shades using only a free smartphone app and base colour cartridges (think tiny printer cartridges full of lipstick, £60 for a full colour family set – pinks, oranges, nudes and reds). During my practice run, I photographed the ketchup on the table, then in about two minutes, very closely recreated its concentrated tomato shade in a real-life lipstick to apply there and then. The machine dispenses five applications directly into a smart, portable YSL compact, which can be wiped out later and filled with, perhaps, doses of your wedding bouquet pink, train ticket orange, or the exact nude spotted on a magazine cover. If you’re feeling low on inspiration, there’s a vast array of colour options on the app, which will memorise favourites for another time. The device is not the simplest to operate at first go, but it is terrific fun, and while no one is expecting it to sweep the nation (it’s available only at yslbeauty.com), it does feel like the expensive start of an ultimately more affordable move towards bespoke.Poultry is now the most popular meat on the menu: according to Statista, 1.06bn fowl (including turkeys) were slaughtered in the UK, in 2020. Due to its popularity and food-safety reputation, however, poultry is also one of the 10 most-wasted foods in the UK. When it comes to chicken, you can, as they say in Spain, eat everything but the beak (and gall bladder). From crest to talon, each and every part of a chicken has a use. True, it’s hard to source poultry with the head, neck, feet and offal intact, but it’s worth the hunt (I order mine from Fosse Meadows). Welcome to the world of umami! Head – if you ever buy poultry, or more likely wildfowl, with the head on, don’t waste it. It adds flavour and viscosity to stock, while the brain, if you’re brave enough to try it, is a velvety-textured treat. Comb – the comb or crest on the top of a chicken’s head is a soft, unctuous and forgotten ingredient that’s divine soaked in milk, then poached, peeled and fried like lardons to garnish a dish. Neck – at River Cottage, we used to make a flavourful, giblet-stuffed goose-neck sausage at Christmas (there’s a recipe in Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall’s The River Cottage Year). The neck bone is also delicious in soup or stock, and has a flaky, brown meat. Skin – gently fry the skin until crisp, to make crackling; this can also be crushed with sea salt to make the ultimate umami seasoning that’s especially great on corn cobs. Fat - the rendered fat from a roast chicken will keep for months and can be used instead of butter or oil. It also makes incredible roast potatoes. Or go a step further and make whipped chicken fat butter. Giblets and offal – the heart, liver, kidneys, gizzard and even the unlaid eggs are delicious, although they can admittedly be hard to find. Fry the offal with warm spices to make a Jerusalem mixed grill, or finely chop the liver, heart and kidneys, then saute with wine to make chicken liver crostini. Bones – a chicken carcass is full of nutrition, flavour and hidden scraps of meat. To save the scraps when making stock, boil the carcass alone for 30 minutes, then remove from the liquid, pick off any meat (don’t forget the oysters – the two pockets of succulent meat located on the back), then return the carcass to the pan with your usual stock ingredients. Feet – the collagen-rich feet add viscosity to stock and, if you’re feeling adventurous, are fabulous braised dim sum-style with a sweet-and-sour sauce. Tail – the parson’s nose is often removed from birds in this country, because it’s rather oily, but it’s also full of flavour and in some cultures a delicacy to be fought over. Across Asia, chicken tails are enjoyed chargrilled on skewers and basted with an umami dressing.My wife and I are watching TV, but there is a loud and persistent scrabbling sound coming from under the sofa, travelling from one end to the other and back. “Can you turn it up?” I say. My wife points the remote at the screen. Something small and grey with a long tail shoots out from beneath the sofa and streaks across the room, pausing briefly to gnaw at the corner of the rug before disappearing under a desk. “Explain,” I say, “how this is different from having a rodent problem.” “It’s a kitten,” my wife says. “It’s the size of a rat,” I say. “And it does mostly rat things.” “I’m trying to watch this,” she says. At that moment I feel a series of tiny needles penetrating the skin of my leg through my trousers. I clench my teeth as the needles travel up my shin, until a little face is peering at me over my knee. “Can I help you?” I say. In the 15 years since we last had a kitten, I’d forgotten how much worry is involved: you have to take constant care to avoid stepping on it, and you have to check that it’s not in the dishwasher before you turn it on. You spend half your day looking under things for it, and the other half patiently letting it unknit your jumper from the sleeves inwards, because at least you know where it is. It’s asleep whenever you want to play with it, then it stands on your plate while you’re eating. At first I spent a lot of time trying to exhaust the cat by playing with it, but it never gets tired of anything. My wife bought a little plastic fishing rod with a length of string and a small stuffed fish at the other end. Using this to entertain the cat is actually a bit like fishing, but unlike a sea bass, the cat is always biting. Eventually, I learned to prop up the rod between two sofa cushions so I could read. The kitten came knowing how to use a litter box, which is a plus, although the thing it does immediately afterwards – deftly flicking the turd into the middle of the room, like a golfer hitting out of a sand trap – I don’t know where it learned that. “When you’re no longer cute,” I tell it, “none of this will be tolerated.” In the meantime, however, it seems to understand that everything it does is potentially Instagrammable. One morning, about a week after its arrival, I come downstairs to find the kitten riding the tortoise around the kitchen. I like to think I’m a good judge of unhappiness in a tortoise, and I was seeing all the signs: the downcast eye, the craning neck, the blooming lake of piss in his wake. “You can’t do this,” I say to the cat. “You’re distressing him.” The cat gives me a look that says: did you get a picture yet? “Fine,” I say, taking out my phone. Even the tortoise is not as unhappy as the dog, which is simultaneously perplexed and terrified by its tiny new enemy. The dog and the old cat reached an uneasy detente over many years, apart from the occasional stand-off either side of the cat flap. Now the dog is being stalked for a minimum of six hours every day, even as it sleeps. Its patience seems bottomless, but its nerves are beginning to fray. I am also being stalked: as I step into the kitchen, the kitten leaps out at me from behind a bin, before changing its mind in midair and withdrawing again as if pulled by elastic cords. “When can it live outside?” I say to my wife. “In two weeks,” she says, scooping up the kitten from its hiding place. “It’s already been two weeks,” I say. “He needs to be chipped first,” she says. “And he needs his second lot of injections. Hold this.” She hands me one end of a large plastic syringe, wedging the tip of it between the kitten’s jaws. “OK, squeeze,” she says. The kitten does not like this at all. “What was that?” I say. “De-worming paste,” my wife says. “When did it get worms?” I say. “They all have worms,” she says. “They all have worms?” I say. “They’re born with worms,” she says, releasing the cat. “I can’t believe what I’m hearing,” I say. “This cat walks across my lunch every day.” “He’s not supposed to be on the table,” my wife says. The cat has positioned itself behind a table leg, where it sits and looks up at me with big round kitten eyes. “Worms,” I say. “Nothing Instagrammable about that.”And with that, we will wrap up the blog for today. Here is what went down: Flood warnings were issued for areas around the Lachlan River and Dubbo in NSW and for the Mitchell River in Victoria’s Gippsland region, with flash flooding still likely. Australia has been accused of “hiding” at the Cop26 Glasgow summit, while opposing a deal that would keep alive hopes of limiting global heating to 1.5C. NSW recorded 250 new local cases, and no deaths. Victoria recorded 1,221 new cases and four deaths. The ACT recorded 11 new cases. Vaccinated international students entering NSW will not have to quarantine when they return to the state next month. Thousands of protesters descended on the Melbourne CBD today, demonstrating against new pandemic powers and vaccine mandates. A new Blue Mountains conservation area has been approved by the NSW government. Victoria police have just confirmed in a statement that no arrests were made at today’s protest despite “significant numbers in attendance”: Police responded to protest activity in the Melbourne CBD on Saturday, 13 November. Despite significant numbers in attendance, the protest was peaceful with no arrests made. So earlier today, the former Liberal-turned-United Australia MP Craig Kelly spoke to protesters in Melbourne, and oh boy. Here are some choice quotes, as reported by the Herald Sun: I have decided to take a stand like many of you have here today – I hear you. We are no longer governed for the people or by the people. I stand with all those who stand for freedom. In Australia you can inject a 12-year-old child with Moderna vaccine. In so many other countries – Denmark, Italy, Sweden, Finland – you can’t. We’re being governed by insane medical bureaucrats. We have a lot of fights ahead of us, the most important fight is to protect our children. You can read more on the protests at the yarn below: Australia has been accused of “hiding” at the Cop26 Glasgow summit, while opposing a deal that would keep alive hopes of limiting global heating to 1.5C. Australia is one of several nations that do not support an agreement that would see all countries return to the negotiating table with stronger commitments next year. Several sources have told the Guardian Australia that the Morrison government was opposed to parts of an updated draft negotiating text released on Friday by the British hosts of the summit that would be crucial to maintain a chance of limiting global average heating since the industrial revolution to 1.5C. You can read more on the crucial story from Adam Morton here: Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, a quick thanks to Matilda Boseley for her stellar work this morning. With that, I shall leave you for the day. But never fear, you are in safe hands with the fantastic Mostafa Rachwani, who will guide you through the afternoon! A major flood warning has been issued for Avon River, near the regional Victorian towns of Stratford and Bairnsdale. From iconic bushranger Ned Kelly to serial killer Ivan Milat, the promise of cash to solve crimes has long been a feature of Australian policing. Each year rewards large and small are offered across the country, usually for information leading to a conviction, and often years, if not decades, after the crime. But these conventions were turned on their head by the case of four-year-old Cleo Smith, who disappeared from her family’s tent at an isolated West Australian campground in the early hours of 16 October. Six days after she went missing, the state government announced a $1m reward for information on Cleo’s location, or that led to the arrest and conviction of her abductor. ‘Our little girl is back’: Cleo Smith’s family thank WA police in first public statementRead more “That’s not normal,” former detective inspector Terry Goldsworthy tells Guardian Australia. “It’s highly unusual, in that it’s done at the start of the investigation.” You can read the full story below: Floodwaters in Dubbo have now engulfed the Tamworth Street bridge. In case you missed it, no Covid-19 in Queensland today! Residents in New South Wales and Victoria are being warned to prepare for flash flooding, as heavy rainfall causes rivers to break their banks across the eastern states of Australia. The focus in NSW has turned to areas around the Lachlan River, with major flood warnings issued for Forbes and Nanami, where the State Emergency Service is assisting with sandbagging. The SES says it has responded to more than 280 calls for assistance, with the busiest areas being around Armidale, Bathurst and Orange. It has also made 21 flood rescues statewide, about half of which were cars stuck in flood waters. You can read the full summary of today’s wild weather below: The controversial federal MP Craig Kelly has appeared at the Melbourne protests today, praising people objecting to the state government’s proposed emergency management legislation. He has also been promoting the event on his Twitter account over the past day. Here is a look at the crowds from the air. The Nationals MP and former deputy prime minister Michael McCormack has issued a warning to residents around the central NSW town of Forbes after heavy rains are expected to cause major flooding. He says emergency services are expecting flood waters to peak on Monday afternoon. A Sydney man has been charged with attempted murder after allegedly shoving a woman before dousing her in fuel and trying to set her alight. Emergency services were called to a home in Carramar on Friday afternoon, after a domestic violence incident was reported. Police will allege a man became physically aggressive toward a woman, pushing her head against a cupboard, before pouring a flammable liquid over her body and clothing. He then attempted to light the woman on fire, they say, but was unsuccessful. You can read the full report below: QAnon conspiracy theories seem to be a significant feature of today’s Melbourne protests. Speaking of flood warnings, there is also a moderate flooding warning for those along the Belubula River around Canowindra, a town near Orange in NSW. Two schools in Canberra have been added to the list of Covid exposure sites in the ACT. Bonython Primary School and Duffy Primary School were both listed as venues of concern, with positive cases having been recorded there over the past week. Authorities have said that only parents and carers who’ve been contacted by ACT Health need to take any further action. Just to get a sense of the crowd. The Age reporter Rachael Dexter says this was filmed over the course of 20 minutes. After almost a century of advocacy, a swathe of land on the edge of the Blue Mountains that is home to rare plants and animals, stunning rock formations and lush forest has been protected by the NSW government, AAP’s Tiffanie Turnbull reports. More than 30,000 hectares near Lithgow has been declared a nature reserve, with the NSW government on Saturday pledging $50m to establish world-class ecotourism facilities in the area. The Gardens of Stone reserve was conceived in 1932 by Myles Dunphy, “the spiritual grandfather of the conservation movement in Australia”. Its declaration as a protected area nine decades later is the culmination of possibly the longest conservation campaign in the state’s history, advocates say. The Nature Conservation Council chief executive, Chris Gambian, said: It has been a long time coming but it was definitely worth the wait ... This is a very significant addition to the state’s conservation reserve system ... (and) one of the conservation movement’s proudest days – it shows what people can achieve when they work together and stay focused and optimistic in the face of many setbacks. The area is home to internationally significant rock formations and more than 80 threatened plant and animal species, including the giant dragonfly. The convener of the Gardens of Stone Alliance, Wilson Harris, said: The landscape is dotted with thousands of pagodas, with gorges, canyons and waterways weaving between them ... There are valleys with lush rainforest, high-country woodlands and critically endangered wetlands that provide crucial habitat for countless threatened species.” The government funding will transform the area, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, said, with upgraded lookouts, walking trails, a four-wheel drive circuit and a mountain bike network on the cards. However, the “centrepiece of the investment” will be the Lost City Adventure Experience, which will include Australia’s longest zipline, an elevated canyon walk and a rock climbing course. Gambian says the new facilities will bolster the local economy and create jobs, but will also unlock a new ecotourism hub for the state. Read Peter Hannam’s story about the environmental campaigners behind the Gardens of Stone here: Um, well that’s ... worrying and unpleasant. Protesters in Melbourne are carrying prop gallows with three nooses hanging from them as they march towards Parliament House. They are protesting the state’s vaccine mandates and proposed new emergency powers legislation. The department also confirmed the four people infected with Covid-19 who died in the latest reporting period were aged in their 60s, 70s and 90s. This brings the total number of deaths in Victoria since the start of the pandemic to 1,222. Victoria’s health department has just released details of the current unexplained Covid-19 wastewater detections across the state. They are as follows: Stawell – repeated unexpected detections between 28 October and 11 November Lorne – repeated unexpected detections between 31 October and 10 November Hamilton – unexpected detection for the period 7-11 November Barwon Heads – unexpected detection for the period 7-10 November Nhill – unexpected detection for the period 7-10 November Speaking of Scott Morrison’s comments yesterday, you will remember he said he believes he has never told a lie in public life. If you want to catch up on this, and make up your own mind if it’s factual or not, check out our snappy 90-second TikTok explainer below: If that doesn’t work for you, you can always check it out on Twitter here: So, you might be wondering, what does the federal opposition have to say about the government’s newly released (and somewhat questionable) modelling showing how we will get to net zero emissions by 2050. Well, no surprises here, but Labor isn’t stoked about it. Here is what the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, had to say earlier, starting off by pointing out the questionable timing of its release: You have a prime minister who released the modelling late on a Friday afternoon, after the press conference. I will give you the big tip, what politicians normally would do, if they are proud of their work, if there is rigour in their work, is release information to journalists and allow them to ask questions. What we had here was a series of press conferences from the prime minister and from Angus Taylor and then after the press conferences were over, a release of the modelling, without scrutiny. The fact is that this government cannot be trusted on climate change and we have seen that this week with the prime minister’s attitude towards electric vehicles, an attitude where he ridiculed electric vehicles during the last campaign like he ridiculed batteries to store renewable energy, like he ridiculed the renewable energy target. This is a prime minister who has no regard for what he said yesterday so therefore you should not give any credence to what he says today. More from the protests in Melbourne. Just a reminder that there is a major flood warning in place for those along the Mitchell River, in the Gippsland region of Victoria; specifically if you are located downstream from Glenaladale. Huge crowds have gathered outside the State Library in Melbourne to protest vaccine mandates and the state government’s proposed emergency powers bill. You can read this great explainer from Josh Taylor below to learn about what this new legislation actually means, and why it’s not really as draconian and these protesters say. Home births have a high rate of safety for women with pregnancies deemed low-risk, a Sydney hospital has found, reports Gina Rushton from AAP. The Royal Hospital for Women analysed data from three years and found women with low-risk pregnancies who planned to give birth at home had a 90% rate of delivery with no medical intervention. This compared to 60% for those with low-risk pregnancies who intended to birth in hospital. The hospital’s general manager, Donna Garland, said the data aligns with international evidence that birthing at home for women with a low-risk pregnancy is a safe option. Three years ago the hospital introduced the option for families to give birth at home supported by the Royal Hospital for Women team and it has been so successful, seven families even returned for a second birth at home ... Demand for home births is increasing and there are not enough places available in the home birth program to cater to requests. Women planning to birth at home understand the powerful and life-changing event that a positive birth can be and our team are very privileged to be a part of this space. Dr Andrew Bisits, the director of obstetrics at the Royal Hospital for Women, said people who plan to birth at home have a long-term relationship with their midwife. Women find birthing at home calming as they are in their comfort space and it is often a family experience, something that’s not possible in hospital, especially during Covid. There are four publicly funded home birth programs in NSW including the Royal Hospital for Women, Wollongong, Belmont and Westmead hospitals. Areas of the NSW regional city of Dubbo may face flooding this afternoon as the Macquarie and Bell rivers continue to swell. There is already minor flooding occurring in nearby Wellington. OK, it’s time for another Victorian flood update, but luckily it’s good news this time! There is no longer any flooding expected for King River and 15 Mile Creek in the state’s north, the nearby Ovens River or Seven and Castle creeks in central Victoria. However, Victoria’s SES has issued flood watch alerts for the Kiewa River as well as a minor flood warning for Macalister River in Gippsland. Worryingly NSW Health’s ongoing sewage surveillance has detected fragments of coronavirus in samples collected from West Wyalong, Tomakin, Uralla and Grenfell. None of these areas currently have any known or recent cases. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded 11 new local Covid-19 cases overnight. Currently, there are no hospitalisations from Covid-19 in the territory. A minor flood warning has been issued for the Victorian regional city of Traralgon. Traralgon was hit hard early this year by destructive storms. Remember yesterday, when we were all abuzz about if Scott Morrison had ever told a lie? (He says he believes he hasn’t, many disagree with that.) Well, the inimitable Sarah Martin has written this brilliant opinion piece about how the prime minister is taking misinformation mainstream. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has this week treated Australians to a list of his favourite things. Along with mind-numbing photo opportunities of gnocchi rolling and performative haircuts, high on Morrison’s list is technology, not taxes, choices, not mandates, and the “animal spirits” of can-do capitalism. As for governments? Not a fan, apparently. Governments, in Morrison’s book, are much too fond of legislation. Particularly “don’t-do governments”, which like to make laws that “tell people what to do”. You can read the whole article below: At the last federal election, the Coalition faced challenges from a string of hopeful independents in rural and city seats, largely running on climate issues. With two exceptions – Zali Steggall in Warringah and Helen Haines in Indi – they came up short. Next year the independents will be back for another shot, focusing on heartland Coalition seats in New South Wales and Victoria. The difference this time is there is a road-tested model of how to mobilise the local community and run a campaign, and a $2m war chest on offer from Climate 200, a group established by the climate activist Simon Holmes à Court. Inspired by Steggall, Haines and her predecessor in Indi, Cathy McGowan, “Voices of” or “Voices 4” community groups have proliferated, turbocharged by the Liberals’ slowness in adopting a net zero target for 2050 and the rolling scandals in federal politics. Will the outcome be different this time? You can read the full story below: Modelling of the Morrison government’s strategy to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 shows its “technology not taxes” plan will leave the nation relying on offsets and unknown technology breakthroughs, but leave the gas sector to grow. Released on Friday afternoon, the modelling report suggests the “net zero” plan will see the value of the coal industry drop by half by 2050. The 100-page report reveals a swathe of assumptions made in the modelling to lend the plan credibility, which left some analysts puzzled. Under a catchphrase “The Australian Way”, prime minister Scott Morrison released the long-term emissions reduction strategy last month after confirming the government would adopt a net zero target by 2050. You can read the full report below: No new coronavirus deaths have been reported in NSW in the previous 24 hours, for the first time in almost three months, reports AAP. The milestone comes as vaccination rates across the state continue to climb, keeping hospitalisations low. Some 90.8% of people over 16 are fully vaccinated and 94.1% of adults have had their first jab. In the 12-15 age group, more than 80% have had their first dose, and 72.4% both. NSW reported 250 local Covid-19 cases in the 24 hours to 8pm on Friday, 36 lower than the previous day. There are 228 people in hospital – also down on the previous day’s tally – with 32 in intensive care. The last time the state recorded no new deaths in a reporting period was more than 11 weeks ago, on 24 August. High vaccination rates also mean from Monday NSW Health will no longer list case locations that a Covid-19 positive person has attended. Also from Monday, elective surgery will begin to return to full capacity in greater Sydney. Australia’s last flamingos will go on display this weekend after taxidermists restored the magnificent pink birds. The last flamingo in Australia (named Chile) died in 2018, the second last (Greater) in 2014 – but they have been resurrected as gay emblems for South Australia’s Feast festival. Flamingos once roamed the Australian outback, great pink flocks of them feeding on crustaceans near Lake Eyre – those crustaceans that give salt lakes their pink hue were also responsible for the birds’ colour. But the last ice age meant the end of wild Australian flamingos. Since then Australia’s only flamingos were brought over to live in zoos. You can read the full story below: Here is the Gwydir River from a few days ago, to get a sense of how full the waterway already is. There are minor floods occurring at the Yarraman Bridge along the Gwydir River in northern NSW. Vaccinated international students entering NSW will not have to quarantine when they return to the state next month, reports AAP. The first chartered plane will touch down in Sydney on 6 December with about 250 students from countries including Indonesia, Singapore, Vietnam, China and Canada. A second flight bringing students from South Asia is also scheduled. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, says this is a “significant milestone”. They don’t just make a significant contribution to our economy but international students play a role in our culture and contribute to our community and lifestyle. The announcement mirrors one made by Perrottet in May, which was thwarted by the Delta outbreak that started the following month. The NSW Vice-Chancellors’ Committee convenor Barney Glover welcomed the announcement and said there would hopefully be 500 fully vaccinated students returned to NSW and ACT universities by the end of the year. We have missed the many contributions international students make to our community. Student housing Scape Redfern will continue as the accommodation partner for returning international students. While the Victorian major flood warning for the Mitchell River in Gippsland is still in place, the heavy rain warning across the state has now been cancelled. A bit more on the Cop26 talks in Glasgow. As my colleague Graham Readfearn said, it will not finish today, Australian time. The president of the summit, Alok Sharma, has issued at statement saying negotiations on a final outcome will continue through the night in Scotland, with a revised draft of the text to be published about 8am local time (7pm AEDT). Country representatives will then gather to discuss them not before 10am (9pm AEDT). It’s expected the summit will finish sometime on Saturday, local time. It had been supposed to finish at 5am AEDT today, but it would have been remarkable if it had. These annual, fortnight-long climate conferences have an unshakeable tradition of running into overtime. Why make a decision about the future of the planet until you are completely exhausted? As our team in Glasgow has reported, a key remaining decision is whether countries are prepared to return to the negotiating table next year with strengthened short-term greenhouse gas emission reduction plans. Research earlier this week by the Climate Action Tracker, an analyst organisation, found that current targets for 2030 would lead to at least 2.4C of heating, a level that would lead to catastrophic climate change. Australia is one of the few countries to have refused to boost its 2030 commitment at Glasgow. Many others have pledged to do more, but their increased commitments are still nothing like enough to hold global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, as scientists say is necessary. Some countries have tried to argue that revising 2030 targets next year is contrary to the Paris agreement, which requires revisions only every five years. But many others – and several key architects of the landmark Paris agreement – have argued the Paris treaty allowed for this to be escalated, and that the science clearly demands it. You can read more on the state of play here and follow the Guardian’s Cop26 live blog from Glasgow from early tonight. Did the Victorian Labor party engage in “premeditated and systematic rorting” of taxpayer resources to fund factional wars? That’s the question – in the words of the counsel assisting, Chris Carr SC – at the heart of the investigation by Victoria’s Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission (Ibac). The upper house MP Adem Somyurek, a convener of Labor’s moderate faction, was dumped from Daniel Andrews’ ministry and resigned from the party after a 60 Minutes/the Age investigation last year outlined wholesale branch stacking within the faction. Here’s what we learned during Somyurek’s evidence this week: The Victorian numbers have also been published. The state recorded 1,221 new Covid-19 cases. Sadly four people infected with the virus have died. NSW has recorded no Covid-19 deaths today, along with 250 new local cases. Some time in the next year, Darko Desic will finish a prison sentence begun in 1990 – interrupted by three decades of a hardscrabble liberty – to face the bizarre prospect of being deported to a country that no longer exists. Desic’s case, with its movie-plot travails and redemptive arc, has drawn international attention and seen his community on Sydney’s northern beaches rally to his aid. A plea for clemency under New South Wales’s rarely invoked royal prerogative of mercy is currently before the attorney general. But his case is also one of a rising trend of deportation and indefinite immigration detention in Australia, where experts say it is “harder to become a member of the Australian community, and easier to be expelled from it”. You can read the full story below: Australia has joined with other major players in the Asia-Pacific to push for “urgent and concrete action” to tackle climate change, reports Paul Osborne from AAP. The leaders of the 21-nation Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation group, including Scott Morrison, issued a statement on Saturday pledging commitments which they said would accelerate economic recovery and achieve “sustainable and inclusive growth”. In 2021, the world continues to confront unprecedented challenges posed by the impacts of climate change. We acknowledge the need for urgent and concrete action to transition to a climate-resilient future global economy and appreciate net zero or carbon neutrality commitments in this regard. A plan was agreed to examine policies which would phase out “inefficient fossil fuel subsidies”. Part of the plan also notes the need to “accelerate progress towards the 2030 target of doubling the share of renewable energy in the Apec energy mix, including in power generation, from 2010 levels by 2030; and to deliver a plan to reduce aggregate energy intensity by 45% from 2005 levels, by 2035”. However, the statement noted only “some progress” in strengthening the region’s capacity to adopt renewable energy. On the pandemic, the leaders acknowledged the “ongoing uncertainty” caused by Covid-19 and the uneven economic recovery across the region. We are taking steps to ensure growth rebounds quickly and to boost the global economic recovery. The leaders rejected “vaccine nationalism”, and agreed to lower tariffs on vaccines and related products to combat Covid-19, speed them through customs and avoid export bans. Host leader New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern told the online summit the meeting was a chance for the region to “emerge from the crisis better than before”. Apec leaders are more determined than ever to work together to defeat Covid-19, accelerate the region’s economic recovery, respond to climate change, and build growth that is inclusive of all our people. As we continue to recover from this global crisis, leaders acknowledged the opportunity to reset. Queensland may have passed its 80% first-dose milestone, bringing a string of freedoms for the vaccinated there, but those stuck across the border still face a lengthy road back home this Christmas. The only way in is by air until the next vaccination targets are due to be met on 17 December, leaving thousands of residents stuck interstate with their cars. Even then, a question mark remains over how border checks will be implemented once Queensland reopens to interstate travellers. If you are planning a trip to Queensland, it would pay to read the fine print. Read the story below to find out everything you need to know. A major flood warning has been issued for the Mitchell River in Victoria’s Gippsland region. The Bureau of Meteorology has warned the river may peak around the town of Bairnsdale from Saturday evening. Good morning all, hope you all had a wonderful Friday night and aren’t feeling too woeful this glorious Saturday morning. It’s Matilda Boseley here on the blog with you again today (you would think a full week full of news would be enough for, but no I’m back for more). Now the big story this morning is the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow, where negotiators are fighting over the final details of a potential deal. The deadline for the fortnight-long talks to finish came and went as leading figures took to the floor for what they hoped would be the final time, to exhort each other to cooperate in the interests of people threatened by the climate crisis around the world. This comes as the Australian government released the modelling underpinning our target of net zero emissions by 2050. (It was released late on a Friday afternoon, which is never a good sign.) The modelling has been lashed by climate groups as falling short of the government’s own goal. It anticipates Australia’s emissions reducing 85% by 2050, with “further technological improvements” relied on to make up the gap. The modelling factors in an average global temperature rise of 2C, which the Climate Council warns will result in the loss of the Great Barrier Reef and the 64,000 Queensland jobs relying on it. The modelling does not consider the economic consequences of climate change itself. Grab a coffee and stick around with me on the blog and I’ll bring you all the updates on Cop, Australia’s 2050 climate goals and of course all the Covid-19 numbers and press conferences as they occur. If there is something you reckon I’ve missed or think should be in the blog but isn’t, shoot me a message on Twitter @MatildaBoseley or email me at matilda.boseley@theguardian.com OK, let’s jump into the day.Playmobil, Lego and Barbie usually feature on children’s Christmas lists but this year they are going after adults’ hearts, too, with collectible toys with a feelgood factor. The usual range of Playmobil firefighters, knights and pirates has been joined by the spacemen James T Kirk and Spock, as the German company targets “kidults” with a £450 model of Star Trek’s U.S.S. Enterprise. Forced lifestyle changes during the pandemic led to a step-up in demand from adults for games, building sets and collectible toys linked to their favourite shows and childhood interests. Without the constraints of pocket money, kidults have become a major force in the UK sector, spending close to £1bn a year on toys. The adverts for U.S.S. Enterprise, with its 7.5cm tall crew and warp-drive sound effects, feature adults sipping drinks and admiring the assembled spaceship on their coffee table. It comes with a wire to suspend it from the ceiling, suggesting that like many toys in this area, it is designed to be looked at rather than played with. The spending power of kidults (buyers aged 12 and over) is now worth 29% of UK’s £3.3bn toy market, according to market researcher NPD. The rise of the adult buyer was apparent pre-Covid but accelerated during lockdown as Britons sought escapism in new and old hobbies. That has continued. In the first six months of 2021 “kidult” sales were 14% higher than in 2019 set against an overall increase of 6%. Melissa Symonds, an analyst at NPD, said this part of the toy market had benefited from the cash saved on commuting and socialising during the lockdowns, but that it was also about “bringing some joy into your life”. “The world has been extremely challenging for everyone and these toys spark joy for a subject people are passionate about,” she said. “I think that’s what is really driving it. There are still limits on experiences and toymakers have noticed adults and are giving them more choice.” The kidult market is a lucrative one as the average spend per toy is twice that of the wider toy market at nearly £16 – reflecting the huge quantities of figurines and merchandise linked to blockbuster media properties like Star Wars and the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) that are bought each year. NPD research shows adult buyers have a wide variety of interests, ranging from puzzles and board games to sophisticated kits for models, drones and robots. The biggest shoppers are 20- to 35-year-olds, who account for nearly 40% of sales, while two-thirds of spend is down to men, it says. The dearth of new film releases during the pandemic prompted people to revisit classic shows and films, fuelling demand for toys based on titles such as Back to the Future and Ghostbusters, as well as the expanding MCU. The US toymaker Hasbro has launched a UK website called Hasbro Pulse, aimed at collectors. Its Christmas selection includes a £108 Ghostbusters blaster – although you are limited to buying three – and figures from the Marvel series Loki. The model railway maker Bachman has also entered the fray with a range of Thunderbirds kits based on the classic 60s series, while Mattel is catering for grownup Barbie fans with the more expensive Signature range, which includes dolls based on historical figures such as Florence Nightingale. Lego says more adults than ever are playing with its plastic bricks and it has expanded its range of technical builds as well as models based on cult film and TV to appeal to adults fan of Lego. The Danish company’s profits more than doubled in the first six months of the year and it has upped the ante this Christmas with sets costing as much as a mobile phone. It is taking orders for a Titanic set after it sold out in less than a fortnight despite a £570 price tag. A £750 Star Wars At-At walker will also go on sale last this month. The 9,000-piece Titanic replica is more than 1.3 metres long and (like the real thing) breaks into sections. This poses a dilemma for adults with expanding collections and the Lego website now includes a section on what to do with a “massive” set.Labour has called on ministers to push through a long-delayed register of foreign owners of UK properties, saying the Pandora papers illustrated the need to crack down on the use of overseas shell companies to obscure the sources of wealth. Citing the revelations in the vast leak of nearly 12m files detailing offshore structures and trusts in tax havens, reported by the Guardian and others, Pat McFadden, the shadow economic secretary to the Treasury, said changes must be made. He said the registration of overseas entities bill, which would set up a database of ownership, first published in 2018, should be brought to parliament next month. Writing in the Guardian, McFadden said the controversy about illicit lobbying by now-resigned Conservative backbencher Owen Paterson and the subsequent coverage of MPs’ second jobs showed the need to maintain high standards of public conduct. There was, he wrote, a wider issue of ensuring “that the country does not become a convenient home for more illicit finance”. He said that as well as parliamentary time for the registration of overseas entities bill, ministers must also reform companies’ record-keeping to prevent opaque ownership structures using multiple overseas shell companies. The government should also take action on the recommendations from a parliamentary report into Russian interference in UK politics, published last year after a long delay, and ensure the elections bill changed rules to ensure the sources of political donations were more transparent. Labour was to form “an illicit finance taskforce with the aim of making the UK the most difficult place possible to launder the proceeds of looting and kleptocracy”, McFadden said. He said: “This is necessary because the use of the UK as a place to store or wash illicit money is not just an issue of financial regulation or tax revenue – it is a national security issue and should be recognised as such. “But if the prime minister doesn’t urgently bring forward the four measures Labour has set out today, he may as well be giving yet another green light to tax avoidance.” The extent of the UK’s financial services industry “gives us both a special responsibility and an opportunity”, McFadden wrote. “The responsibility is to show that we are determined the UK will not be a welcome financial home to kleptocrats. And the opportunity is to set standards which will set an example elsewhere in the world. “Underlying all of these is something bigger: a rejection of the dismal idea that politics is simply a gravy train for the self-interested.” The Labour interventions come after a cross-party parliamentary group also called for the register of overseas entities to be set up. The parliamentary group on fair business banking, including more than a dozen Tory MPs and peers, has written to Boris Johnson urging action. “Economic crime and illicit finance in the UK funds organised crime, terrorists and other malicious actors; undermines good governance and faith in our economy; and tarnishes our global reputation,” it said. The National Crime Agency estimates that the total cost to the UK economy of money laundering a year is about £100bn. Moves to create the register of property owners followed repeated calls for action to be taken, including a 2015 speech where David Cameron pledged there would be “no place for dirty money in Britain”.Chris Bryant is so fed up being lobbied by MPs on behalf of their colleagues that he’s decided to report the next one who sidles up for a quiet word – straight to the parliamentary commissioner for standards. Bryant, whose cross-party committee polices MPs’ conduct, describes an increase in attempts to influence due process in recent months, culminating in Boris Johnson’s extraordinary botched attempt to overturn the verdict against Owen Paterson. “It’s: ‘Chris. Can I just bend your ear …?’ Absolutely not!” he says. “It has happened quite a lot over the last year, most notably over the Owen Paterson case but also a couple of others. And in the past, my view has been: ‘Right, I’m just going to tell you you’re not allowed to lobby.’ My new version is: the moment anybody lobbies me I will simply report it to the commissioner and then the commissioner can decide what to do with it.” The commissioner, Kathryn Stone, investigates MPs’ conduct. But it is Bryant’s committee which then decides what sanctions they should face, with MPs given the final say – though this is usually a formality. Since Johnson’s bid to clear Paterson opened the way to a maelstrom of allegations about MPs’ financial interests, Bryant has found himself cast as the scourge of the government. The Labour MP’s coruscating speech in the Paterson debate was heard in a silence rare for the House of Commons, as he warned that if MPs followed Johnson’s lead, Paterson’s name would become a byword for wrongdoing. Speaking to the Guardian from his Welsh constituency of Rhondda this week, he warned that MPs may now have to endure months of intense scrutiny. “My guess is that there’ll be stories all the way through to Christmas,” he says. “And this angers me, because the government has led us all into this quagmire.” Bryant first came across Johnson at Oxford University in the 1980s when Johnson was president of the debating club the Oxford Union. “We were at university together. He’s a bit younger than me,” says Bryant, 59. He only recalls coming across the mop-headed future prime minister on a couple of occasions but says his character was already clear. “You know, he was then almost exactly as he is now.” Asked if he means Johnson took a relaxed attitude to rules, Bryant bristles. “I don’t think he’s relaxed at all. It’s quite the opposite of relaxed. I think he thinks he’s Samson. He wants to pull the temple down on top of his head. And what is irritating I think, particularly for lots of Tories, in particular new Tories, is that they had no idea what deluge would come. And if you pull the building down on top of you, people tend to get hurt. Completely capriciously.” The biblical comparison perhaps comes naturally because Bryant was a vicar before becoming a politician. Despite his theological roots, he insists he never intended to set himself up as parliament’s moral guardian, however. “I do not think of myself as a saint. So I hate the idea of some kind of great witchfinder who’s out there to snatch people into the back of my van,” he says. “I have as many clay feet as anybody else and I’m not a judgmental person by nature.” Nevertheless, in his 20-year parliamentary career, he has often strayed into what he calls “warm water” – setting himself against foes including the Kremlin and the Murdoch press. More recently, he graphically detailed his successful treatment for skin cancer. Bryant rejects the word “sleaze”, seeing it as an unhelpful catch-all. “I don’t like the word sleaze because it’s so untargeted. You know, 20 years ago sleaze included just being gay.” Bryant’s civil partnership with Jared Cranney was the first same-sex relationship celebrated at the House of Commons, in 2010. Rather than sleaze, Bryant believes it is conflicts of interest that damage the standing of parliament. “If people think that you are really not interested in serving the public and you’re really only interested in serving some kind of commercial gain, then I think they look on that very ill,” he says. “And also then when it accumulates then people start to go: ‘Hang on, it didn’t pass the sniff test last week. Now there’s a really sulphurous smell about the place.’” He says the “vast majority” of MPs have no conflict of interest but all are damaged by the perception that politicians are on the take. The prime minister felt the need to insist this week that the UK is “not remotely a corrupt country”. Bryant is less complacent. “There are clearly the first spots of corruption on the windscreen but, more importantly, the danger is we are corrupting,” he says, pointing not only to the Paterson case but to the government’s habit of doling out pots of money to handpicked constituencies. “I don’t like the levelling-up fund because basically it’s ministers deciding where to award money, I think that will inevitably lead to corrupting – and every step that you take down that yellow brick road gets you further away from probity.” Several ministers, including the chancellor Rishi Sunak, have acknowledged the government mishandled the Paterson affair – but Johnson has declined to apologise. With a motion reinstating the verdict against Paterson coming before the Commons on Monday and expected to pass without a vote, Bryant says he would like ministers to set the record straight by endorsing his committee’s report. “I’ve not heard a single government minister say that Owen Paterson was guilty, and that the sanction was suitable,” he says. With his committee expected to report within weeks on its review into MPs’ code of conduct, Bryant is happily immersed in the detail of parliamentary rules. But he says that if Keir Starmer asked him to serve in the shadow cabinet, he would do so. “If anybody wants to offer me anything, I would, because in the end I want to change the world and the best way to change the world is through the Labour party. It’s the only real engine of change we have – and that requires every shoulder to the wheel.”Barclays has been accused of putting its mortgage customers through a “nightmare” by wrongly recording defaults on their credit files, meaning they are trapped on high-cost deals for home loans and other borrowing. Guardian Money has spoken to a number of people who say Barclays has repeatedly marked them down as having defaulted on their mortgage payments despite them having paid in full. Others who took agreed payment holidays say they have also had defaults placed on their files without reason or warning. The financial consequences of having a default on your credit file can be devastating because it becomes harder to get a loan, a new credit card, or to switch your mortgage to a cheaper deal. Lenders always check a prospective customer’s file and will often withdraw offers if they see defaults. The defaults stay on file for six years. Despite being aware of the problems, which appear to particularly affect former customers of Woolwich, which Barclays took over in 2000, staff have seemingly been unable to remove the references. The admin errors appear to affect customers who have made a change to their mortgage terms in some way, or have even been overpaying. In many cases the bank has admitted it is at fault, and paid victims £300 compensation, but has failed to remove the defaults, say those affected. It has become particularly pertinent in recent weeks, with households scrambling to remortgage ahead of predicted interest rate rises. WB, who lives in Clapham, south London, says the default placed on his buy-to-let mortgage by the bank are currently costing him about £115 a day as they have prevented him from moving the large loan he has on his home to a cheaper deal. “The way Barclays has treated customers in this situation is nothing short of scandalous,” he says. “My problems go back to 2019 when I went through a routine rate change after signing a new five-year deal. The bank’s administration failed, meaning three months’ direct debits were not collected.” WB thought the matter was resolved – he says the bank admitted its error and paid £300 compensation – but he recently discovered that there are four defaults on his credit file. “If it wasn’t so serious, Barclay’s response would be laughable,” he says. “I have an offer of a new mortgage with another provider but it can’t go ahead until Barclays formally confirms it is an error. If it isn’t resolved soon I am going to have to get a lawyer involved.” JN, from Edinburgh, contacted Guardian Money this week after a recent Experian credit check revealed that Barclays had posted three defaults on his file without warning. “Every month my mortgage has been paid without fail but Barclays has told Experian that I have missed three payments over the last six years, wrecking my credit score,” he says. “What I find most extraordinary is that at no stage did Barclays write to me or contact me about this – I only found out because I checked my file on the advice of my daughter. I wonder how many other mortgage holders have been similarly affected but have no idea that they have defaults on their file.” GW, from Surrey, is in a similar position to WB. The small business owner says he agreed a six-month mortgage payment holiday last year because of the Covid-19 shutdown. The break was agreed with the bank and should not have prompted the default. Since then, he says, he has not only resumed his monthly payments but has been overpaying to make up for the holiday. Despite this, the bank has registered 13 defaults against his name, and he says he has no idea why. “It’s a nightmare. Due to them I have been unable to move my credit card balance to a cheaper deal,” he says. “There is little point in looking for the new mortgage that we need with so many defaults – after all, who’s going to touch us with that on our record? I desperately need Barclays to sort this out. Staff don’t seem to know what they are doing. I have taken it to the ombudsman – but am getting nowhere.” Barclays disputes this and says GW’s agreed payments holiday was only three months rather than the six he claims, prompting the defaults. It says the Financial Ombudsman Service is looking at the case and it will abide by the adjudication. The affected readers, who all asked not to be named, contacted Guardian Money after reading about the case of CS from Norwich, who had 11 defaults placed on his file by the bank – defaults that remained even after Barclays told us that they had been placed because there because of a “rare error”. One reader who contacted us told us about a case from 2017, which she says has still not been resolved. “My credit score is perfect – or would be had Barclays not lodged my ‘mortgage nonpayments’ on my credit file in 2017,” HK wrote. “I now can’t get a mortgage, and only a couple of credit card companies will allow me to have a card, and with a paltry limit of £1,800. The couple you wrote about are not alone.” A Barclays spokesperson says: “We take the responsibility of reporting accurate data of customers’ credit reference information extremely seriously. As soon as we are alerted to any discrepancy we will work swiftly to review and resolve the situation. “Of the recent individual cases brought to our attention, the majority have already been resolved and where errors were identified corrective action taken to ensure accurate reporting. “We are currently reviewing the remaining two active cases and will shortly provide both customers with a resolution proposal.” • This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to remove references to “default notices”, which are distinct from defaults.For Ellie Woods, the attraction is creating something beautiful but functional – plus the childlike joy of getting her hands grubby. “I think it’s the hands-on part of it that really appeals,” said Woods, a 25-year-old apprentice at the Leach Pottery in the Cornish town of St Ives. “I love the fact that people are going to hold and use our work; it’s so intimate, more intimate than looking at a painting or piece of sculpture.” Pottery is enjoying a boom. Applications for apprenticeships and night-school courses are pouring in and high street studios that give people the chance to work with clay are popping up across the UK. Sales of high-end wares produced with love and care at places like the Leach Pottery are soaring, with younger people prepared to invest in items they will live with for years. A report from the Crafts Council concluded that the appetite for British craft had never been greater. Highlighting shows such as the Great Pottery Showdown, it said that three-quarters of respondents to a survey it had conducted were buying British craft and a fifth of people said they would pay to attend a craft workshop. It pointed out that the mental health benefits of taking part in pastimes such as pottery was one its great attractions. The Craft Potters Association has seen its membership almost double, from 1,000 in 2020 to more than 1,800 now. At the Leach pottery its 2022 courses sold out completely within days of being advertised. Meanwhile cinema audiences looking for a change of pace from Bond or superheroes are turning to The Colour Room, the film about the life of Clarice Cliff, who rose from modest beginnings to become a celebrated ceramicist. Libby Buckley, the director at Leach Pottery, believes the impact of Covid, and people’s desire to find new ways of living, is an important factor in the explosion of interest. “I think the idea of craft and making has really taken off in the last couple of years,” she said. “Some of that is down to Covid. People who spend their time on a computer all day like the idea of having a go, getting their hands dirty. The great thing about pottery is that it’s really playing with mud. It’s very tactile.” Buckley also suggested that people had spent so much time indoors gazing at their surroundings and everyday objects they had come to the conclusion that they might as well pay a little extra for really beautiful pieces. “People are realising it’s good to have things you love around you.” In the 1960s in bohemian enclaves like St Ives, pottery became part of the counter-culture, a search for an earthier, alternative way of living, and Buckley feels that is happening again. “We’re reading a lot about the Great Resignation. So many people are re-evaluating their lives.” The Leach pottery, experimental and progressive, was founded a century ago in St Ives by Bernard Leach and Shōji Hamada. It was opened as a museum, shop and studio in 2008 but has sometimes been overlooked by culture-living visitors who are drawn to other art attractions in the town such as the glitzier beachside Tate St Ives and the Barbara Hepworth museum and sculpture garden. Not now. An exhibition called Clay and Community was launched on Friday pulling together a dizzying range of activities and events that have run as part of celebrations to mark 100 years of creativity at the Leach Pottery. It features radical, brilliantly technical pieces by professionals but also work by schoolchildren and keen amateurs who attended “Raku parties” to make pots using the fast and dramatic method of firing that inspired Leach. The interest in Leach was highlighted this week at an auction of pottery at Phillips in London, when his works were being snapped up by collectors from across the globe for five times their estimates. John Bedding, an honorary potter at the Leach studio, said he was pleased more people were taking an interest in Leach and having a go at pottery themselves, though he said: “There may be quite a lot of wheels on the secondhand market when people realise it isn’t that easy.” Simon Winn, 50, from Cornwall, who works for a pharmaceutical company, is one of those who has managed to get a place on a course at the Leach Pottery next year. He said he was looking forward to it with a mixture of excitement and trepidation. “It feels more accessible. Anyone can sit at a pottery wheel, have a go and come away with something even if it’s not pretty,” he said. “I like the idea of making something utilitarian and, of course, getting my hands dirty, making a mess.”The UK government was accused of sending incorrect advice to millions of energy customers this week, which could cost those who act on it hundreds of pounds. Letters sent out by the Department for Work and Pensions to people who might be eligible for winter fuel payments were in envelopes that carried a message saying that switching energy tariffs could save them “an extra £290”. However, the figures were based on deals available last year, and the recent collapse of smaller firms, and the rise in wholesale energy costs, means that most households are better off if they do not switch. The MoneySavingExpert website, which highlighted the mistake, says the wording was “financially damaging” and that many of those receiving the letters were vulnerable customers. Martin Lewis, the founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, says: “We are in an extreme crisis. The logic of how to manage bills has been turned on its head. There has never been a time when clarity of message and action is more important. That’s why the government, mailing out an incorrect message to millions, including many of the nation’s most vulnerable, is too big a risk to take.” Lewis says the right thing for most people now is to do nothing because the regulator’s price cap means that variable tariffs are cheaper than the fixed-rate deals on the market. “The price cap forces energy firms to sell energy at below its cost price – there is no meaningful cheaper option,” he says. A spokesperson for the DWP sasy: “We are committed to supporting low-income and vulnerable households to keep warm during the colder months. “We have encouraged people to switch energy tariffs for a number of years to help them save money. “The message on these envelopes was simply a suggestion and no further [envelopes] will be issued.” The energy crisis means that the cost of a deal offering a fixed price for your gas and electricity is likely to be much more than the charges you will face on a tariff that is subject to Ofgem’s price cap. While the price cap means that the average dual-fuel user will pay £1,277 a year on direct debit, MoneySavingExpert says switchers could face paying up to 30% more. The cheap deals that existed a year ago have all been pulled because wholesale gas prices have risen so much in recent months. The price cap is expected to rise in April, and analysts have suggested it could go up to an average of £1,660 a year. Last week, the charity Electrical Safety First said it was concerned that rising energy prices were driving more people to use portable electric heaters and that this could lead to an increased fire risk in people’s homes. Although not inherently dangerous to use, the charity said the heaters were often used by people to dry clothes, or left on at night. Lesley Rudd, the chief executive of Electrical Safety First, said: “If you are buying a portable heater this year, make sure you buy from a retailer that you know and trust and always follow the manufacturer’s instructions.”It was when the text message suggested volunteers bring a sleeping bag that Dr Peter Dennis realised he might be in for what he politely refers to a “protracted operation”. But little did he know he would not return home for three nights after the longest rescue mission in Welsh history. The ecologist from Aberystwyth University had heeded the call last Saturday to join the search for an injured caver in the Brecon Beacons who had fallen a mile into the 43.5-mile (70km) “intestinal” network of Ogof Ffynnon Ddu, which translates as Cave of the Black Spring. The medics first on the scene established it was a stretcher job: George Linnane, an experienced caver, had suffered leg, jaw and chest injuries after falling in the Cwmdwr caverns when a rock bridge gave way. Going the “easy”, quick way out was not an option. “Easy”, in caver world, involves “a long, flat-out crawl which is only 40 or 50cm in diameter in places”, explained Dennis, a veteran caver who is chairman of the British Cave Rescue Council. The long way round it was. Had his day gone to plan, it would have taken 38-year-old Linnane about three hours to reach the surface from where he fell. Instead, it took a team of almost 300 unpaid volunteers from 10 teams around the UK 54 hours to get him out as they passed his stretcher from hand to hand through some unimaginably tight spaces. “We reckon we had about a third of the rescue capacity of all our teams across Britain and Ireland mobilised and working on this rescue, which gives you an indication of the significance of it,” said Dennis. The rescue, coordinated by South &amp; Mid Wales Cave Rescue Team, required much lateral thinking. “There was one point we were faced with a slightly downhill, muddy wet slope and no footholds. It looked quite tricky for carefully managing the stretcher so a colleague, Joel, chirped up, ‘Pete, we can do this!’,” remembers Dennis. “We lay down, Joel shoved his boots on my shoulders, and we formed a human ramp down this mud slope and basically the stretcher was slid down over our faces and chests.” Teams carried the stretcher three hours at a time, swapping over to combat fatigue and cold. “Heads drop, you get very tired. It’s extremely exhausting carrying the stretcher over waterfall cascades – just imagine carrying a heavy load up a river above the surface,” said Dennis. The reason so many people were needed was to form “an avenue” to pass the stretcher along. Linnane is “fit – but he’s a big lad, a rugby player sort”, said Dennis. On his second trip underground, on Sunday morning, Dennis helped to carry Linnane along a rift – a high, narrow passage. “We had to turn him 180 degrees to present him to a rigging team so he could be lowered down a cliff. It was very tricky. It was hard work raising his chest up to the wall to get his legs pointing downwards.” Linnane remained lucid and in good spirits throughout the ordeal, said Dennis. “He was actually cracking jokes, which showed he was on a level above just survival mode. He was listening to what people were saying and commenting on that. That’s what filled us with optimism that it was just time that we needed, and not that there was some critical deadline to beat.” The casualty was surrounded by friends, said Dennis. “A lot knew him … there was a lot of telling him who had arrived, people he knew, and saying, ‘Don’t worry, George, we will get you out.’” Linnane must not feel guilty about the rescue, insisted Dennis. “If he felt guilty about it he’d soon be told that was silly, because that accident – his foot on that rock bridge – could have happened to any caver and he was just the unlucky one who put his foot there on that particular moment.” It was 8pm on Monday when Linnane was finally brought to the surface, a round of applause ringing out in the thick fog. Dennis celebrated with a mug of tea. Nothing stronger: “I had to drive home at 11pm.”In the wake of the Owen Paterson affair, Boris Johnson hopes you will conclude that all politicians are the same, that they are all self-serving knaves and that all the fuss over lobbying is just another short-term political storm. That way, no scandal matters. That way, anything goes. That way, his own lifelong disregard for the norms of responsibility has no consequences. That way, shame doesn’t exist. The U-turn performed by ministers over Paterson does not come from the heart. There is no real contrition here. Rather it was an entirely tactical response to what should have been a foreseeable public backlash against what the government was doing – ripping up the parliamentary standards process to save an MP found guilty of multiple breaches of the lobbying rules to push the interests of the companies paying him, one of which was awarded £600m of government contracts with no competitive tendering process whatsoever. While Tory MPs who followed the prime minister’s instructions on this issue are left wondering why they ever trusted Johnson, there is a bigger question in play. That is how to ensure public standards in the UK remain high, that the country does not become a convenient home for more illicit finance or follow the dangerous path of tearing down every institution in sight because it attracts the ire of the faction in charge. It is now more than a month since the Guardian’s publication of the Pandora papers – an enormous cache of documents revealing the secretive purchases of UK assets, widespread use of shell companies to cover tracks and the sources of wealth of some of those named who have given millions of pounds to the Conservative party. After the publication of those papers, Labour is calling for four things. First, the bringing forward of the registration of overseas entities bill. This legislation is aimed at showing the true nature of ownership of property and other assets in the UK. It has been promised by the government for almost four years and would enjoy cross-party support, but still it will not bring it forward. Labour is today calling for the government to stop this prevarication, and to commit to bringing forward this legislation by 10 December 2021 – the fourth anniversary of the UK anti-corruption strategy, which in 2017 committed to bringing a draft bill in that session of parliament for the establishment of a public register of beneficial ownership of overseas legal entities. Second, reform of Companies House must be brought forward. The use of shell companies lies at the heart of the secrecy outlined in the Pandora papers. There is no good reason for ownership to be hidden behind layer after layer of shell companies whose only purpose is to obscure the facts from public view. Companies House must be empowered to become a vigilant guardian of propriety, not be left as a passive library of data. Third, the government must act on the recommendations made in the intelligence and security committee’s Russia report of last year. This report described London as a “laundromat” for illicit finance, and called for action to deal with shortcomings in the unexplained wealth order regime and for a register of members of the Lords or Commons who serve on the boards of overseas companies. The response of the government to these recommendations has been to hope they go away. And fourth, we must ensure that the elections bill currently going through parliament requires political donations to be open and transparent, and to come from money generated in a legitimate fashion. To reinforce all this, Labour has also announced the formation of an illicit finance taskforce with the aim of making the UK the most difficult place possible to launder the proceeds of looting and kleptocracy. This is necessary because the use of the UK as a place to store or wash illicit money is not just an issue of financial regulation or tax revenue – it is a national security issue and should be recognised as such. If the prime minister doesn’t urgently bring forward the four measures Labour has set out today, he may as well be giving yet another green light to tax avoidance. The size of the UK’s financial services industry gives us both a special responsibility and an opportunity. The responsibility is to show that we are determined the UK will not be a welcome financial home to kleptocrats. And the opportunity is to set standards that will set an example elsewhere in the world. Underlying all of these is something bigger – a rejection of the dismal idea that politics is simply a gravy train for the self-interested. This recent lobbying scandal was certainly not the first involving money and politics, and it is unlikely to be the last. But what makes it stand out is the response of the government of the day, which was not to try to stop such things happening, but to rip up the system that declared they were wrong. The country deserves better than that. Pat McFadden MP is shadow economic secretary to the TreasuryExperts are finding fifteen times as much child sexual abuse material online as they were a decade ago, figures show. The online safety organisation the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF), said its analysts were facing a “tidal wave” of abuse material. It called on the government to ensure the online safety bill, intended to improve internet safety, was used to protect children. IWF figures show that this year it has acted against a record amount of more than 200,000 websites containing child sexual abuse material. That is 15 times more than in 2011, when there were just over 13,000 reports of abusive content. Susie Hargreaves, the charity’s chief executive, said while major improvements in detection technology and the hiring of more analysts had helped uncover more criminal material, it remained a growing problem. “I took up my position as chief executive of the IWF in 2011 and, since then, we have seen a truly mammoth increase in the amount of this harmful, hurtful material available freely on the open web. We’ve more than tripled the number of analysts at the IWF in that time,” she said. “In 2014 we were given the ability to proactively search for this material, which was a gamechanger for us, making us unique among non-law-enforcement bodies. But the sad fact is, the problem has outpaced the efforts around the world. We’re continuing to build world-class technology which helps us, and companies globally, to tackle this criminality, but it’s the work of our human analysts which really sets the IWF apart.” She added that the figures highlighted why it was so important that the government placed the protection of children on the internet at the centre of the proposed online safety bill, its planned regulation for the tech sector. “Our analysts, every day, are holding back a tidal wave of criminal material, preventing it from spreading even further online, and stopping criminals from sharing the horrendous abuse of innocent children. This is why the role we play in the online safety regulation is so important. We need to see real action now to halt this rise. “The new online safety bill is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to make sure children’s safety is front and centre, and that our digital future is built around a core of measures to protect children.” The minister in charge of the new law regulating behaviour online, Nadine Dorries, told social media bosses last week to “remove your harmful algorithms” or face swift criminal prosecution. Dorries said she had been working with officials to make the proposed online safety bill tougher to tackle tech firms, which she said “have the ability to put right what they’re doing wrong now”. The plans include accelerating controversial measures that could see tech executives facing jail. • This article was amended on 14 &amp; 19 November 2021: to replace the top image with one which better reflects the text and to replace the image of Sarah Smith, formerly of the IWF, with one of Susie Hargreaves who is the charity’s chief executive.George Resch loves two things in this world: “Making people think a little bit more positively, and making them laugh.” A former fence salesman from Long Island, New York, Resch is now the creator of the wildly popular (2.5 million followers) positive news outlet Tank’s Good News, set up in September 2017 after he saw a picture of an old woman being rescued from her living room in Texas during the floods caused by Hurricane Harvey. Inspired by the image’s portrayal of “triumph in the tragedy” – she was on the back of a jet ski doing a double thumbs up – Resch, 41, began posting similar images: a young woman food shopping for an elderly couple too scared to get out of their car during peak pandemic in Oregon, or the homecoming queen who gave her crown to a recently bereaved classmate. Resch believes the appeal of his posts is simple: “It’s a hit of dopamine when you’re scrolling through doom and gloom.” Every day, he is inundated with messages from people saying he has saved their life. Speaking to Resch is an oddly emotional experience for me. Last year, Tank’s Good News became my lifeline. Desperate to find my way out of postnatal depression (PND) after the birth of my second child, I stopped reading the news, logged off social media and immersed myself in Tank’s stories of optimism. Before this, I had never been one to put up my blinkers. I thought it dangerous and foolish to ignore bad news. Like many journalists, “keeping informed” verged on compulsion, born out of professional obligation and fear of ignominy. But last summer I felt raw; fire-hosed by information and stimuli. I’d wake up feeling terrified, before indulging in a bout of doomscrolling (the excessive consumption of bad or anxiety-inducing news online). I would find myself lost in unverified stories and furious hot takes on social media, leaving me drained of energy, yet too jittery to sit still. At first, I thought it was my long-term anxiety, diagnosed in my late 20s but present since childhood, merely dialled up. But after I explained the curious combination of lethargy and fury to a perinatal psychiatrist – “I’m not sad, I’m furious” – I received a diagnosis of PND. There had been warning signs that I ignored, of course. A sliver of a maternity leave, insomnia for years, a wobble when I’d had my first child the year before, a book deadline that hung over my newborn charge. Then my oldest friend lost her little boy and my trust in the world leaked away. I felt like a watered down person, with no conviction, or purpose. I was a book left in the sunshine too long: spine unglued and pages flying away. As I shrank smaller and smaller, the world loomed larger. I’ve always been sensitive to noise, but now I felt electric: a forest fire, burning with shame and fear. If anyone so much as brushed past me, I almost threw up. I was convinced I was being watched. I was ashamed to be feeling so furious, so lost, so shattered. I had a wonderful life, I thought (furiously). Why couldn’t I snap out of it? But it felt as if that life was trapped behind glass, and I was the taxidermied ferret, with a frozen rictus grin. These were not ideal conditions in which to publicise a book. I have never felt more of a fraud than in those months when I made a cheery weekly podcast, or gabbed on a radio show about my new book. I knew I needed to find a way of shutting out the world as much as possible, while still being able to do my job. (As a freelance writer, taking a sabbatical or decent maternity leave never occurred to me.) The answer came to me suddenly, and all at once: banish bad news. I already switched off my phone regularly – installing a landline so that my mother could reach me instead of leaving me 48 voicemails in a row, at 10-minute intervals – but now I kept it turned off for days at a time, learning of “bad” news only when my husband or friends told me, or when I had to research something for work. Instead, I sniffed out positive news platforms like a bloodhound, replacing the hours I had previously spent reading newspapers surfing them instead: the Happy Newspaper, the Good News Movement, Upworthy, the Good News Network, Positive News, the Guardian’s Upside. (Pleasingly, they all come as websites, too, meaning I didn’t have to go on social media.) It was not, I soon discovered, a matter of one or two outlets – this was an entire good news movement. As I dived into them, it occurred to me to question the idea that only bad news is newsworthy. What if “joyscrolling” – scrolling fervently through sites dedicated to uplifting or positive news – is just as important? *** In the 60s, President Lyndon B Johnson complained about the lack of optimistic news in Time magazine to its publisher and editor, Henry Luce. Luce replied: “Mr President, good news isn’t news. Bad news is news.” A negative bias in the news is an evolutionary necessity. You needed to know the bad news (a bear outside your cave) in order to prepare and defend yourself. This is true of today, particularly during the pandemic, but many of us were hooked on the 24/7 news cycle, and reading urgent hourly bulletins late at night, long before Covid-19. It is not the case that the news has got worse – given how subjective the idea of “good” and “bad” news is, this is impossible to prove. The problem, according to behavioural and data scientist Pragya Agarwal, is more that we “find ourselves compelled, in a world of instant gratification and on-demand entertainment, to be informed of the news instantly” . Critical reasoning takes time, which is why Twitter now asks, “Have you read this article?” before you retweet it. Every expert I speak to cites 2016 and “the fake news crisis” as a key shift towards anxiety around news consumption. Where once we received our news from trusted sources – Agarwal says we attributed a “status bias” to news sources, simply because there were so few of them – many of us now receive it from unverified content producers, via social media. Getting your news from Facebook or TikTok, for instance, presents a further problem. As Pooja Lakshmin, a perinatal psychiatrist and founder of women’s health platform Gemma, says: “What does it mean to see the news in that same place that you also see memories and emotions?” It is not unusual to sidestep the news cycle during new motherhood, especially if you find you are depressed. “I was so furious at the world when I had PND that I wanted no active part in it,” says the writer Emma Jane Unsworth, whose memoir After the Storm explores her experience of PND. “Avoidance felt like defiance. Being politically unaware made me feel like I was getting some kind of revenge.” Postnatal depression soared in 2020 – research from UCL found that new mothers were more than twice as likely to experience it during the first lockdown than before the pandemic. Lakshmin encourages temporary, selective news consumption when you have a new baby, but also “during any extreme period of personal stress” – such as grief or divorce – where you might “find yourself spiralling and struggling to self-regulate”. She also stresses that disengagement should always be temporary. But you don’t need to be depressed to feel compelled to quit the 24/7 news cycle. The BBC noted that while there had been an initial hike in news broadcasting figures in March 2020 (even from gen Z, who typically eschew nightly TV news), they plunged back down again a month later, as people felt overwhelmed with information that was good and bad, but mainly uncertain. The two largest news stories of the last few years – coronavirus and the climate crisis – both remain unresolved, unpredictable and urgent. Uncertainty is even worse for you than bad news, according to neuroscientist Lisa Feldman Barrett. “It is not hyperbole for me to tell you that I think all this uncertainty is a serious public health issue,” she says. Speaking to friends, I realise that many of them are looking for, if not an escape, then a breather. They have secret joy rituals. Emily begins her day with videos of orcas, finding calm in their expansive inky blackness. Rosie watches videos of nuns on TikTok. Mary, a lawyer, and Andrew, a yoga instructor, have set up a side project called Hello Stranger, where they leave stamped blank postcards with Mary’s address written on them, around London, with a small note at the top asking people to share some happy news. To date, they have left 500 postcards and received 300 back. For those of us who feel anxious when anything is left unresolved, simple acts of routine, or completion, can be a vital salve. A woman goes shopping. An orca crashes its tail. A room of nuns hole-punch a sheet of unleavened bread with military efficiency, to create perfectly rounded communion wafers, over and over again. *** The term “doomscrolling” was coined in a tweet in 2018, but popularised by business journalist Karen Ho in spring 2020, after she noticed how many people were hunched over their screens consuming excessive amounts of negative news, with faces like Munch’s Scream. Ho started by simply asking her followers every night on Twitter: “‘Hey, are you doomscrolling?’ and people were like, ‘Ohhhh, that’s what I’m doing!’” In response, she issued simple, daily self-care reminders – take a break from the screen, stop slouching, stretch your legs, grab a glass of water – and in autumn of last year, created @doomscroll_bot on Twitter to send regular reminders. Ho says there is a key difference between doomscrolling and preparation – using the news as it was designed, to stay informed and make safe decisions based on that information. She ticks off healthcare policies, public health measures and the weather as things you should read, and prepare for. “If the NHS is saying: ‘We have run out of hospital beds in Yorkshire’, that stuff is depressing but it’s important for you to know.” Ho regularly updates the bot’s programming, paying attention to current events and tailoring her message during “doomscrolling peaks” such as the US presidential election, the Atlanta spa shootings and the murder of George Floyd. Her aim is to provide “some small measure of action that will help people to feel less helpless”. Graphic designer and photographer Emily Coxhead describes her colourful quarterly, the Happy Newspaper, as “a reminder that there’s always good stuff happening, even if we don’t always hear about it”. Coxhead started the newspaper in 2015, after finishing university and finding herself struggling with her mental health, feeling “bombarded by bad news”. The paper now has a team of paid contributors, 21,000 subscribers in 33 countries and more than 400,000 followers on social media. The positive news movement’s emphasis on community is appealing. Some of the good news fodder is stomach-churningly cheesy, with posts showing curlicued mottos on slogan cushions. And there are, undeniably, lots of tiny fluffy animals. But the bulk of it is resourceful, heartening and awe-inspiring in its collective endeavour. The Happy Newspaper is a combination of localised news and global development, with stories including Japan’s appointment of a minister for loneliness, and a teenager who makes bow ties for shelter dogs to help them dazzle their potential owners. The key to the paper’s success, Coxhead says, is its commitment to community, which is also baked into the business – for every two newspapers sold, she sends a free one to a school. “I don’t pretend that everything is covered in sunshine and rainbows, because it’s obviously not,” she says, “but I do think there needs to be a better balance.” Looking back, much of my son’s first year is blurry, but specific stories pierced cleanly through the fog. The Zaatari refugee camp which, thanks to the ingenuity of University of Sheffield scientists, began growing vegetables out of disused foam mattresses (the foam acts as a “desert garden”, holding the vegetable’s roots in place as it grows in a nutrient-rich water solution). The 89-year-old Chicagoan who sewed 600 face masks while grooving to the Beatles. The Sisterhood of the Travelling Wine volunteer group (which spans tens of thousands across the US), whose “wine fairies” leave booze on the doorsteps of those most needing a lift. Perusing this news daily over several months, I began to feel less desperate; less diluted. Replenished by these good news outlets, like roots growing almost magically in a mattress, I began to feel level. *** Of course, joyscrolling isn’t for everyone. “This good news crap is just another example of complacency propaganda,” Touissant, an ex-chef from Louisiana writes to me via email. We begin corresponding after he replies to one of my tweets about doomscrolling, saying he hates the term. “The focus isn’t on us fixing the planet, or the broken healthcare system, but diversionary stories about how a bunch of teachers all donated their sick days to another teacher with cancer – while never mentioning the problem of the broken healthcare system.” It’s true that you can use good news-only outlets to hide from the “real” world – as I once did. Pull the heavy-tog duvet of positivity over your head and mute the world around you. To do this for any length of time is obviously not sensible. There’s an argument that platforming positive-only news is generating another kind of fake news; bad news doesn’t go away with a blanket of optimism. Disengagement, even temporary, is also a privilege. Not everyone has people who can parse the news for them, who can determine what to pass on and what to hold back. “You have a huge swathe of the population who are uninformed and unaware, and we have seen globally how problematic that can be,” Lakshmin notes. Agarwal agrees: “Some of us can’t dissociate from the bad news so easily. When there is a conversation about racism, people of colour cannot dissociate from that.” In this vein, my friend S says not reading the news would leave her more psychologically vulnerable – forewarned, she says, is forearmed. Agarwal advises taking a more measured approach: “Be mindful and reflective about the reasons why you are disengaging, and be mindful and reflective about when you are coming back.” That includes filtering who you follow on social media “and thinking carefully about the validity of your sources,” she says. Read a whole piece from start to finish, then go offline (crucial, this bit) and discuss it, more fully, with your friends. In short: be intentional. Ho manages her own doomscrolling by “getting in and getting out. I’m trying to disentangle from opinions and arguments.”Lakshmin says: “Basically, don’t start scrolling through your uncle’s best friend’s nephew’s problematic Facebook posts before you go to sleep.” I no longer read only good news. Thanks to a combination of medication and talking therapy, my depression lasted a matter of months. I started reading newspapers again, but I no longer get them delivered: I wanted to feel as if I was seeking out the news, rather than it feeling “forced” through my door. I don’t keep any news apps on my phone and I rarely, if ever, watch the news on television. If it is on in a room – as it always is in my mother’s kitchen – I don’t stop to observe the car crash. I simply pass through. Looking back, I think it was less that I could not tolerate bad news, and more that I was experiencing a total sensory overload. Positive news outlets are no longer part of my daily routine, but I still enjoy them, regularly finding myself awestruck. Like the post about the 2,800-year-old skeletons found snogging on an archaeological site in Iran, in 1972. Snogging! Resch finds the criticism of positive news outlets tiresome. “My head is not buried in the sand,” he insists. “If it was, I’d miss all of the good stuff.” Good news is lucrative – he has now hired three people to help him sift through the best bits of the internet. It’s not that it can be hard to find; rather, that there is just too much of it. “I’ve never had a day when I haven’t found anything good,” he says, before pausing for half a beat. “Not yet.”As testimony wrapped up this week in the trial of Kyle Rittenhouse, a wary America has realized that the trial of the young man on charges linked to his killing of two racial justice protesters in Kenosha, Wisconsin, has not played out like many people expected. With more than 30 witnesses taking the stand throughout a tumultuous week, a few called on by the state appeared to help Rittenhouse’s legal team with its claim that he was acting in self-defense. That added to notable errors made by prosecutors, as well as a judge with a simultaneously stern and flamboyant courtroom style who has shocked with controversial comments and outbursts. With closing arguments set to begin on Monday the US has been gripped by the highly contentious case and many people are slowly understanding that the verdict in the trial is far from certain. Last August, Rittenhouse obtained an AR-15-style rifle after traveling from his home in Antioch, Illinois, in response to a Kenosha-based militia calling for protection of businesses against protesters supporting the Black Lives Matter movement. The city had been racked by protests after the shooting of Jacob Blake, who is now paralyzed from the waist down, by a white police officer. Since then, Rittenhouse has been charged with two counts of homicide, one of attempted homicide and two of recklessly endangering safety for firing his weapon near others. He is also charged with possession of a dangerous weapon by a minor, as he was 17 at the time. Rittenhouse has pleaded not guilty. The case has come to symbolize different things for different slices of America. Many see Rittenhouse’s popularity on the right as a racist affront to the protests against police brutality and note how he and other armed white vigilantes were treated very differently by police when compared with protesters. Meanwhile, conservatives have raised huge amounts of money for Rittenhouse’s legal defense and see him as a hero. Those controversies have been given extra edge by the bizarre behavior and controversial rulings of the judge in the case. Before the trial, Judge Bruce Schroeder, Wisconsin’s longest-serving circuit judge, made headlines when he controversially ruled that the people shot by Rittenhouse last August cannot be referred to as “victims” by prosecutors. Defense attorneys may, however, call them “arsonists” or “looters”. Even though rulings against using the term “victims” are not uncommon in trials involving self-defense claims, prosecutors argued that Schroeder was establishing a double standard. Throughout the trial, several of the state’s witnesses appeared to have bolstered Rittenhouse’s self-defense argument, including Gaige Grosskreutz, the 27-year-old man he injured. Grosskreutz testified that he carried a loaded gun that night and acknowledged that it was aimed at Rittenhouse when Rittenhouse shot him. During cross-examination, the defense attorney Corey Chirafisi asked Grosskreutz, “It wasn’t until you pointed your gun at him, advanced on him … that he fired, right?” “Correct,” Grosskreutz answered. He has, however, affirmed that he did not intend to point his pistol at Rittenhouse, saying, “That’s not why I was out there. It’s not who I am.” Grosskreutz, who trained as a paramedic, testified that he volunteered as a medic at the protest. Another witness, videographer Richie McGinniss, described the 36-year-old Joseph Rosenbaum whom Rittenhouse fatally shot as chasing after Rittenhouse and lunging for his gun. When prosecutor Thomas Binger pressed McGinniss to concede he did not know what Rosenbaum’s intent was, McGinniss had a pointed – and damaging – answer. “Well,” McGinniss replied, “He said, ‘Fuck you,’ and then he reached for the weapon.” Prosecutors also made at least one unforced error that allowed evidence favorable to the defense that otherwise would have been barred. When Rosenbaum’s fiancee, Kariann Swart, took the stand last Friday, a prosecutor asked her if Rosenbaum had taken medication earlier on the day he was shot. By asking that question, Schroeder ruled, prosecutors opened the door for the defense to ask Swart what the medication was for. She told jurors it was for bipolar disorder and depression during cross-examination, in turn potentially adding credibility to the idea that Rosenbaum was an unstable aggressor. As the trial unfolded, things took a startling turn on Wednesday after Rittenhouse testified that he was under attack when he shot the three men. The 18-year-old broke down crying uncontrollably at one point and Schroeder ordered a 10-minute break for him to compose himself. During cross-examination, Binger asked Rittenhouse whether it was appropriate to use deadly force to protect property. He also posed questions about Rittenhouse’s silence after his arrest. At that, the jury was ushered out of the room, and Schroeder loudly and angrily admonished Binger for pursuing an improper line of questioning and trying to introduce testimony that the judge earlier said he was inclined to prohibit. “Don’t get brazen with me,” Schroeder yelled at Binger. As the defense argued for a mistrial with prejudice over Binger’s actions, Schroeder’s phone suddenly rang to the ringtone of God Bless the USA. Released in 1984 by Lee Greenwood, the song is popular in conservative circles and often played as Trump’s entrance theme during his rallies. Schroeder also appeared to sympathize with the defense team on Wednesday after Rittenhouse’s lawyers suggested Apple’s pinch-to-zoom feature on tablets and phones can distort video evidence. The company’s “iPads … have artificial intelligence in them that allow things to be viewed through three dimensions and logarithms,” the defense team argued. “This isn’t actually enhanced video. This is Apple’s iPad programming creating what it thinks is there, not what necessarily is there.” Schroeder responded that the prosecution shouldered the burden of proof that Apple does not use artificial intelligence to manipulate footage. “You’re the proponent of the exhibit, and you need to tell me that it’s reliable,” he said. The judge also suggested prosecutors find an expert during their brief recess, saying: “Maybe you can get someone to testify on this within minutes? I don’t know.” On Thursday, Schroeder urged jurors to clap for military veterans after he saw that one of the defense’s witnesses, John Black, was a veteran. “Give a round of applause to the people who have served our country,” he announced in court. Right before a lunch break, Schroeder made a racist comment that prompted widespread outrage on social media. “I hope the Asian food isn’t coming … isn’t on one of those boats along Long Beach harbor,” he said. The judge appeared to have been referring to the record-breaking number of cargo ships that are waiting off the coast of California due to a supply chain backlog at the Los Angeles and Long Beach ports. On Friday, Schroeder announced that he would allow the jury to consider lesser charges in one of the two killings, while ruling against the prosecution’s request to allow the jury to consider a lesser charge in the killing of Rosenbaum. According to him, the evidence did not show that Rittenhouse could win acquittal on first-degree reckless homicide but be found guilty on the second. Schroeder has set time limits of two and a half hours for each side’s closing arguments on Monday, saying: “The brain cannot absorb what the seat cannot endure.” • This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to clarify that Kyle Rittenhouse is not accused of carrying a weapon over state lines.• Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereThe north-south divide in house prices will narrow over the next five years, it was predicted this week, with some regions recording rises of almost 19% during the period. The property firm Savills said it expected prices to rise across Great Britain and revised its forecast for the next five years upwards. It predicted increases of 3.5% next year, driven by robust growth elsewhere in the economy and a shortage of homes for sale. By the end of 2026, it said prices could be up by 13% – the same growth that has been recorded in the months since the housing market reopened after the first coronavirus lockdown. Over the past 16 months, prices have risen in all areas of Great Britain. However, the biggest increases have been in markets outside London. Savills expects this trend to continue. For 2022 it has predicted growth of 2% in London and growth of at least 3% in every other part of Great Britain. In both the north-west and Yorkshire and the Humber it has forecast rises of 4.5%. Over the next five years the company said it expected prices to rise by 18.8% in both regions, while in London they would go up by 5.6%. “Given where we are in the housing market cycle, the north-south divide in house prices looks set to close further over the next five years,” said Lawrence Bowles, a director of residential research at Savills. “There remains more of an affordability cushion beyond London and the south. The government’s levelling-up agenda has the potential to accelerate a rebalancing of the market but only if it gains meaningful traction.” However, despite the big rises in the north-west and Yorkshire and the Humber, the price gap between homes there and in London will remain huge. By the end of 2026, Savills expects homes to cost an average of £272,732 in the north-west and £266,417 in Yorkshire compared with £713,987 in London. Since the lockdown on the housing market was eased in early summer 2020, prices have risen sharply, fuelled by stamp duty holidays, lifestyle changes and record low mortgage rates. In recent weeks many of the cheapest mortgages have been taken off the shelves in anticipation of the rise in the Bank of England base rate as policymakers take action against inflation. The forecasts are based on the assumption that the Bank will increase rates twice in 2022 to 0.5% by the end of the year and to 1.5% by the end of 2026. Currently, the base rate stands at only 0.1%, so this would mean a marked change in the cost of borrowing. Lucian Cook, Savills’ head of residential research, said this would have an impact on how much homebuyers could afford to spend. Rules on lending mean that banks and building societies must stress-test borrowers before advancing mortgages and only allow them to borrow sums they can afford to repay if interest rates are high. “Stress-testing of affordability has meant that existing borrowers are unlikely to get into financial trouble as rates creep up,” he said. “But it will cap how much new buyers can borrow relative to their income in a higher interest rate environment, acting as a drag on both prospective price growth and market activity over our forecast period.”Going Out: Cinema Mothering Sunday Out now Set in the home counties between the wars, this atmospheric Graham Swift adaptation pairs Josh O’Connor with Odessa Young in a doomed romance between a wealthy young scion and the girl next door, who works as a housemaid. Olivia Colman and Colin Firth also star. Becoming Cousteau Out now Documentaries often claim to be a “deep dive” into their subject matter, but that’s more than usually true here, as the revered French oceanographer and conservationist Jacques Cousteau (who once set a record by living under the sea for 30 days), is profiled by the film-maker Liz Garbus. Tick, Tick ... Boom! Out Friday 19 November Arriving garlanded with some glitzy claims to fame, this is the toe-tapping directorial debut of the Pulitzer- and Tony-winning Hamilton writer Lin-Manuel Miranda, adapting the semi-autobiographical stage musical by Rent creator Jonathan Larson for the big screen. Andrew Garfield and Alexandra Shipp provide the requisite sparkle. Natural Light Out now Filmed in Latvia with a cast of Hungarian and Latvian non-actors, documentary-maker Dénes Nagy’s impressive fiction feature debut adapts and compresses Pál Závada’s sprawling novel about a soldier tasked with occupying former Soviet Union territory in Hungary during the second world war. Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs Headie One Monday 15 to 27 November; starts Newcastle upon Tyne Last October UK drill’s biggest star (below) – fans include Stormzy, FKA twigs and Drake – landed at No 1 with his debut album, Edna, named after his late mum. After understandable delays, he’ll finally get to showcase it on this mammoth tour, which ends with a night at Wembley Arena. Michael Cragg KeiyaA Saturday 13 to Thursday 19 November; starts Brighton The Chicago-born, New York-based multi-instrumentalist emerged as one of 2020’s most arresting new artists via her self-produced, and self-released, debut Forever, Ya Girl. Featuring meditations on hurt, longing and loneliness, its genre palette takes in everything from R&amp;B to psych. MC Huddersfield contemporary music festival Thursday to 22 November; various venues Britain’s foremost showcase for new and experimental music returns. Chaya Czernowin is the composer-in-residence; premieres include works by James Dillon and Enno Poppe; and Musikfabrik, the Arditti Quartet and the London Sinfonietta are among the visiting ensembles. Andrew Clements EFG London jazz festival Saturday 13 to 21 November, various venues Jazz superstars and rising talents span London at dozens of gigs city-wide, including Damon Albarn’s eclectic tribute to Afrobeat legend Tony Allen (Saturday 13 November), Israeli pianist Shai Maestro’s powerful quartet (Monday 15 November), saxist/rapper Soweto Kinch’s new orchestra work (Friday 19 November) and much more. John Fordham * * * Going Out: Art Sarah Morris White Cube, SE1, Friday 19 November to 9 January This New York-based painter presents a group of soft, dreamy watercolours … no she doesn’t; she continues her tough, sharp abstract evocations of big city life (above). On canvas and film she analyses modern urban architecture in uncompromisingly mathematical, formal ways. Morris kisses her hand to the new with silent irony. Jeremy Deller Modern Institute, Glasgow, to 22 January The artist who produced Acid Brass and restaged the battle of Orgreave has a gift for turning politics into poetry, and vice versa. This retrospective of his posters ranges from the furious (Fuck You 2020) to more melancholy and thought-provoking statements, like I Blame the Industrial Revolution. Ancient Greeks: Science and Wisdom Science Museum, SW7, Wednesday 17 November to 5 June A fresh view of ancient Greek civilisation that sees its art in the context of the intellectual explosion that started in the 6th century BC when Greek thinkers speculated on the existence of atoms, mathematics and geometry. All this is visible in their art, with its sense of cosmic beauty. Mind and Mortality Stanley Spencer Gallery, Cookham, to 27 March Stanley Spencer was a magic realist, a painter of swan rituals, rural resurrections and intimate nudes. His totally individual take on modern life has an honesty and directness that echoes through later British artists from Hockney to Gilbert and George. This exhibition of late portraits reveals his final sombre thoughts. Jonathan Jones * * * Going Out: Stage A Christmas Carol The Old Vic, SE1, Saturday 13 November to 8 January Matthew Warchus’s sumptuous production returns to the Old Vic: Jack Thorne’s adaptation has jolts of darkness, but is also lit up by joyous ensemble work and a childlike sense of magic. Stephen Mangan stars. Miriam Gillinson The Jungle Book The Watermill Theatre, Newbury, Thursday 18 November to 31 December A new musical version of Kipling’s book runs at the Watermill, which always blends theatre and song in such lively ways. There will be pyjama performances, so children can enjoy the story of Mowgli’s childhood in the jungle while wrapped up and ready for bed. MG Ahir Shah Swindon Arts Centre, Friday 13 November then touring to 10 March Last seen showcasing his brainy strain of satire on Late Night Mash (The Mash Report’s post-cancellation heir), the Londoner is now taking his not quite so caustic, but still enjoyably cerebral, live show on a nationwide tour. Rachel Aroesti Matthew Bourne’s Nutcracker! Theatre Royal Plymouth, Monday 15 to 20 November, then touring to 23 April Not your average Nutcracker, Bourne’s cheeky, fizzy, camp and kitsch version of the enduring Christmas show sees Clara escaping her bleak orphanage to go on a fantastical tour of the colourful kingdom of sweets, complete with dancing marshmallows and liquorice allsorts and Tchaikovsky’s endlessly melodious score. Lyndsey Winship * * * Staying In: Streaming Tiger King 2 From Wednesday 17 November, Netflix Apparently determined to bookend the pandemic, the documentary series about imprisoned big cat breeder Joe Exotic (above) dominated the cultural conversation during the first lockdown. Now it’s returning to observe the queasy fallout from the show’s success – including the strange breed of celebrity it bestowed on its contributors. Crime From Thursday 18 November, Britbox Very loosely based on his 2008 novel of the same name, Irvine Welsh’s unsurprisingly harrowing Edinburgh-set police procedural about a traumatised detective working on a missing-child case marks the Trainspotting author’s first (and, some might say, long overdue) foray into TV. The Wheel of Time From Friday 19 November, Amazon Prime Video Starring Rosamund Pike, this portentous fantasy drama is adapted from Robert Jordan’s beloved novel series, whose complex, very large, medieval-like world involves a magical time cycle and thousands of characters. Think Game of Thrones, but busier and more conceptually mind-bending. Cowboy Bebop From Friday 19 November, Netflix This visually dazzling live-action adaptation of the 1990s “space western” anime TV series follows a trio of bounty hunters – Spike Spiegel (John Cho), Jet Black (Mustafa Shakir) and Faye Valentine (Daniella Pineda) – as they bicker, banter and brawl their way across the universe. Rachel Aroesti * * * Staying In: Games Battlefield 2042 Out Friday 19 November Delayed from September, from this week you can finally join friends on these enormous futuristic post-climate-apocalypse battlefields, driving planes through sandstorms and getting sniped by teenagers. Jurassic World Evolution 2 Out now Anyone who’s ever seen a Jurassic Park film reckons they could do a better job of running it themselves. Find out in this dino-park management game. Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic Out now One of the best Star Wars games makes a return on Nintendo Switch, so you can fit saving the galaxy in around putting the kids to bed. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Courtney Barnett – Things Take Time, Take Time Out now Following 2018’s introspective Tell Me How You Really Feel, the Australian singer-songwriter (above) returns to her roots on her comfortingly ramshackle third album, weaving tender snapshots of mundane lives (see lead single Rae Street) around meandering soft rock. Co-production comes from the Warpaint drummer Stella Mozgawa. Damon Albarn – The Nearer the Fountain, More Pure the Stream Flows Out now Since Albarn’s debut solo album, 2014’s Everyday Robots, the musical polymath has reunited two of his bands – Blur and the Good, the Bad and the Queen – and released three Gorillaz albums. Somehow he has also managed to carve out time for this languid song suite inspired by Iceland. Taylor Swift – Red (Taylor’s Version) Out now After losing control of her album masters to her arch nemesis, record executive Scooter Braun, Swift (below) continues her series of rerecording past albums with this shiny new version of 2012’s big pop breakthrough. Phoebe Bridgers and Ed Sheeran contribute to a slew of unheard tracks extracted from the vaults. Silk Sonic – An Evening With Silk Sonic Out now Bruno Mars and Anderson .Paak, AKA Silk Sonic, unleash their debut album of sensual 70s soul and honeyed R&amp;B. Completed remotely in lockdown after Mars revisited early demos the pair had recorded in 2017, the album is narrated by Bootsy Collins and features input from Dr Dre. MC * * * Staying In: Brain food Hrishikesh Hirway: What you discover when you really listen ted.com/talks Host of Song Exploder, the long-running podcast series unpicking the genesis of famous tracks, the baritone-voiced Hirway (above) is one of our finest explainers of sonics. In this Ted talk, he explores the underused art of listening. Radiolab: Mixtape Podcast The art of crafting a mixtape is no easy feat and in this imaginative, anthropological series from Radiolab, we hear how the cassette and Walkman revolutionised access to music, as well as shaping its current sound. Life at 50C BBC iPlayer Tackling the climate crisis is an increasing necessity and this documentary only cements its urgency. Filmed across seven countries, it hears from people who have been forced to flee their homes owing to extreme heat. Ammar KaliaTrumpworld is in legal jeopardy. The 45th president’s phone call to Brad Raffensperger, urging the Georgia secretary of state to “find 11,780 votes”, may have birthed a grand jury. In Manhattan, the outgoing district attorney, Cyrus Vance Jr, has empaneled one of those, to look at Trump’s business. As a Vanity Fair headline blared, “The Trump Organization should be soiling itself right now.” In Washington, the Department of Justice indicts Steve Bannon, chairman of Trump’s 2016 campaign and a pivotal figure in the “Stop the Steal” movement second time round. For Trump, out-of-office has not translated into out-of-mind. He thrives on all the attention. Amid it all, Jonathan Karl dives once again into the Stygian mosh pit, this time with Betrayal, a sequel to Front Row at the Trump Show, a New York Times bestseller. In that book, in the spring of 2020, ABC News’ chief Washington correspondent prophesied that “Trump’s war on truth may do lasting damage to American democracy”. Sadly, he wasn’t wrong. Front Row preceded by months a coup attempt egged on by a defeated president. Looking back, Trump’s embrace of birtherism, “alternative facts” and crowd violence were mere prelude to the chaos that filled his time in power, his final days in office and all that has come and gone since then. In his second book, under the subtitle The Final Act of the Trump Show, Karl gets members of Trump’s cabinet to speak on the record. They paint a portrait of a wrath-filled president, untethered from reality, bent on revenge. Karl captures Bill Barr denouncing Trump’s election-related conspiracy theories and criticizing his election strategy. Appearing determined to salvage his own battered reputation, Trump’s second attorney general tells Karl his president “was making it too much of a base election. I felt that he had to repair the bridges he had burned [with moderate voters] in the suburbs.” By that metric, Glenn Youngkin, Virginia’s governor-elect, has a bright future, a politician who puts suburban dads and rural moms at ease. No wonder Republicans think they have found a star, and with him a winning formula. As for Trump’s claims about rigged voting machines, Barr “realized from the beginning it was just bullshit” and says “the number of actual improper voters were de minimus”. No matter, to Trump: he continues to demand Republican legislatures carry out post-election audits. Karl delivers further confirmation of Mitch McConnell’s fractious personal relationship with Trump, a man the Kentucky senator reportedly repeatedly mocked. According to Karl, McConnell, then Senate majority leader, sought to formally disinvite Trump from Joe Biden’s inauguration. Kevin McCarthy, the chief House Republican, leaked the plan to the White House. In turn, Trump tweeted that he would not attend. McConnell attempted to thread the needle, placating Trump while keeping the GOP’s Koch brothers wing onside. But once he acknowledged Biden’s victory, the damage was permanently done. McConnell was an object of Trumpian scorn. That the senator jammed Amy Coney Barrett on to the supreme court days before the 2020 election and before that played blocking back for Brett Kavanaugh is now rendered irrelevant. Trump wants McConnell out of Senate leadership. Adding insult to injury, Trump recently told the Washington Post McConnell wasn’t a “real leader” because “he didn’t fight for the presidency”, and said he was “only a leader because he raises a lot of money”. “You know,” Trump said, “with the senators, that’s how it is, frankly. That’s his primary power.” He’s not wrong all the time. ••• Betrayal also documents a commander-in-chief who scared his own cabinet witless. After Trump junked the Iran nuclear deal, for example, Tehran thumbed its nose back. Drama ensued, because Trump wanted to know his options. Chris Miller, then acting defense secretary, tells Karl that to dissuade Trump from ordering the destruction of Iran’s uranium enrichment program, he chose to play the role of “fucking madman” – his words, not Karl’s – which meant advocating that very course of action. According to Karl, not even Mike Pompeo, then secretary of state and an Iran hawk, played along. “Oftentimes with provocative people, if you get more provocative than them, they then have to dial it down,” Miller explains to Karl. “They’re like, ‘Yeah, I was fucking crazy, but that guy’s batshit.’” Here, the reader might pause to imagine a campaign slogan for Trump in 2024: “Fucking crazy, but not batshit”. On a similar note, Karl depicts Rudy Giuliani, Trump’s crony and attorney, as a walking timebomb. Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law and chief adviser, avoided the former New York mayor. Mark Meadows, Trump’s last chief of staff, saw him as a corrosive force. “I’m not going to let Rudy in the building for any more of these,” Meadows reportedly told Chris Christie, New Jersey’s former governor, and Bill Stepien, Trump’s campaign manager, as they prepared for debates with Biden. These days, Giuliani is suspended from the bar, reportedly under investigation and unable to persuade Trump to pay his bills. Christie and Trump are at loggerheads too, over sins real and imagined, past and present. As for Meadows and Stepien, they are in the crosshairs of the House select committee focused on the US Capitol attack. From the looks of things only Kushner and his wife, Ivanka Trump, have so far remained intact, ensconced in Florida, sufficiently distanced from Big Daddy. Despite such fallout, Betrayal concludes with words of warning. Karl rightly contends that Trump’s “betrayal” of American democracy highlighted “just how vulnerable” the system is. “The continued survival of our republic,” he writes, “may depend, in part, on the willingness of those who promoted Trump’s lies and those who remained silent to acknowledge they were wrong.” In a hypothetical rematch, Trump leads Biden 45-43. Among independent voters, he holds a double-digit lead. Don’t hold your breath. Betrayal: The Final Act of the Trump Show is published in the US by DuttonThe questions 1 Which film star might be found at SE7 TW5? 2 Which Ken Welsh travel book inspired a sci-fi classic? 3 What does a barium meal precede? 4 Which protest movement began at the University of Cape Town? 5 Who is the only British swimmer to retain an Olympic title? 6 Which canine travelled with Jones, Blake, Dinkley and Rogers? 7 Which German city was the “Queen of the Hansa”? 8 The British Gazette newspaper was published during what crisis? What links: 9 Stargazer; lionfish; reef stonefish; fang blenny? 10 Peter Ustinov; Christopher Biggins; Anthony Andrews; Michael Sheen? 11 Banchan; chimaek; hallyu; kimbap; mukbang? 12 Westminster airport; Trafalgar Square ziggurat; Regent Street monorail? 13 Trump (June); George W Bush (July); Clinton (August)? 14 18th-century dandy; crested penguin; tubular pasta? 15 Tammy Wynette and Billy Connolly; Village People; Ottawan? The answers 1 Charlton Heston (postcodes). 2 Hitch-Hiker’s Guide to Europe (Douglas Adams). 3 X-ray examination. 4 Rhodes Must Fall. 5 Adam Peaty (100m breaststroke). 6 Scooby-Doo (Fred, Daphne, Velma and Shaggy). 7 Lübeck. 8 1926 General Strike. 9 Venomous fish. 10 Played Emperor Nero on film or TV. 11 Korean words added to the OED in 2021. 12 Proposed (and unbuilt) London structures. 13 US presidential births in 1946. 14 Macaroni. 15 Hits with full-stopped songs: D.I.V.O.R.C.E.; Y.M.C.A.; D.I.S.C.O.Even after Malik Johnson turned four years old, he would scream, trying desperately to communicate despite his speech delay. His mother, Jennifer Emelogu, a former English teacher, knew he wouldn’t be ready for kindergarten. So Emelogu transferred Malik from his daycare to Pre-K 4 SA, San Antonio’s grassroots model for high-quality early childhood education. Funded through a ⅛-cent local sales tax, the program has become a point of pride for the Texas city – a place where students and parents can actually get the support they need. “Every school in the world could take a page out of Pre-K 4 SA’s book. For real,” Emelogu said. “There’s no kid that fell through the cracks here.” By the end of last academic year, Malik had learned how to calm himself down and his speech therapist felt certain he was prepared for elementary school. “I’ve seen so much progress,” Emelogu said. Now, through the Build Back Better agenda, Joe Biden wants to give every three- and four-year-old in the United States access to high-quality early childhood education like Pre-K 4 SA. The plan would save the average family thousands each year on childcare, while making good preschool available to millions more kids. When Biden announced his trimmed-down Build Back Better framework late last month, universal Pre-K was still a prominent feature, even after the administration cut its original $3.5tn wishlist to $1.75tn. But the bill still faces an uncertain future in Congress, where conservative and progressive Democrats have been sparring over which social programs to preserve. Free, universal preschool could radically reform the country’s status quo, where high-quality early childhood education is a luxury, not a right. For many families, childcare – sometimes as costly as college tuition – has become a formidable barrier to career growth and economic stability. Some parents are spending most if not all of their earnings on daycare or preschool. Others have dropped out of the workforce to become full-time caregivers. “The fact is, today, only about half of three- and four-year-olds in America are enrolled in early childhood education,” Biden said last month. “In Germany, France, and the UK, even Latvia, the number of children in those countries enrolled is 90% – 90%.” In fact, the US trails much of the world in enrollment in pre-primary education, even though there’s clear evidence that high-quality programs pay off. Their rates of return often mirror or exceed stock market returns, especially among less privileged children. Possible benefits of good quality early childhood education are far-reaching, including, but not limited to, better health, higher incomes and less crime. “If the United States is gonna be competitive economically around the world in the years to come, it’s absolutely essential that we invest in universal Pre-K and get our young people off to a much better start in their educational journey. So it’s a pressing need,” said Julián Castro, the former San Antonio mayor who spearheaded Pre-K 4 SA. Universal Pre-K is wildly popular as a policy, with recent polling showing that as many as 73% of Republicans and 95% of Democrats support free preschool for three- and four-year-olds. It’s also nothing new: in the 1970s, Congress almost made childcare an entitlement, and in the intervening decades prominent politicians including Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama have championed the cause. Under Biden, the White House is staffed by top experts like the treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, long an outspoken advocate for how high-quality early learning can bridge socioeconomic and educational disparities. “It’s a policy that we should really focus on ensuring that there is high-quality provision, and we should really ensure that, you know, the access is given to those who stand to benefit the most,” said Parag Pathak, a professor of economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. ‘We aimed very high’ In San Antonio, Pre-K 4 SA is a stunning example of the difference preschool can make. Since the initiative launched in 2013, it has expanded to four campuses and serves 2,000 four-year-olds a year, while also providing professional development and competitive grants to promote quality early education throughout the city. “We aimed very high. Our goal was to be better than the best programs in the state and the country,” Castro said. Students learn through play, empowered with problem-solving techniques. They find solutions when conflicts arise, learn practical skills like following recipes, and plant seeds that grow into sunflowers taller than their own teachers. They also give back to their community, creating San Antonio-inspired art for auction. Proceeds go to a local non-profit the kids choose during elections in the fall – a tradition that teaches them the importance of voting. “You’re four years old, but there are so many things that you can do,” said Jessica Cruz, a master teacher. “And I think just giving them that sense of confidence, like, ‘I can do things. Even though I’m small, I still have a voice.’” An impact study on the initiative’s first cohort found that alumni had better attendance records than their peers and didn’t need to repeat grades between kindergarten and second grade. By third grade, reading and math scores eclipsed the state average. “It’s not that the kids aren’t capable. It’s not that the families aren’t capable. When they have access to highly skilled teachers, evidence-based curriculum and all the supports, the success speaks for itself,” said Sarah Baray, Pre-K 4 SA’s CEO. Done right, early childhood education “sets children up for success throughout life”, she said. “When we invest in the people of the community, that has exponential potential to benefit not just that child, not just that family, but the entire community. And that’s how we build a strong future.” ‘Parents are left scrambling’ Briana Saussy and her husband could be saving thousands more a year for their three-year-old’s college fund if they didn’t have to spend so much on part-time childcare. The couple has intentionally shaped their life in San Antonio so they can be present for their kids’ early years. Both work from home – Saussy as an author, her husband as a freelance teacher – and their younger son goes to preschool just three times a week. They still pay more than $600 a month to a local children’s center, rates that climb higher if their little boy ever needs to go in early one morning or attend a few extra days. Living on their children’s schedule also carries a cost: less publicity for Saussy’s books, fewer classes picked up by her husband. “For us, that was a choice that we were happy to make. But I would be very resentful if it wasn’t a choice … and I had to have him home because I couldn’t afford it,” Saussy said. Parents across the country are constantly having to weigh options, which affect their careers, incomes and financial wellbeing. In Mesa, Arizona, Cinthia Alaniz and her husband work full-time. They pay for their four-year-old twins’ daycare through state assistance, plus the money they are getting from the child tax credit. “If we weren’t getting that, we would have to reconsider our whole entire situation,” Alaniz said. When Alaniz found out she was pregnant with twins, she stopped working. With three older kids, some of whom would have also needed childcare, it made more sense for their family to live on a single income than for her entire wage to go toward daycare. Alaniz went back to work in 2019, while her mother and mother-in-law looked after the twins. If both caretakers were too busy, Alaniz switched around her schedule or brought the toddlers to work, which made it difficult to get much done. Then, she found a role as a family support specialist at an elementary school, where she’s on the same schedule as her school-aged children. But she worries that if she gets a raise or her husband starts working more, they’ll no longer qualify for assistance – a devastating prospect when twins effectively mean double the childcare costs. “I would have to stop working until they were ready for kindergarten, and we would just be back in the boat that we were in before, where we would just be managing off of one income for a family of seven,” Alaniz said. For parents, universal pre-k begins to resolve these non-choices. Alaniz wouldn’t have to worry about giving up her career because of childcare costs, while her twins would be guaranteed a free, high-quality education. And Saussy would find more flexibility helpful, even if she still wanted her son at home a few days a week. “Parents are left scrambling to try to figure out, like, what to do, and how to afford what seems like the best options,” Saussy said. “And I think programs like Pre-K 4 SA are filling a very needed gap. “I think that if we can have more of that – and more options and more choices for parents – that’s always a benefit.” ‘Excellence on the cheap’ While “universal” has a nice ring to it, the truth is the most affluent families already have access to pre-k, tutors, and at-home care. But “the real fear that people have is that if it’s targeted, it’s stigmatizing,” explained James J Heckman, a Nobel prize-winning professor of economics at the University of Chicago. “Making it universal makes it less stigmatizing,” he said, even though “it’s a strictly political criteria”. Ultimately, the kids who consistently get the most out of accessible early childhood education are the ones who start at a disadvantage, Heckman said. In Pre-K 4 SA’s first cohort, for example, those who were economically underprivileged or limited English proficient benefited the most. Although Pre-K 4 SA is still a relatively young initiative with limited data, research on other high-quality programs reveals even longer-term positive effects for children and their parents, including on high school graduation, blood pressure, drug use, employment and income. Those benefits trickle down to the community through a reduction in crime and social spending, and an increase in productivity, Heckman’s work shows. “Compared to the cost of other things the federal government is doing,” Castro said, “this is excellence on the cheap.” ‘Beyond our wildest dreams’ For Pre-K 4 SA, the federal government’s unprecedented commitment to preschool would be “miraculous,” Baray said. It would provide an opportunity to “expand far beyond our wildest dreams”, not by opening new learning centers on every corner, but by supporting other programs with teacher training, materials and curriculum. “If the funding came in through this federal initiative, oh my gosh, we’d be ready to go,” Baray said. “We’ve got the infrastructure to do it, to expand tomorrow. It’s really a matter of funding issues.” As more seats in other programs open up to four-year-olds, Pre-K 4 SA also hopes to expand its programming to three-year-olds so educators can deepen their relationships with the families they serve. “One year, and they’re gone. It just seems so fast. They’re out the door. And they change so much within that one year,” said Tonda Brown, director of one of the education centers. “I can only imagine what they’ll gain in two years.” Last May, for the end of the school year, Pre-K 4 SA’s students gathered and danced outside in the Texas heat. All the kids seemed happy to be there – and sad to leave. One stopped crying only to take a student-teacher photo. Proud parents drove up one by one for a parade, their cars decked out to celebrate all their children’s accomplishments. “I really do feel that our families feel it when they leave,” Brown said. “Their child’s been loved on, and they’ve gotten all the things that they’re gonna need.”Hong Kong has refused to renew the visa of an Australian correspondent from the Economist, the newspaper’s chief editor said, amid a crackdown on free speech and dissent in the city. Sue-lin Wong is one of several foreign journalists working in Hong Kong to be forced out in recent years. Press freedoms in the once-outspoken city have been reined in as China remoulds Hong Kong, following huge democracy protests in 2019 and Beijing’s imposition of a strict national security law last year. Wong, who is not currently in Hong Kong, was refused permission to return to work in the city, the paper’s editor, Zanny Minton Beddoes, said in a statement. “We regret their decision, which was given without explanation,” she said. “We urge the government of Hong Kong to maintain access for the foreign press, which is vital to the territory’s standing as an international city,” she added. The Hong Kong government and immigration department did not immediately respond to requests from Reuters for comment. Since Beijing imposed a national security law on Hong Kong last year, democracy activists, newspaper editors and journalists have been arrested. Critics of the legislation say it is being used to crush dissent in the city – claims the Hong Kong and Beijing authorities reject. Fears over freedom of the press in the former British colony are increasing, months after the city’s most vocal pro-democracy newspaper, Apple Daily, was forced to shut after its tycoon owner, Jimmy Lai, and other staff were arrested under the national security law. In 2018, the visa of the Financial Times’ Asia editor, Victor Mallet, was not renewed by Hong Kong after he moderated a speech by a pro-independence activist at an event hosted by the Foreign Correspondents’ Club in the city. The move alarmed some diplomats and business groups in Hong Kong. The Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Hong Kong last year reported “highly unusual” delays in visa approval for multiple media outlets. On the authoritarian Chinese mainland, where the press is heavily controlled and censored, foreign journalists must apply for specific visas and face routine harassment. Reporters only need a regular business visa to work in Hong Kong, however. As of April, 628 foreign employees working for overseas media held work visas in Hong Kong, according to the Chinese foreign ministry. Hong Kong is guaranteed freedom of speech and the press under article 27 of the Basic Law, the mini-constitution agreed by China when it took back control of Hong Kong in 1997. Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, has denied the security legislation would curtail media freedom, saying that “freedom of expression, freedom of protest, freedom of journalism, will stay”. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report.It takes less than a minute of watching Duel, Steven Spielberg’s feature-length debut, to realize you’re in the hands of a master director. And it takes even less time than that to suspect as much, because the opening shots alone, a POV from a camera attached to the front bumper of a red Plymouth Valiant, have an unsettling visceral jolt to them, despite the mundane action of the car pulling out of a suburban driveway and heading on its way. The bumper’s-eye-view would be a major component of Walter Hill’s superb 1978 thriller The Driver. Spielberg beat it by seven years. There are some important asterisks here. Duel was not Spielberg’s first time behind the camera by any means. He’d been unusually precocious as a child and young adult, enough to draw the attention of Universal Pictures, which commissioned the short Amblin’ from him in 1968, when he was only 22, and signed him to a seven-year directing contract on the strength of it. By the time he got to make Duel, Spielberg was already a seasoned TV director, though the fact that Duel is understood as his first feature at all is a testament to his generational talent. It started as a 77-minute programmer for ABC’s Movie of the Week and proved such a sensation that he was given additional time and money to expand it into a 90-minute feature. Now 50 years and countless awards, accolades and box-office dollars later, Duel feels like the proto-Jaws, an early statement of principles on how to build suspense and terror through patience, simplified action and delayed gratification. If you want to “play the audience like a violin”, as Alfred Hitchcock once phrased it to François Truffaut, you can’t be slashing away at the strings all the time. As an exercise – and it is scarcely (if elegantly) more than that – Duel is proof positive that a truck menacing a car on the California highway is all the story necessary for a film to exist. Provided it has the right director, of course. Not a word of dialogue is uttered for several minutes, other than the weather, traffic and sports news spilling out of the Plymouth’s speakers as the driver heads toward an unknown destination. Spielberg doesn’t even introduce the driver until absolutely necessary, and he does it first through a shot of the man’s sunglass-shielded eyes as he looks into the rearview mirror – something he will have to do more often than usual as the film unfolds. Until that point, Spielberg sticks with that bumper POV, which has the effect of enhancing the feeling of speed and danger while the car moves first through a neighborhood, then on to city streets, then on to the congested freeway outside Pasadena, and finally to the two-lane blacktop headed north down the Sierra Highway. We learn later that the driver’s name is David Mann, though it’s not necessary. We also hear his thoughts from time to time, though they’re not necessary, either. All that’s important is that he’s stuck behind a gas truck that’s as black as the clouds spewing out of the exhaust pipe like an Industrial Age smokestack. There’s no guessing why the truck driver chose David to torment on this day – we see his cowboy boots but his face is a secret for the longest time – but he’s feeling homicidal, and a little sadistic, too. There’s no more psychology to him than there is to the great white who terrorizes the beaches of Amity Island. He’s just a killer. Adapted from the short story by Richard Matheson, who also scripted, Duel sketches in a little bit of domestic tension in David’s backstory, just enough to give him a reason to defend himself. In a brief phone call with his wife, David apologizes for his behavior the previous evening, when he failed to intervene at a party where another man was acting with sexual aggression toward her. The scene is like a shake-and-bake Straw Dogs: his masculinity has been diminished and he’s about to get involved in a life-or-death battle to reclaim it. Spielberg ramps up the action slowly. At first, David breezes past the truck as any normal driver would on a two-lane road, thinking nothing of it. The truck then passes him aggressively, at a very high speed, horn blaring … only to slow down again. The pattern repeats itself. What seems annoying and inexplicable to David at first becomes actively menacing as he makes various attempts to outrace this surprisingly nimble machine or slip away to various pitstops or hiding spots along the side of the road. Every time, the truck awaits. Capitalizing on a time when California road movies were en vogue, especially ones with muscle cars racing for pink slips, Spielberg shows an early mastery of space, always making the audience keenly aware of where these fast-moving vehicles are in relation to each other while volleying between up-close car mounts and shots of the arid hills, cliffs and mountains. Duel is as close as films get to a feature-length car chase, which would court tedium if Spielberg didn’t mix up a vast repertoire of dazzling shots and Matheson didn’t add a fresh new wrinkle to the showdown. There’s a minimalist purity to the film, with Spielberg still acting like the star graduate of film school, finally getting a chance to play with all the tools in the box. And finally, there’s that land-shark of a truck, which Spielberg anthropomorphizes into such a monster that it’s a surprise to learn that anyone is driving it at all. Duel doesn’t have the luxury (or technical necessity) of keeping the truck out of sight like the shark in Jaws, but the two have a lot in common, including the “doll’s eyes” darkness that make them seem like they are staring into the abyss. David is left with the dawning realization that he’s up against an implacable evil that can’t be negotiated with, only destroyed. If Robert Shaw were around, the truck would be worthy of a monologue, too.The best measure of the artist Ai Weiwei was made not by any critic but by an interrogator working for China’s state security forces. It came 51 days into his imprisonment in 2011 on trumped-up tax evasion charges. The agent “understood that I wasn’t an evil person”, Ai relates in his autobiography, “just a troublemaker”. “Everything I did was basically a form of dadaism,” the agent told him. “Cultural subversion was my speciality.” The artist first became “a nail in the eye, a spike in the flesh, gravel in the shoe” of the Chinese Communist party when he orchestrated the gathering and publication of the names of 4,851 children who died in the 2008 Sichuan earthquake. Their deaths, Ai writes, were a direct consequence of corruption and the unsafe construction of school buildings. Were Ai to have kept this politicking confined to the gallery, the state security services might not have been so determined in their persecution of him. Indeed, we hear little about the conceptual work that initially made his name: the 1,001 Chinese nationals, from all walks of life, who became a living artwork at the Documenta exhibition in Kassel in 2007 are afforded just a few paragraphs; his later installation of 100m ceramic sunflower seeds in the Turbine Hall of Tate Modern in 2010 even less. Art Ai regards as “a safe haven, a language that was less confrontational”. Instead, the artist has increasingly turned to documentary-making to highlight the government’s corruption and censorship, as well as embracing blogging and social media with bravado. Politics, he says, is a kind of “readymade” artwork. The earthquake is not the only cause Ai has taken up. He has highlighted labour abuses in the construction of the 2008 Beijing Olympics stadium he helped design; sold a pack of baby formula at auction to call attention to its high levels of toxic melamine; and campaigned against the cat-meat trade. In 2009 the artist was beaten and his team locked in their hotel rooms after they travelled to Chengdu in China’s southwest to support a fellow activist on trial. Ai clearly relishes the publicity these confrontations afford him and he makes no huge effort to ingratiate himself with the reader. In 1994 he produced The Black Cover Book, a compendium of artworks and texts distributed under the radar of the censors. Though it did catch the attention of the police, spooking his collaborators, Ai sounds disappointed when he reveals “they did not directly interfere”. After Chengdu he says he “was determined to see how far I could go”. His arrest followed shortly after, sparking international condemnation (in 2015, when the UK issued only a limited visa to allow him to visit his show at the Royal Academy in London due to his criminal record, home secretary Theresa May intervened to extend it). Given that AI is not shy of controversy, there are some strange omissions. He does not address the criticism levelled at him after he recreated the photograph of Alan Kurdi, the three-year-old Syrian refugee pictured dead on a beach, with himself in the position of the drowned boy. Nor does he mention his support for Julian Assange. Early in the book, in a paragraph concerning self-criticism sessions in 1940s China, he writes how “ideological cleansing” continues in the modern west “under the influence of politically correct extremism” – but leaves the point hanging. Ai’s rebellion has its roots in his father’s turbulent life. He writes that he was never emotionally close to Ai Qing, who was a famous poet. Yet it is evident that his father’s persecution, first under the Nationalists in the 30s and then as a “rightist” during the Cultural Revolution, had a profound effect on Ai’s character. Ai Qing joined the Communist party in 1941 and was intimate with its leading lights, including Mao Zedong, whom he found “thoughtful and composed, and widely read … cracking the occasional joke”. Yet he soon fell foul of the leader’s purges. It is in the recollections of Weiwei’s teenage years in a region nicknamed “Little Siberia” that the autobiography is at its most vivid and revealing. Living in a dug-out pit, the boy foraged for firewood to keep warm, his father forced to clean latrines in which “faeces would freeze into icy pillars”. “Father would always light a cigarette and size up the work as though admiring a Rodin sculpture. The nicotine rush would bolster his courage in addressing the task ahead,” he writes. Ai Qing suffered this persecution stoically, he notes: “I have to admit I lack that level of forbearance.” When Ai Qing was eventually politically rehabilitated, he professed himself at peace, but for his son those humiliations have cast a long shadow. He expresses an “impatience with the timidity of my father’s generation”. Despite these mixed feelings, 1000 Years of Joy and Sorrow is ultimately an elegiac tribute to his father’s professional and personal legacy. He quotes from Ai Qing’s poems, reproducing several of them in full. One of his father’s earliest works, written in Paris, describes his fellow exiles “loving freedom, hating war / In a fury over these things / In anguish over them / Working up a sweat / Tears in their eyes”. Ai now lives in Portugal, and, for all his pragmatic understanding of art’s limits in the face of totalitarianism, rejecting his father’s belief that poetry was “inseparable from the future of democratic politics”, art nonetheless remains for him a signifier of social health. Censorship, Ai writes, “is the cruellest form of violence”. • 1000 Years of Joys and Sorrows by Ai Weiwei, translated by Allan H Barr, is published by Bodley Head (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The wildlife charity that employs Carrie Johnson is facing further questions over its finances, after its latest accounts show it paid more than £150,000 in “interior design services” to the chairman’s wife last year. The Aspinall Foundation, which is currently under investigation by the Charity Commission, took in just over £1,500,000 in donations from the public and corporate donors – while in the same year they paid £150,158 in fees to Victoria Aspinall, the wife of Damian Aspinall, the chairman of the charity’s trustees. The transaction happened in 2020, which is before Carrie Johnson, the prime minister’s wife, took on a senior role at the charity heading up communications from January 2021. The purpose of the Aspinall Foundation is global conservation work and releasing zoo animals back into the wild, working with its sister charity, the Howletts Wild Animal Trust, which runs two wild animal parks in Kent. Damian Aspinall, the casino owner and socialite, is the son of the charity’s founder and its board of trustees includes Ben Goldsmith, the brother of government minister Zac Goldsmith, who is a friend of Carrie Johnson and the prime minister. It solicits donations directly from the public, employing a team of fundraisers for the purpose, as well as running a fundraising lottery and asking for animals to be sponsored. The chairman’s wife, Victoria Aspinall, had previously been paid £12,500 for interior design services in 2019, but her fees went up by more than tenfold in 2020 to a sum equivalent to 10% of donations taken that year. The charity also has large reserves in cash, property and fine art. In its accounts, the Aspinall Foundation said the transaction was “at arms length” and added that the fees charged by Victoria Aspinall were “subject to a rigorous benchmarking exercise to ensure the foundation received value for money”. The charity also paid £124,231 for accountancy work undertaken by Alvarium, a company of which another trustee, Charles Filmer, was a director. In 2020 the foundation’s trustees, Damian Aspinall, Filmer, Robin Birley and Ben Goldsmith, secured a coronavirus business interruption loan of £2m, interest free for the first year. This was passed on in the form of a loan to the Howletts Wild Animal Trust. The Aspinall Foundation’s previous set of accounts for 2019 showed the 30-room Howletts mansion in Kent owned by the charity was rented to Damian Aspinall for £2,500 a month. In 2020, he paid just over £10,000 a month for rent of the same mansion, after the rent was calculated based on an independent professional valuation. The Aspinall Foundation was put under investigation by the Charity Commission over potential financial mismanagement in March this year. The matters being investigated by the commission pre-date Symonds’ appointment as an employee at the foundation, and there is no suggestion she is subject to its investigation. At the time, the commission stressed that the opening of an inquiry is not a finding of wrongdoing. However, a statutory inquiry is its most serious form of investigation, undertaken only where it is seriously concerned that a charity is at risk of wrongdoing and abuse. Where the commission concludes serious wrongdoing has taken place it has powers to remove trustees from the board, take over the running of the charity, or even wind it up. A separate statutory inquiry was also announced into the management of Howlett’s Wild Animal Trust, which is also chaired by Aspinall, and whose trustees include Aspinall’s daughter Tansy. The Aspinall Foundation did not respond to a request for comment. At the time of the Charities Commission investigation, a spokesperson for the foundation said: “The Aspinall Foundation remains firmly committed to its ethical and legal duties as a charitable body. Our trustees will continue to work openly and transparently with the Charity Commission to ensure best practice governance and compliance.”You know business as usual has resumed at cinemas when Marvel films start overlapping each other. Chloé Zhao’s ambitious Eternals might be hogging all the attention now, but Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings is still lingering in cinemas ages after its September opening – and this week it has finally landed on Disney+. For anyone largely uninvested in superhero cinema, Shang-Chi is one of the Marvel machine’s more pleasurable products in a while, in large part because it crosses genre streams a little. Its tale of an apparent San Francisco everyman (Simu Liu) whose secret kung fu mastery comes to the fore when his shadowed past – and immortal warlord father – beckons is more or less in the superhero origin-story mould. There’s more excitement, however, in its fusion of standard-issue Marvel action with the moves of wuxia cinema, the genre of Chinese storytelling that translates as “martial heroes”. It’s all elegantly choreographed and bolstered by some genuine star power. Stuntman turned actor Liu is sparky enough, but it’s really the marvellous Tony Leung, as his seductively villainous dad, who classes things up no end. Indeed, it’s Leung’s presence in particular that makes you wish that Destin Daniel Cretton’s film could break free of the Marvel factory and be the full-scale martial arts saga it clearly yearns to be. It’s notable how proceedings sag every time there’s an obligatory callback to some other chapter of the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Still, I hope that Shang-Chi acts as a kind of gateway for younger viewers into more adventurous, international realms of wuxia cinema – beginning, perhaps, with Leung’s own biggest hit in the genre, Zhang Yimou’s almost absurdly beautiful Hero (2002; Amazon), in which the balletic fight staging only barely distracts you from all the ravishing autumn foliage and swirling scarlet fabric in the frame. The plot? Only scarcely less trite than Shang-Chi, to be honest, though the film is a case study in the impact made when an individual artist, rather than a corporation, drives a generic script. I dedicated a column a couple of years ago to Zhang and his gorgeous exploits in this genre – notably the soaringly romantic, sapling-fresh House of Flying Daggers (2004; Google Play) and the strangely underrated, charcoal-painted Shadow (2018; now on Netflix). It’s notable, however, that China’s leading auteur only started dabbling in wuxia after the astonishing commercial crossover of Ang Lee’s rapturous, rollicking Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (2000; Netflix), a film that once, in what feels like another, pre-Marvel world altogether, made well over £150m worldwide. Those wishing to delve further back into wuxia, however, may be frustrated by the selection available online. You currently have to revert to DVD and Blu-ray to watch genre standard-bearer King Hu’s A Touch of Zen (1971), for example, or the collected works of trailblazing stylist Tsui Hark. Happily, Chang Cheh’s hugely influential, western-inflected and riotously enjoyable 1967 classic One-Armed Swordsman (Apple TV) is streamable, as are two essential works by Hu: the severe, beautifully composed Dragon Gate Inn (1967; Amazon) and the female-led landmark Come Drink With Me (1966; Amazon), with an incandescent Cheng Pei-pei as fierce swordswoman Golden Swallow. The greatest of them all, however, might be Wong Kar-wai’s elliptical, elaborately conceived and damn near swoon-inducing Ashes of Time (1994; Arrow), the film that proved that the all-action spectacle of martial arts could mesh with the contemplative nature of art cinema. Wong’s next stab at the genre, The Grandmaster (2013; BFI Player), looked majestic but wasn’t quite as transcendent; it was more the rich, cryptic poetry of Hou Hsiao-hsien’s The Assassin (2015; BFI Player) that carried the Ashes of Time baton into the 21st century. It’s many, many miles from Marvel to here, but Shang-Chi is a good place to start. Also new to streaming and DVD Zola (Amazon/Apple TV) “The first film ever adapted from a viral Twitter thread” sounds like a gimmicky sell, but Janicza Bravo’s witty, unruly stripper road movie has more than novelty going for it. It’s also a perceptive, unnerving study of the chasm between real and online living, vivaciously performed and filmed with experimental brio. The Colour Room (Sky Cinema) The life of the innovative British ceramicist Clarice Cliff isn’t the stuff of high drama, and makes for an unmemorable if pleasantly mellow biopic – chiefly a vehicle for plucky Bridgerton star Phoebe Dynevor to spread her wings a bit. Cliff acolytes will find more of interest, particularly in the film’s visual echoes of her distinctive primary-coloured aesthetic. Prisoners of the Ghostland (Elysian) “Bananas” is Nicolas Cage’s default setting these days, so there’s nothing particularly surprising about him collaborating with maximalist Japanese auteur Sion Sono for the director’s first English-language feature. A broad-brush fantasy in which the criminal underworld meets the spiritual netherworld, it’s fun and exhausting in equal measure. All or Nothing and Vera Drake (StudioCanal) Two early-2000s Mike Leigh films get a rerelease on DVD/Blu-ray and digital platforms. While Vera Drake’s reputation is assured, it’s pleasing to see the bruising, undervalued All or Nothing getting a 4K restoration as polished as its deftly woven, emotionally confrontational working-class drama is varnish-free. This article was amended on Tuesday 16 November. The Assassin was directed by Hou Hsiao-hsien not Tsai Ming-liang, as originally stated. This has now been correctedThere were cheers and boos, oohs and aahs in the Marlowe Theatre in Canterbury this week at the first read-through of this year’s pantomime, Jack and the Beanstalk. Opening in a fortnight for a six-week run, and starring the Strictly Come Dancing winner Joanne Clifton, boyband singer Duncan James and a real dog, the script is packed with corny gags and local jokes that are the panto hallmark. “It’s great to be back,” the writer and director Paul Hendy told the cast and production team. Like most theatres, the Marlowe cancelled its show last year because of Covid restrictions, blowing a massive hole in its annual budget. This year, panto is bigger than ever. All over the country, minor celebs have been cast, Widow Twankey’s crinoline dresses dusted off, glitter balls hoisted and double entendres rehearsed. But beneath the slapstick humour, theatres are nervous. Despite all Covid-related restrictions in England being lifted months ago, ticket sales have not bounced back to pre-pandemic levels. Traditional early bookings were sluggish, and school group sales significantly down on 2019. Although family bookings are picking up now, they are 10-20% below pre-pandemic levels. Grandparents, a key element in a multigenerational family experience, are thought to be particularly hesitant. “It’s definitely slower and people are leaving it later,” said Hendy. “There are people who still don’t feel comfortable sitting in a theatre.” According to Hendy, whose company, Evolution Productions, is staging 11 pantos across the country this Christmas, 98% of regional theatres put on a Christmas show. “Panto can bring in 40% of annual income in a four-week run. It’s the lifeblood of UK theatre,” he said. Last year, eight of Evolution’s planned 10 pantos were cancelled before the opening date. Two opened briefly to live audiences before the curtain came down. The financial consequences were “pretty horrific”, said Hendy. At the Nottingham Playhouse, rehearsals for Beauty and the Beast are in full swing after last year’s show was put on hold, but box office sales are “a little behind an ordinary year,” said the artistic director, Adam Penford. “Panto ticket sales are our second-biggest income stream after Arts Council funding. Our business model is built on the success of the Christmas show. “If we don’t sell as many tickets this year because audience confidence is slow in returning, that will be really problematic. I do think there’s appetite, but we need to reassure people that the theatre is a safe environment.” Julian Bird, the chief executive of UK Theatre and the Society of London Theatre, said there was evidence that sales for Christmas shows were rallying, and some venues were “on track for their best panto season ever”. But he added: “There is still a significant minority of core audiences who need more clarity on what is happening with Covid before they will book tickets.” Many people have fond memories of panto. Penford, who grew up in Nottingham, was taken to see the Playhouse show every year – the only time his parents went to the theatre. “It’s clearly ingrained in my mind – the thrill of entering the theatre, the buzz, the lights, the music. It’s definitely why I ended up with a career in the arts, and now I’ve come full circle back to the Playhouse,” he said. Until Covid struck, panto was “in a good place”, said Hendy. “The quality of shows has improved dramatically. The turning point was Ian McKellen playing Widow Twankey at the Old Vic [in 2004] – suddenly it was OK to love panto.” On top of concerns about ticket sales, nagging anxieties persist that this year’s panto season could yet be hit by new Covid restrictions. “The repercussions would be fundamental,” said Emily Wood, the co-director of Evolution. Closures would be “the death knell” for some regional theatres. She added: “Despite all the uncertainty, we’re feeling optimistic. People are desperate to have a great festive season after being robbed last year. We’re all going to double-down on the Christmas experience, and for a lot of people that includes panto.”There has been feverish speculation, in both Westminster and Brussels, about the British government’s possible intention to trigger article 16 of the Brexit withdrawal agreement. Make no bones about it: such a move, especially if accompanied by the unilateral suspension of elements of the Northern Ireland protocol, would throw the UK’s relations with the EU into turmoil, just at the moment when real progress is being made to facilitate its implementation. For the Brexiters dragging Boris Johnson to the cliff edge, there would be no great return to the supposedly consequence-free highs of the post-referendum period of 2016, as some might hope. Rather, it would mark the beginning of years more Brexit uncertainty, instead of the implementation of the promise to “get Brexit done”. More importantly, as the hijacking of another bus in Belfast last weekend highlighted, there is an urgent need to ease tensions rather than inflame the situation. A majority of people in Northern Ireland don’t think that a triggering of article 16 would be justified, according to a recent opinion poll commissioned by Queen’s University Belfast. Before taking any decision, Johnson should ask himself what is really in the interests of the people of Northern Ireland. It is increasingly clear that more and more citizens of Northern Ireland, who try each day to build a better future for themselves and their families, do not seek confrontation, further division and uncertainty; for them, the protocol is the only solution to the challenges posed by the type of Brexit that the British government negotiated. The Queen’s University poll, commissioned before the announcement of the EU’s comprehensive proposals to reduce checks, tells us that 67% of Northern Irish citizens believe that bespoke trade and regulatory arrangements for Northern Ireland are needed to manage the effects of Brexit. This is precisely why the EU and the UK reached, after years of negotiation, an agreement on a protocol to safeguard peace and prosperity on the island of Ireland. The number of voters who agreed or strongly agreed that the protocol is on balance a “good thing” for Northern Ireland had risen from 43% in June to 52% in October. As a matter of fact, Northern Ireland gets the best of both worlds under the current setup, as belonging to the UK as well as to the single market provides for significant economic opportunities – as long as there is stability and predictability for businesses and consumers alike. It is hard to see how ripping up the protocol now would enhance stability and predictability, at a time when the pandemic is still inflicting damage and energy prices are soaring. There have been complaints that the role of the European court of justice – the involvement of which is necessary if Northern Irish businesses are to keep trading with the EU27 – infringes on the sovereignty of the people of Northern Ireland. Do these complaints come from people on the ground in Northern Ireland? Not to my knowledge. They mainly emanate from London. Will they be heeded? Don’t bet on it. There’s little chance that the EU would compromise on a golden rule of its single market. Since the protocol came into force, the EU and the European Commission have, again and again, come with proposals to improve its operation for both businesses and citizens. The latest suggestions from the commission stretch the EU’s single market rules to breaking point. But they are also exactly what businesses in Northern Ireland requested. In politics, some only want to be proved right, while others listen to the people and show a constructive spirit. Further years of Brexit negotiations are not in the interests of anyone who cares about peace and prosperity in Northern Ireland. The EU has no desire to punish anyone for Brexit. Those who pretend otherwise are being intentionally misleading, in a bid to further undermine UK-EU relations. There is no reason for the UK to punish Northern Ireland for its very specific situation. There is no reason, either, to punish European fishermen, who have been able to fish in British waters for centuries and are now only asking that their rights be respected. To this end, we need the trade and cooperation agreement (TCA) to be implemented in good faith. As John Hume, a champion of human rights on the island of Ireland, once rightly said: “When people are divided, the only solution is agreement.” The EU has shown agility and determination in its bid to “get Brexit done”, be it on the protocol or on the TCA. It is now not too late for Johnson to decide to work with the EU in the collective best interest. • This article was amended on 14 November 2021 to use the term Brexiter in accordance with style guidelines. Nathalie Loiseau is an MEP and a former French minister for European affairsThe Thames shark hunt begins on a swirling golden brown river, where high above Battersea power station soars a speck that may be another awesome predator: a peregrine falcon. “I haven’t seen a shark but I’ve seen porpoises up the Thames and there were a couple of whales last year,” says Alfie Gardner, captain of one of the Thames Clipper Uber Boats that whisk commuters and tourists up and downriver. “We see a lot of seals. Near enough every day.” The 95 miles of the tidal Thames that snakes through Europe’s biggest city is full of life, according to a new survey by the Zoological Society of London (ZSL). Harbour and grey seals pop up for a reason: the Thames is home to more than 115 species of fish, and is a nursery for smelt, seabass and sharks – starry smooth-hound, tope and spurdog. Other remarkable sightings include a juvenile short-snouted seahorse at Greenwich and a juvenile minke whale, which was stranded near Teddington this spring. An informal shark safari via the scheduled riverboat service from the London Eye to North Greenwich starts with a promising display of common gulls, which perch on construction barges facing into the wind so their feathers won’t ruffle. The Thames does not look alluring and its brown waters are coloured by sediment animated by the tides. Who can tell what lies beneath? The party of visitors to the Tate Modern’s beach could probably say, if only we could understand them: this biodiversity hotspot contains two swans, four greylag geese and a gaggle of feral pigeons and gulls. As the riverboat cruises past the Tower of London, a cormorant hangs its wings out to dry like an enormous gothic bat. This fish-eating bird is another sign that there is food in the river. Beside the Old Thameside Inn there rolls a log: here is the Thames reborn as a Canadian mountain stream. Unfortunately, the rebirth of the Thames has met with several false dawns, and this may be another. Before 1800, 3,000 Atlantic salmon caught on the river would be taken to Billingsgate market each year. Then the Industrial Revolution poured everything from cyanide to sewage into the river, and Victorian engineer Joseph Bazalgette’s sewage system only shifted the pollution downstream to Beckton. In 1957, a survey conducted by the Natural History Museum made an incredible discovery: there were no fish left in the Thames. As the Guardian reported in 1959: “The tidal reaches of the Thames constitute a badly managed open sewer.” Sewage discharged at Beckton began to be treated in 1964, industrial pollution was controlled, and heavy industry retreated from the riverside. In 1974, the first salmon was caught on the Thames – in a power station intake 16 miles below Tower Bridge – since 1833. But a 32-year effort to restore salmon by restocking the Thames with young fish ended in failure in 2011. This week, ZSL’s survey found that the number of fish species in the tidal Thames has actually declined since the early 1990s. “It was a surprising decline,” says Alison Debney, ZSL’s conservation programme lead for wetland ecosystem recovery. ‘I’ve been spending the last 10 years telling everybody we’ve got all these fish and isn’t that great?” Scientists need to unpick the reasons for this decline, says Debney, which could be pollution combined with the climate crisis. There are positive increases in dissolved oxygen concentrations and less damagingly high phosphorus levels in the Thames but harmful nitrate concentrations continue to increase, and microplastics flow down the river at a rate of up to 94,000 pieces a second. Fish could be struggling with dramatic temperature changes: on average, summer temperatures in the upper tidal Thames have risen by 0.19C a year this century. According to Debney, this rise could be assisted by that old foe: treated sewage, which warms the river. Raw sewage also continues to be discharged into the Thames. More than 95% of these overflows should be captured by the Thames Tideway tunnel, a £3.9bn super-sewer due for completion in 2025. There’s no sign of a shark but river regulars say seals are more visible than ever. They like the Salt Quay pub in Rotherhithe – or at least the sand in front of it – and the shallows of Wandsworth. “As the river gets narrower, the seals seem to get bigger,” says Gardner. They are keeping their heads down on this particular river cruise. Finally, a creamy shape materialises in the water beside Deptford Creek. A seal? No, it’s an old football. The Guardian’s informal Thames safari species list Common gull: 550 Herring gull: 22 Mute swan: 13 Greylag geese: 4 Cormorant: 1 Black-headed gull: 1 Jackdaw: 2 Floating pieces of wood: 5 Plastic bottles: 1 Tennis balls: 1 Footballs: 1The Department for Work and Pensions has unlawfully told “significant” numbers of people who legitimately claimed universal credit at the start of the pandemic to repay money often totalling thousands of pounds, a charity has claimed. The claimants were all given universal credit during the lockdown in March and April 2020 when face-to-face identity checks were suspended. Since then the DWP has carried out retrospective checks on those claims and asked individuals for ID evidence. Failure to supply proof of identity within 14 days has led to claimants having their awards summarily terminated, and told that they must repay all of the money – in some cases as much as £13,000 – which the DWP has classified as “overpayments”. In some cases the DWP has arranged with the claimant’s employers to have the money deducted in monthly instalments from pay packets at a rate of up to 20% of claimants’ earnings. According to the Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG), which has been helping some of those affected, many of the cases involved people who were unaware the DWP wanted retrospective evidence because they were no longer claiming universal credit, and no longer checked their online journal for DWP messages. In one case a taxi driver had his entire claim of £12,000 voided because he supposedly did not supply full proof of his ID when requested, despite uploading his passport, driving licence and rent agreement to his universal credit journal. His claim was terminated anyway, and despite appealing against the decision he has been forced to set up a repayment plan to avoid the debt being passed to a collection agency. Claire Hall, a solicitor at CPAG, said: “Just as families are getting back on their feet, many of those who lost their jobs when the pandemic first hit are being put through a second ordeal by the DWP. Despite making legitimate claims for universal credit over 18 months ago, people have now received financially devastating debt notices simply because they haven’t been able to comply with requests to verify their details quickly.” CPAG said the DWP had unlawfully presumed that in all cases claimants’ failure to respond to a request for evidence a year after they claimed – often for good reason – meant they were not entitled to the award in the first place. Although the exact number of those wrongly asked to return overpayments is not available, CPAG believes it makes up a significant proportion of the 99,000 claims made at the time subsequently identified by the DWP as incorrect. A DWP spokesperson said: “At the onset of the pandemic we suspended certain verification processes as we could no longer see customers face-to-face, making customers aware that we may return to seek this verification in the future. “Those who can prove entitlement in a reasonable timeframe will not be asked to repay any money. We have a responsibility to the taxpayer to ensure public money is properly spent. Therefore it is right and lawful that we seek to recover payments that claimants were not entitled to. “We have been unable to verify the details of these case studies, as we have not been provided with the required information; we can do so if this is provided.”This year’s Remembrance Sunday commemorations will be the first since last summer’s chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan, events that have prompted many British veterans to question the value of their time in the country. One of those is Rob Shenton, a former major who has suffered from bouts of depression and PTSD, and served two tours in the country before he was medically discharged by the army in 2016 after 25 years, after a period of poor mental health. Five years into civilian life, the unexpected Taliban takeover in August prompted a fresh bout of soul-searching. “Deep down, it has affected me. I asked myself: was it worth all that effort, did it lead to my medical discharge?” he said. It has meant that this year, the 49-year-old veteran, a spokesman for the Help for Heroes charity, isn’t planning to attend the Cenotaph or any other parade on Sunday – and is calling on the public to think differently about who British veterans are today. “The number of world war two veterans is now diminishing. Today’s veterans are much younger, people who served in Iraq and Afghanistan; they could even be in their 20s. People who go to their local cenotaph should look around: there are going to be a few lost souls out there,” said Shenton, who served in the Engineering Corps. Charities reported a surge in contacts from Afghan veterans this summer as it became clear that the west’s former enemies in the country, the Taliban, were staging a high-speed takeover, culminating in the capture of Kabul. “My Afghanistan veteran patients are still fed up with the withdrawal,” said Dr Walter Busuttil, the director of research at Combat Stress, a charity that helps treat cases of PTSD. Many had now begun to come to terms with it, he said, but “the nature of the withdrawal will make remembrance this year even more difficult for some”. Shenton worked as a community liaison officer in Musa Qala, Helmand on one of his tours in 2008, where he saw “post-suicide-bomb incidents – images that will always stay with you”. The tour as a whole was full of moments that were “heart-stopping, heartbreaking, heart-rending”, he added. A particularly memorable episode involved Shenton arranging the transportation of the body of an Afghan whom they had worked with, who had been killed by the Taliban. “We made the decision to respect Islamic custom and ensure he could be buried before sundown,” he said, which required a helicopter to take the body to the family. “It was not a difficult decision, but it was a difficult period. At the end of the day, he was a friend. What I just remember is, as local people were putting the body into a coffin, one of them shook my hand and said thank you.” Shenton says he felt proud of the work that he did on that tour, working closely with Afghans, and the UK Foreign Office and Overseas Development Agency, engaged in post-conflict reconstruction, and arranging the employment of locals in rebuilding programmes. “We always knew there would be a withdrawal, as long ago as 2012. But the surprise was what happened afterwards in terms of the Taliban takeover,” Shenton added, saying the events prompted an intense discussion among Afghanistan veterans at home. “There were lots of different opinions. Some said we did our job, others felt a sense of total loss; many were somewhere in the middle ground. But we’ve got to honour those people that didn’t come back – the sacrifices can’t have been in vain,” he said. However, for Shenton, the aftermath of August’s messy retreat has meant he will not be at the Cenotaph in Whitehall, where he has previously represented the Help for Heroes charity on parade, or any other formal memorial service this year. Instead, the former soldier has chosen to take part in a veterans event at a military orienteering competition in Aldershot, where “I’ll be around the armed forces community, around people who understand. Because of what’s been in the news, it’s just different.”Olivia Colman’s husband has written his first TV drama, a true crime series starring his wife, and I have so many questions about this that she says she can bring him downstairs to join in if I like. Ah, the possibilities when interviewing someone over Zoom. “Eddy!” she shouts up the stairs, while I peer into their comfy sitting room, somewhere deep in the English countryside (period fireplace, bookshelves). “I’m slagging you off!” she shouts with glee at him, followed by a distant grunt. We carry on alone, accompanied only by one of their dogs, the excitable Alfred, Lord Waggyson, and a child who briefly pops into the room to a big grin from mum. Colman, blessed with the friendliest, giggliest face on British telly, familiar from so many hit shows, somehow feels as if she belongs in my home, as if we are already friends. This, as we will find out, is something of a problem now she’s an international megastar. Her fame comes not just from winning an Oscar for her role as the greedy, naughty Queen Anne in The Favourite (her viral acceptance speech began with: “Oh, it’s genuinely quite stressful. This is hilarious. Got an Oscar” and went on to: “I used to work as a cleaner and I loved that job. I did spend quite a lot of my time imagining this. Oh, please wrap up? Right. OK”). It’s also from playing our actual Queen in two series of The Crown; the wicked artist godmother in both series of Fleabag; and Sophie in Peep Show. She has also, more recently, had a further Oscar nomination for best supporting actress in The Father with Anthony Hopkins. This year she has Landscapers (the one written by her husband), as well as The Lost Daughter, directed by Maggie Gyllenhaal and based on Elena Ferrante’s novel, and a slew of other films ranging from period biopic The Electrical Life of Louis Wain to animated sci-fi comedy Ron’s Gone Wrong. When I ask her why she’s doing quite so much, she says something about “having to pay the mortgage”. How big can that mortgage be? Surely at that level of success, you can sit back and say no to everything but the five million quid gig, and pay off all your bills for ever? “Well that would be good!” she hoots. “Have you ever been an agent? Maybe we could …” she asks, wide-eyed. “God, yeah, imagine. A five million quid job!” Of course, she also takes all these roles “because I really love what I do. I would love to do slightly less in a year, but that would involve being paid different amounts. I’m not saying … you know, things are going really well. But if I stopped work, we wouldn’t last long.” Colman, her husband Ed Sinclair and their three children recently decamped from their south London terrace home to live more rurally, in a place where she can walk their dogs without having to talk to anyone. She doesn’t reveal where, but I know she remains fond of Norfolk, where she grew up. She is a hermit, “so I’m happy here. I like being able to be outside and no one can see me. I wear a woolly hat and I’m loving the mask thing.” She also takes a scarf to put over her face when others approach, clearly wary of people like me who think her friendly demeanour means she’s up for a new pal. She was out walking her dogs the other day and “there was a group of people coming, and I panicked and put my thing up. And this woman went,” Colman puts on a comically booming voice, “‘I do recognise you, Olivia!’ Well, don’t say anything then – I’m clearly trying to hide! What is wrong with everyone?” Americans are better at this, she says. “They’re ever so slightly classier than Brits about their actor people. They’re really nice. Sometimes in the UK, someone will literally hold a phone to my face; that has never happened to me in America. Over there, they’ll say, ‘Excuse me, may I take a photograph?’ And you say, ‘Oh well, thank you for asking so nicely!” But here most people don’t ask and I think that’s unspeakably rude and threatening.” She would never do it, she adds, then pauses to think whether this is true. “I’d do it to a squirrel,” she concedes. Still, at least she doesn’t have to do all the dog walks now, as Pockets, their Cypriot rescue dog, has taken to going alone – possibly in pursuit of nonconsensual squirrels. “Now she knows the area, people in the village bring her back to us. We’ve had to look at the fencing because she climbs trees and just fucks off!” *** Colman was born in Norwich and christened Sarah, but cheerily threatens to leave Zoom after I try calling her that: her stage name has become her real name. She was privately educated at Gresham’s School in Norfolk and later briefly attended a teacher training course. She soon dropped out but was able to use her student ID to get into Cambridge Footlights, where she met not only the earliest incarnation of Mitchell and Webb, with whom she would go on to co-star in Peep Show, but also her future husband Sinclair. He went on to attend Bristol Old Vic theatre school and she later copied him and applied – the irony being that her career would become the bigger one, though huge fame waited until now, her late 40s, which is, she says, so much better than if she had been 20. “I wouldn’t have coped at all. I got it late, when I already had my family. I don’t know how people cope with it young, and people who want to be famous, I don’t know what to say to them.” That crowning Oscars moment arrived the year before the pandemic took over, when red carpets were still full. It appeared to be the shock of her life. “It was bonkers,” she says. “You’re being swept along by people and you’re going: this can’t be happening. I think you go into self-preservation, emergency mode, because it’s too much to cope with. I only really remember it because I’ve seen it,” she says, explaining she had to watch it afterwards on YouTube like anyone else. Her husband told her it was the best night of his life, watching that happen to the person he loved. They had travelled out to LA as a family and borrowed a friend’s house outside the city, where the kids could watch the ceremony with their babysitter, away from the madness. “And she filmed them. That was a really beautiful thing that she did. Our youngest was far too young so didn’t have a clue what was going on, but the others were just going: wow! I remember seeing it through their eyes,” she says, looking rather wistful at the thought. Sinclair is no longer only the proud bystander in her life, now that Landscapers is to be screened on Sky (and HBO) in December. Having worked as as an actor and writer before, he always longed to create something for his wife to star in. Tyrannosaur, Paddy Considine’s incredibly powerful film in which she played a domestic abuse victim, really moved him, Colman explains, “but wasn’t seen by many people – which rather broke our hearts”. He wanted to write something with a similar degree of pathos, and after reading a 2014 article in Guardian Weekend magazine, about a couple imprisoned for the murder of the wife’s parents, an idea started to form. Susan and Christopher Edwards were sentenced to life in prison 16 years after the 1998 murders, having buried the bodies in the Nottinghamshire garden and gone to France. They lived a delusional, naive life based around Hollywood stars, buying movie memorabilia with the dead couple’s savings and pensions, while fraudulently claiming they were still alive. (The husband wrote a letter to Gérard Depardieu and was delighted when he wrote back, beginning a long correspondence. He found out only at their trial that his wife had been writing the letters all along.) Sinclair and Colman both felt the couple had been misunderstood, with Susan a victim of abuse all her childhood. I have seen the series and, although it makes for great telly and is beautifully presented, I sometimes struggled with how much of Colman’s natural charm comes through. She plays Susan as a quiet delight. I ask if this was intentional: of course it was. “Ed had written her sympathetically: that is how he felt about her. And I did feel her husband was her knight in shining armour who had taken her away from this horrible situation. The fact that she was abused as a child, didn’t seem to have had any clout – I think that would be different now. But even five or six years ago, it was sort of classed as: that was when you’re a child, but you murdered when you were an adult, so it doesn’t count. And he felt: why is no one taking that into consideration, because what an enormous thing to have to deal with? He doesn’t have any doubts that they did it. You have to do time for that. But there are women who have killed their husbands because they face a lifetime of violence and eventually you snap. It doesn’t mean you’re a bad person. It doesn’t mean you went out to kill people.” Colman hasn’t met the couple, but Sinclair has been in correspondence with them. “And he told them: this isn’t a turn-around-justice piece, you know, but I am interested in your story and and would you be willing to let me? And they were so eloquent and well-read and gentle in their musings, and in their writings, and they still talk about each other in such a loving way.” Did the newcomer have trouble getting the project made? “I have always read his writing and I have always known it was brilliant. And he lacked the courage to show people for a long time. What I love is that he then showed this and everyone went: oh my God, it’s amazing, and I was like, mwahaha, I told you … You know, he’s my biggest fan,” she adds, and there is such youth in her giggles after she says this, “and I’m his biggest fan, so he just wanted to make sure that … I don’t know, he just wanted to write something for me, which was lovely.” I wonder if this is why she is so widely loved by the public. It is rare to get to the middle of our lives and retain such immediate access to our sweetness. We block things off, we know too much, whereas Colman sometimes seems to know too little, though I wonder how much she is just messing around and making light of things. “I’m sorry, I don’t know what I’m talking about,” she will often say, after answering a question with perfect sense. But she also doesn’t waste time apologising. For example, she once appeared on The Graham Norton Show to promote a film and couldn’t remember her character’s name or much else about it. The audience were in stitches; she seemed delighted. I bring this up, tell her I would have apologised, called myself an idiot. She says she does get like that, too: “But I refuse to apologise for something I don’t know.” She wonders if this might be because she once had a maths teacher who explained something difficult to the class, asked if they understood, and Colman admitted she did not. “I didn’t have that sort of brain, for maths. But then a few other people said they didn’t get it either and the teacher said, ‘Oh OK, then that’s not your fault, that’s mine.’ From then on, I refused to pretend I knew.” *** In The Lost Daughter, Colman plays a celebrated academic, a translator of Dante, who comes unstuck as a mother. “And Maggie [Gyllenhaal, its director] is very well-read. I mean, I might have read lots of books, but I don’t retain the information,” Colman says, typically self-deprecating. “So she had to talk to me in a different way.” Gyllenhaal would be talking about the meaning of Dante, she adds, “and I’m more Jilly Cooper”. It is an utterly spellbinding film, and has been garlanded with praise at film festivals, pre-general release. I’m not surprised – it is largely set in a sultry Greek beach village, yet reveals, partly through younger flashbacks in which Colman’s character is played by Jessie Buckley, what happens when you start having bad days as the mother of small children, and when the bad days become most of the days. I have never seen maternal ambivalence shown on the screen like that before. Colman nods, very much in agreement. “There’s a sort of deal among people that we don’t talk about these things. And Elena Ferrante broke the deal, said it out loud. And Maggie thought: I’m feeling this. What if a whole cinema of people are feeling this? It’s amazing how many people have said thank you for putting it on screen and saying it out loud.” Ferrante said Gyllenhaal, whose interest had also been piqued by reading something the author wrote in the Guardian, could have the rights to the book only if she directed it herself, “or the deal was off. She made Maggie do it, not chicken out. I was so pleased, because she was amazing. And I watched with a load of my mum mates who had that, same as you, sort of, ‘Oof, I know that feeling.’ When you just want to be on your own.” There is an intriguing, quasi-sexual vibe between Colman’s character and Dakota Johnson’s; strangers, both mothers, though at different stages, who become acquainted on a beach holiday. The way the camera watches their encounters is loaded with ambiguity. “I mean, Dakota is breathtaking to look at,” Colman agrees. “So you do stare at her. Maggie would whisper to me, on set: ‘You can’t take your eyes off her. She’s so beautiful.’” I wonder how familiar that maternal ambivalence was to Colman personally. “Dakota laughed at me when we did interviews together. She said, ‘You never felt like that!’ And no,” Colman is hurriedly muttering now, “I didn’t really. But I don’t know anyone who didn’t have a little bit of postnatal depression. First baby, I found it absolutely shocking. And my mum had said, ‘Oh, having a baby is like shelling peas!’ In a bid to become a granny, I think. I was like, what?!” This is like when a couple of my friends told me giving birth would be just like bad period pains, I say. “Oh fuck off! Dump those mates straight away! How dare they? Only stick with honest friends. And I – the birth was quite traumatic and that sent me into a … I didn’t know what to do with myself. And I just felt like I wasn’t very good at being a mummy. And that lasted a while and,” she says rather more quietly, “I never want to have that feeling again.” She says it’s so innocuous, the way they call it the baby blues. “Mine lasted a bit longer. And I am a very happy person, but there are moments when your hormones are all over the shop. But then I fell in love with him, and I wasn’t scared of having more, because I thought: I can do this now. Nothing is as shocking the second time around … If I had my way I’d be on number six by now, and I would really rather they all just stayed within a metre radius of me. Ed is a little more level.” That close childhood bond is in marked contrast to the upbringing of her character in Landscapers. How does she handle the responsibility of depicting a real, living person? Colman says it was more stressful playing the Queen in The Crown. She “emoted” too much for the part, would cry at anything emotional, so had to wear a secret earpiece with the shipping forecast playing in it while she delivered her lines. All of that Tyne and Dogger kept her feelings on an even keel. “Playing the Queen was the most pressurised thing I’ve ever done. Because everyone goes: that’s not right.” Did she get that sort of backlash? “I don’t tend to read anything because I’m not very thick-skinned – so I don’t know. But we had amazing voice and hair and makeup departments – you’ve done half your job before you even step out of your van.” Turns out it wasn’t the actual Queen she found the hardest act to follow – it was Claire Foy, who had played the same character at a younger age in the earlier series. “I kept thinking, how would Claire Foy do this? “Oh shaddap,” she suddenly adds – the dog is barking. “I’m gonna put him in the kitchen,” she says, dispatching Alfred. It sounds bad in there. I ask if he’s committing a murder, but no: “Our lovely nanny has come back from the shop and he’s just letting everyone know.” I’m glad she admits to having a nanny and isn’t pretending she can manage without one. Colman’s insistently down-to-earth shtick is part of her appeal; it buys into the great British underdog-made-good tradition. But she is responding to her enormous fame in a perfectly reasonable way: with bafflement, excitement and wariness. Most of us would do the same, I think. But then, just as I make the mistake of thinking we’re buddies, she punctures the illusion. It’s what I’m drinking: earl grey, when she’s having a mug of Tetley’s. “Oh, you’ve ruined it. Earl grey! Eurgh.It’s nasty, like drinking water you’ve washed your hands in. “Oh Sophie,” she sighs, “and I thought we could be friends.” • Landscapers is on Sky Atlantic and Now on 7 December. The Lost Daughter will be in select cinemas from 17 December and on Netflix on 31 December. The Electrical Life of Louis Wain will be released on New Year’s Day.If you’re in a particularly strange mood can I recommend you watch the Robbie Savage documentary that is also a little bit about Macclesfield, Robbie Savage: Making Macclesfield FC (Saturday, 11pm, BBC One). Nominally it’s an hour-long documentary about Macclesfield FC, a phoenix club remade in the ashes of the wound-up Macclesfield Town FC, and how small towns need local clubs with big hearts as much as teams at the lower end of the footballing pyramid need the love of local fans. But mainly it’s about Robbie Savage, who is also there for some reason. Here he is, look, wearing an incredibly absurd pair of trousers, doing the crossbar challenge. Here he is again, interrupting the actual manager to give a ferociously bad team talk halfway through a game they are winning. He makes the camera operator turn round so we can see that he’s got chocolate on his hoodie. Robbie Savage, Robbie Savage, Robbie Savage. Savage is an interesting facet of British culture. As a professional footballer, he was a high-level player who played for middling teams and seemed to exist purely to collect yellow cards and annoy opposition fans. Since retiring he’s sort of carried on doing exactly that, somehow. As a broadcaster he lurches between court jester and wind-up merchant, and at some point you have to sit down and admit: the football ecosystem needs him. The sport itself is about wins and losses and goals. Supporting football is about the ether: who could do better, who could do worse, who is or isn’t out of their depth. Discussion needs conflict, and Savage is an infuriating lightning bolt of it. In this programme, however, he is just annoying. The rough format is this: last year, after mounting debts of more than half a million pounds, Macclesfield Town FC was wound-up after a court ruling, with its assets listed for sale on Rightmove. Local businessman Rob Smethurst bought the club and went about rebuilding it as Macclesfield FC, with a 3G pitch, a new stand, a two-floor gym and a bar that serves as a community hub, as well as an entirely new first team. For some reason he got Savage involved, because he lived nearby. This hour-long documentary is the story of the regeneration – or at least it would be if Savage would shut up. No documentary is without sin but Making Macclesfield FC veers toothlessly away from saying anything about the complications of taking over an institution that means so much to people who live in the town it’s in, and deciding to make Savage the director of football. Fans of a team they followed for decades had misgivings about the takeover, and fears that another uncaring owner might fall over the same hurdles that dogged the last administration. The closest we get to hearing their criticism here is an unfilmed town hall meeting where select quotes include Savage reading out tweets that call him a “wanker”. The documentary finds itself torn in two. On the one hand, it cannot resist the allure of old Razzle Dazzle Savage palling around with the less glamorous staff who run the club; on the other, every time it threatens to tell an actual story we get pulled back to the PR effort. We meet a father-son duo who were long-term fans of the old club and whose enduring support got them through a family catastrophe; we hear nothing about them again. We meet Macclesfield’s volunteer oddjob man Jimbo, the kind of what-needs-doing-I’ll-do-it bloke that lower-level football is built upon, but the most intriguing footage we see of him is interrupted by Savage. Without any players – and with a budget larger than any comparable team in the league – there are interesting stories to tell about start-from-nothing recruitment and the life of a travelling lower-league footballer. What we get is Savage in front of a whiteboard, laughing at a player who asked for a free gym pass in their contract. Making Macclesfield FC had a chance to be a fascinating look at the reality of running a lower-league club in a system that so heavily rewards the teams at the top. Instead it suffers – as every football fan in this country eventually has to – from Robbie Savage’s main character syndrome.The government’s planned cull of technical qualifications could prevent thousands of working-class students going to university to train to be nurses or work in health and social care, just as these professions are struggling with severe staff shortages, vice-chancellors say. New data from the university admissions service Ucas shows that this year more than 25,000 students who accepted places on social care degrees or subjects allied to medicine had studied a BTec, a qualification the government intends to drop as part of its new skills and post-16 education bill, to be debated in the House of Commons on Monday. Prof David Green, the vice-chancellor of Worcester University, said: “Withdrawing funding for BTecs could strangle a very important part of the recruitment stream for nursing and other health degrees. It could be a disaster, particularly for students from less affluent socio-economic backgrounds.” The Ucas figures include careers where there is a national shortage of staff, including nursing, midwifery and radiography. BTec students made up a third of the 74,000 students accepted in these disciplines before clearing in 2021. With plans to stop funding some BTecs as soon as 2023, university leaders say the move is rushed and ministers have not thought through the consequences for critical caring professions. Latest NHS figures show there are about 39,000 vacancies for registered nurses in England, with one in 10 nursing posts vacant on acute wards in London. The government wants to drop BTecs so that they do not conflict with its new T-level qualifications for technical subjects. Colleges, universities and unions are campaigning to keep BTecs going as a middle-ground option so students can choose. Prof Steve West, president of the vice-chancellors’ group Universities UK and head of the University of the West of England, said: “Many students do the health and social care BTec first. They go on to graduate and take up great jobs in the NHS and social care. We simply cannot afford to see that disrupted, given the shortages we are seeing in the workforce.” The Labour peer David Blunkett and the Conservative peer Kenneth Baker – former education secretaries from opposite sides of the political divide – attacked the move to defund BTecs as a “revolutionary policy” that the government was introducing “on the sly” rather than putting it on the face of the new bill. Writing for the Guardian, they said T-levels were suitable for students with the highest grades of GCSEs: 6–9. “They would be out of reach of those students with lower grades, who presently take up a broad and highly relevant employment-focused BTec.” Under the new plans, which focus on paring down the number of vocational courses on offer, 16-year-olds will choose either to study A-levels or train for a skilled job with T-levels, which include a three-month work placement. A new health T-level was launched in September. However, last year fewer than 1,300 students started studying for a T-level, compared with 250,000 young people who took a BTec national diploma. Universities say the marketing for the new health T-level does not mention careers such as nursing or midwifery. Dr John Cater, vice-chancellor of Edge Hill University in Lancashire, said: “T-levels are just coming into existence, while BTecs are being withdrawn. The transition is likely to be painful and slow. I worry that there is a generation of young people who could suffer while that transition takes place.” Cater said that BTecs, which are vocational but combine practical and academic training and can be taken alongside A-levels, were more likely to be chosen by students from poorer backgrounds. Jayna Goauder, who grew up in care and is now in the second year of a social work degree at Canterbury Christ Church University, says: “I loved doing my health and social care BTec. I went into classes and it all just came naturally, which confirmed to me that this is definitely what I want to do.” Goauder studied two A-levels as well, but says the coursework element of the BTec suited her better. “The BTec gave me a great base for my degree,” she says. “Why are they funnelling money, energy and time into changing qualifications which work and are accessible?” Sean Domingo, who grew up on the Isle of Man and is now in his second year training to be a nurse paramedic at Edge Hill University, says that without his health and social care BTec, which he started at the age of 23 after leaving school at 16, he would not have gone to university. He liked the mixture of practical and academic learning, and says the coursework assessment rather than exams suited him because he has dyslexia. “The majority of my class did BTecs, so without them you wouldn’t have 30 brand new nurse paramedics training on a pioneering course.” Research by the Social Market Foundation thinktank showed that 44% of white working-class students who go to university have studied at least one BTec, and 37% of black students who go have entirely BTec qualifications. Prof Rama Thirunamachandran, chair of the Million Plus group of modern universities and the vice-chancellor of Canterbury Christ Church University, said: “BTecs bring into the university system students who are talented and have the potential but perhaps don’t have the academic achievements as they aren’t in schools that are heavily geared towards A-levels.” He said the government should be giving T-levels time to “bed down”. A spokesperson for the Department for Education said the health T-level was created with employers, including the NHS, and would prepare students who wanted to study subjects at university including nursing and midwifery. “We are not abolishing all BTecs. We will be led by the evidence and will continue to fund BTecs or similar qualifications where there is a clear need for them and so that all young people have access to high-quality options. These could include health and social care qualifications that could be studied alongside A-levels.”Maria Sakkari is one of the best women’s tennis players in the world. That has been clear for a couple of years during her slow-burning 20s as, bit by bit, she steadily rose up the rankings and established herself at the top of the game. This week in Guadalajara, as she contests the WTA Finals as one of the elite eight, it is a simple fact. And yet, for the majority of her tennis career, that has not been the case. Although she and Stefanos Tsitsipas have become the first two top-10-ranked Greek tennis players, their success belies the fact that they have done so without the guidance, expertise or financial heft of a federation. “I was lucky to have parents like my parents because they invested a lot and I had zero support from federations or sponsors,” says Sakkari, whose mother, Angeliki Kanellopoulou, was once ranked No 43 in the world. “My father paid so much for me to play tennis and I’m very grateful for what he has done and they have both done in order for me to achieve my goals.” A result of treading her own path without outside help is that it has been uncommonly long. Sakkari, now 26, was unremarkable as a junior player, reaching a career high of only 203. When she decided to pursue her career as a professional, she initially gave herself two years just to see how things would go. If she didn’t succeed, she already had an alternative route in mind: “I was thinking of maybe going to college or studying something in Greece.” In time she eventually transitioned to the ITF pro circuit, the lowest rungs of professional tennis, and she would see many of the far more successful junior players, with all of their sponsors and hype, also trying to reach the top of the game: “They were so far away,” she says. “They were so much better. I could clearly see that they were another level.” Looking back to those days and seeing how she has overtaken some of them is an understandable source of satisfaction for Sakkari. She cites Aryna Sabalenka, career high junior ranking of 225, as another player who defied convention: “Seeing these players now, I don’t want to sound arrogant, but at the moment being the better player than some of them, it proves … you can tell many juniors that you don’t have to be a top junior to make it to the top.” The progress from there was slow but constant. At 18 in 2013, she moved from Greece to Barcelona by herself which “made me realise that I have to live my own life, just take my decisions for myself”. She made her grand slam debut aged 20 at the 2015 US Open, qualifying at her first attempt. After building her game with Thomas Johansson, the 2002 Australian Open champion, she settled on a 23-year-old British former hitting partner called Tom Hill as her coach in 2018. She reached the top 20 only last year. Tennis players often dip into the same pool of inexperienced coaches who move from one camp to the next, but her unusual choice has turned out to be an inspired one. Sakkari and Hill are the same age and they have grown and improved together, with both determined to test each other’s limits on the court and then enjoy themselves away from it: “It’s nice to have someone your age who really understands you and really supports your decisions,” she says. Although her improvements have been constant, this year has been her true breakthrough. Sakkari has always been chiselled and strong, such a supreme athlete that during lockdown she considered competing in the Greek national athletics championships with her 100m personal best of 12.7 (without spikes) just to amuse herself, and she plays an extremely physical style. But now she uses her athleticism in order to play more attacking tennis. Most notably, her serve has dramatically transformed from a decent but inconsistent delivery to her defining weapon. Still, Sakkari says her mental transformation, and her management of the “negative thoughts”, has been her biggest change. “Being deadly honest, I’m working with a specialist,” she says. “I’m not hiding it from anyone. It’s probably one of the best gifts I’ve ever given to myself because that improved me as a person and it improved me as a player as well. It’s the best thing in that part of my career, it was my turning point and it definitely was one thing that I will never regret.” All of that mental work was particularly tested at the French Open when she reached her first slam semi-final and held match point before a heartbreaking loss to Barbora Krejcikova. Shortly after the most crushing defeat of her life, she delivered one of the most memorable press conferences of the year: “I have to be deadly honest,” she said. “I got stressed, starting thinking that I’m a point away from being in the final. I guess it’s a rookie mistake.” She concluded if she was in that position again then she would know what to do. “It was clearly a tough loss in Paris,” she says. “It really disappointed me because I could see I was one point away from making the final. That took me a little bit of time to get back on track.” For some players, it would have taken a lot of time to get back on track. Instead, she worked with her psychologist, she found her way by the end of summer and she reached a second slam semi-final, at the US Open, beating three top 10 seeds in a row, but losing to Emma Raducanu. She showed she could achieve a run of big results that would eventually secure her a spot in the WTA Finals. “I knew that I could do it but I told myself that I’m capable of doing it [this year],” she says. “It came this year, which is great.” On Thursday, Sakkari, the fourth seed, contested her first match in Mexico, outplaying Iga Swiatek 6-2, 6-4. Proof of her improved first serve came with her winning 26 out of 27 points on it in the whole match. With every year of her career since her professional journey began in 2011, Sakkari has improved her ranking and she has gradually risen to the top of the sport. Now that she is there, she only wants more.At this point, the most surprising thing about New Zealand making it to the T20 World Cup final is that anyone is still surprised by it at all. This is the team that reached the final of the 2015 World Cup, the final of the 2019 World Cup (which they lost, of course, because of a clause in the small print), who won the inaugural World Test Championship, and who are currently ranked as the best side in the world in Test and ODI cricket. For the past five years, they’ve been the best, and most effective, all-format team in the sport. And yet, flick back three weeks to the tournament previews and you’ll find that they were sixth in the betting. India were favourites, then England, Pakistan, Australia, South Africa and New Zealand. Given the way we all talk about them, “and New Zealand” is maybe what they ought to rename the side. Always an afterthought, everybody’s second favourites. The New Zealanders, you guess, are perfectly happy with that. There used to be a theory, back in the 2000s, when the All Blacks always blew up in the knockout rounds of the Rugby World Cup, that the team couldn’t handle the pressure that came with being favourites. It’s not a problem the Black Caps have had to worry about, even while they’ve been beating everyone else so often. They haven’t only turned themselves into the best team in the world, they’ve somehow done it without anyone else really even noticing it was happening. They’re elaborately camouflaged, a ruthlessly efficient team masquerading as a scrappy bunch of underdogs from the world’s boondocks. They’re a World XI who make out as if they’re Ilford Seconds. Which is why there’s precious little point asking them exactly how they’ve gone about this transformation (I’ve tried, repeatedly), because a proper answer would blow their cover and sound uncomfortably like bragging. If you ask their senior players, they will talk about the team culture, about a set of values shaped by Brendon McCullum when he was captain. They will mention the strength of their domestic set-up, and the quality of the pitches they play on, and at the end of it you will be left with no real idea how a country which, according to the board’s latest reports, has only 68,383 registered players and about half as much money as Virat Kohli owns, has turned out a team who can consistently beat the bigger and better resourced sides. You’d have had more luck asking Arkle to explain why he can run so fast. From this distance, it seems that at least half those 68,383 are apparently capable of biffing a few sixes and bowling a tidy over or two, another quarter of them can keep wicket too, a large part of the rest bowl swing and seam at about 85mph, and the other one is Kane Williamson. This is a team who have been playing Daryl Mitchell, a bloke who has never opened in professional cricket, at the top of the order, who lost one fast bowler, Lockie Ferguson, and were able to replace him with another in Adam Milne, while they left a third, Kyle Jamieson, on the bench. They couldn’t even fit Finn Allen, Ross Taylor and Colin de Grandhomme into the squad. New Zealand, who have one of the smallest pools of professional players in the world game, still have enviable strength in depth. And they’ll need it, now that Devon Conway had to pull out of the final because he broke his hand when he punched his bat after he got out against England the other night (“It’s not the smartest thing he’s ever done,” said head coach, Gary Stead). Conway is a big loss, at a bad time. Because there is, of course, one thing missing in this picture. As Jimmy Neesham said when he was asked why he refused to celebrate after the team won their semi-final, “The job’s not done yet”. New Zealand may have won the World Test championship, but they’ve never won an international tournament in white ball cricket. And if that wasn’t enough pressure already, it would have to be Australia who are in their way again this time. This is, to use the new cliche, not a “match-up” that much suits them. The New Zealand government’s own history website describes the rivalry with Australia as like one with “an older sibling who haven’t always taken us seriously”. The Australians waited 16 years before playing New Zealand in a one-off Test, beat them by an innings and 103 runs in one and a half days, then (come back when you’ve grown up) refused to play them again for another 27 years. In all, New Zealand have played Australia 212 times across the three formats, and beaten them in only 51, which is their worst win/loss record against any team in international cricket. It hasn’t been much better in the past five years either, when Australia have beaten them in five out of five Tests, six out of 11 ODIs and five out of nine T20s. Last time they met in a final, in the 50-over World Cup in 2015, Australia marmalised them. This is one fixture where playing the underdog doesn’t seem to pay off. Which might be why it’s time for New Zealand to admit that, given everything else they’ve achieved recently, they ought to be the favourites to win it.One evening last summer, I was running through a damp field on my farm in Vermont with my 10-year-old and a passel of dogs. We were barefoot and laughing. Suddenly, my daughter turned to me with a serious look in her eyes. “I didn’t realize things were going to get so bad so soon,” she said. “What things?” I asked. Was she thinking about the heatwave in Vermont, forest fires in California or the pandemic? “Climate change,” she said, staring hard at me. “It’s bad, isn’t it?” Lately, when my daughters begin the sentence “when I have children … ” my chest aches. I know they can live fulfilling lives without traditional parenthood, but I wish them a future where they have options – one that I suspect is moving quickly out of reach. Some models predict significant global ecological and environmental collapse by 2040 – within my lifetime, as well as my children’s. It’s not only my children seeking honest answers and advice. Just before the pandemic, two students entered my office and professed they no longer felt it wise to have children. Recent polling reveals that four in 10 young people are “hesitant to have children as a result of the climate crisis” and “fear that governments are doing too little to prevent climate catastrophe”. Each of my students asked: What would you do? Are we prepared to answer these questions honestly for the ones we love and advise? Moreover, should we? As a mother of two, my decision – fraught even 13 years ago – has already been made. My challenge now is to help my children process reality in an age-appropriate way, and prepare for it. ••• Last week, my eldest daughter was flipping blueberry pancakes. “Mom,” she said. “I just read an article that says anyone under 40 will have a hard life because of climate change. Is that true?” “I think it will be hard,” I said, choosing my words carefully. “But we’ll continue to find beauty in the world, and help others.” My daughter returned to her pancakes. I felt sick. This is the first year I’ve had to witness my daughters’ fear of the future. I respect them too much to obfuscate the truth: the world is becoming increasingly warm, volatile and inequitable. Research indicates we have a mere decade left to address climate change in “an unprecedented, transformational way” in order to avoid global catastrophe. Young people are already calculating how much suffering they will witness or bear themselves, and what this means for their futures, particularly with regards to child-bearing. “I do feel like this is something that’s been discussed a fair amount in circles I run in,” my former student Mollie, 22, shared with me via email. “Especially when conversations turn more pessimistic. Someone usually says, ‘I don’t even want to have kids’ or ‘the next generation is totally fucked; we can’t have kids.’ This conversation often leaves me angry and unsettled, because it forces me to wrap my mind around something completely unfathomable at the moment: what is our earth going to look like in 2050, when I might have kids trying to start lives of their own? Would it be unethical to bring someone into that world, however it may look?” My former research assistant Ellie, 23, agrees. “I hope it doesn’t sound melodramatic to say that I’m deeply afraid of the things I’ll see in my lifetime. Even if humanity gets its act together, I can’t imagine what my kids would see in theirs.” ••• Whether or not to procreate is an extremely controversial question, and another example of how climate scrutiny often falls upon individual actions, when it’s the governmental and capitalist systems that have made life on the planet untenable. It’s abhorrent that the burden of environmental collapse falls first on the shoulders of young people and the global south, when oil corporations and countries like the United States carry an outsized responsibility for the crisis. And yet our planet’s resources are straining under the global population, which is approaching eight billion. Many climate activists avoid mentioning childbirth because of its association with population control and eugenics. “The conversation is often reductive and racist,” farmer and environmental sociologist Dr Isaac Leslie told me on a call. “White people too often blame Black and Brown women for having children when the issue isn’t population – it is consumption. Consumption is what’s linked to environmental destruction. The conversation should be about capitalism and climate change, not about controlling the bodies of people who give birth.” The Center for Biological Diversity notes on their population growth page: “Under current conditions, a child born in the US will be responsible for almost seven times the carbon emissions of a child born in China, and 168 times the impact of a child born in Bangladesh.” Children born into poverty are not driving the climate crisis, but they will suffer its impact in an outsized way. Dr Jaya Tiwari, the vice-president of Boma Project, an NGO focused on graduating women from extreme poverty in the face of climate change, has witnessed the inequities of child-rearing first-hand. She made personal decisions accordingly. “As someone growing up in India”, she told me, “the second most populous country in the world – and as someone who has devoted a majority of her professional life to working on development issues in the dry lands of Africa, and in regions that sit at the intersection of poverty, gender inequality and climate change – I agonized about the question of motherhood and what my choice to have a child meant for myself, my family and my planet. The fact that we ended up with an only child is an indication of where I ultimately landed.” Given the increasing impact and risk of childbirth, it’s imperative that people who give birth have absolute control over their bodies and unfettered access to reproductive healthcare. “The vortex of poverty, the lack of access to education and reproductive rights, the struggle for resources and continued climate pressure creates a cycle that feeds upon itself,” Tiwari tells me. “We have indisputable global evidence that education for girls correlates to having fewer children and living healthier lives.” According to Project Drawdown, a non-profit focused on data-driven climate solutions, increased family planning and education of women “could prevent 120 gigatons of greenhouse gases by 2050 – more than on- and offshore wind combined.” When relatively privileged individuals consider childbirth, they imagine avoiding the nightmarish scenarios many parents are already living. More than 100,000 children have been born in refugee camps in Myanmar and in Bangladesh’s Cox’s Bazar, the largest refugee settlement in the world, which is vulnerable to extreme flooding and landslides. “We often talk tongue-in-cheek about the apocalypse”, Leslie told me. “Society and humanity will continue, but the question is what gross inequalities will continue with it.” ••• To be clear, I fundamentally believe it’s unethical to interfere with reproductive choices at the individual level. Plus, families largely make emotional decisions, not data-driven ones. My students, while fearful, also express hope that we might leverage technology and legislation to turn things around. George, 23, told me via email that “as someone who just spent his entire summer outside with kids, I still definitely want children. I think I will have to see how climate legislation evolves in the next five years to make the call whether or not they are biologically mine – because I’m certainly anxious about bringing a child into calamity.” I would offer these points of deliberation for someone considering having a child: Connect deeply with your reasoning for bringing a child into the world Look at the predictive modeling for climate change scenarios in your area and visualize yourself raising a child within them, noting your ability to withstand risk Be willing to have a difficult and honest conversation with your partner about family planning and domestic labor Imagine helping your future children build the psychological, physical and financial resilience they might need to endure the challenges ahead Consider additional ways to nurture lives and build climate resilient communities Younger generations are often more progressive about the notion of building families. My student Ellie wrote, “While I don’t believe the changes we’re seeing have to signify end-of-days, I do believe there are incredibly thoughtful solutions at hand which – if we can pull them off – would bring about a world I’d very much want to have children in. But I also think my generation may have found itself at a unique moment in which more people isn’t the answer, and alternatives like adoption represent more eco- and ultimately, human-conscious choices.” Queer communities present thoughtful models potential parents can learn from. Leslie tells me they spent years letting go of the idea of having biological children and grieving it. “Queerness and climate intersect in the talk about children,” Leslie said, noting possible plans to create a family through fostering, and building space for queer community on a farm with their partner, Wichie. “It’s hard to separate what we really want from what we’ve been socialized to think we need to be happy,” Leslie says. “Now that I’ve seen what chosen family can be, I’m no longer attached to the concept of biological family.” “Climate resilience is community resilience,” Leslie’s partner, Wichie, tells me. “We understand that we’re preparing for the future. We’ll teach our children how to grow food and think about the betterment of their communities.” As mentors, friends, and parents of younger generations, many of us must be willing to listen and engage in meaningful conversations about climate pressure and child rearing. I suggest the following tips: Do not direct the conversation solely at women; talk about child-rearing in a way that honors and invites contributions from men, queer and nonbinary parents, and other caregivers Do not reduce the procreation conversation to platitudes. We will not help someone we love by practicing oppressive optimism about the future, bludgeoning them with doomsday scenarios or pushing old agendas Allow for grief and anger. Older generations have helped create an unfair and terrifying future Do not center the argument on labor shortages, nationalist concepts, or putting more of a particular political party into the world; child rearing is a powerful individual decision If you have accumulated wealth, consider what support you’d be willing to offer families in your community or in regions of the world suffering because of climate pressure and displacement Conversations about procreation are sometimes less about parenting logistics, and ultimately more about the health and promise of the future – and how we will care for one another as things get harder. “Despairing is easy,” Leslie said to me, “and it’s offensive. You have to believe that there is some sort of joyful future ahead. In queer culture, we have always celebrated sex and life amidst death. We can hold these things together. People are creative; as a Jew in the diaspora, I think about this all the time. Marginalized communities still carry the spirit and strategies of their chosen families and ancestors. Social connection and joy are part of building resilient communities.” When my daughters ask me again if they should have children, I will be inclined to say no. Instead, I will say: I leave that decision up to you, but you will want to be intentional, and consider how you are participating in a resilient community. Ultimately, I will do my best to listen.Jon Ronson and Adam Curtis became friends in the late 1990s, having bonded over their shared interests in power, society and the stories we tell about ourselves. Curtis, 66, is a Bafta-winning documentary film-maker whose credits include The Power of Nightmares: The Rise of the Politics of Fear and HyperNormalisation. His most recent six-part series, Can’t Get You Out of My Head, draws on the history of psychology and politics to show how we got to where we are today. Ronson, 54, is a US-based Welsh writer and journalist whose books include 2015’s So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed, about social media brutality and the history of public shaming. In recent years, Ronson has turned to podcasting, investigating the porn industry in The Butterfly Effect and its follow-up The Last Days of August. His forthcoming BBC podcast, Things Fell Apart, is about the roots of the culture wars and the ways the present is echoed in the past. Over eight episodes, he talks to individuals caught up in ideological conflicts, conspiracy theories and moral panics. These include Alice Moore, the wife of a fundamentalist minister and unexpected culture war instigator who campaigned to remove textbooks containing liberal material from schools, and Kelly Michaels, a daycare worker and victim of the “satanic panic” who was wrongfully imprisoned in 1988 by a New Jersey court for child abuse (the verdict was overturned in 1993). We are on: Curtis is talking from his office in London while Ronson is at home in New York. By way of preparation before their chat, Curtis has binged on Ronson’s new series. No sooner are cameras switched on than the reminiscences begin. Jon Ronson Do you remember that time we went to an auction of [the late Romanian dictator Nicolae] Ceaușescu’s belongings? Adam Curtis Yes, now that was exciting. JR It was. We went on a minibreak to Romania together. AC I bought Ceaușescu’s cap, and a pair of socks. JR I also got a pair of socks. There was some very heavy bidding from a mysterious gentleman who got all the ornaments. The prices were getting pretty high so I stuck with the socks. I don’t even know where they are now. I bet you know where your stuff is. AC I do, actually. JR We have had many conversations over the years and generally I find I’m asking you questions because I’m trying to get ideas. I always think of you as a fantastic source of insights into the future. In the early days of social media, you were the very first person to say to me: “Don’t think of this as a utopia. There are some problems here.” There are two or three people in my life where, when they talk, I really want to listen to what they have to say, and you are one of those. AC That is completely not true. What actually happens is that I bollock on about theories which you completely ignore and then you go off on your stories. Anyway, I’m trying to remember when we actually met. JR I think the first time I met you was when I made the [1997] documentary Tottenham Ayatollah and you came to the screening. AC And your wife Elaine invited me to meet you in a cafe off Tottenham Court Road. She said: “Can you come and talk to him? Then you could take some of the pressure off me by talking about his film.” JR She probably said: “I can’t take it any more. He won’t stop agonising.” AC But when we met you didn’t agonise at all. I think what we recognised in each other – and it’s been the professional bond between us – is that we’re both interested in what happens outside those normal areas that most political journalists examine that involve politics and power. We want to look at things like psychology and how a conspiracy theory plays out and how feelings work through society. JR I’m really surprised at how frequently the things that we tell stories about overlap. But the way we go about it is so different. I think your brain works better thinking about theories and my brain works better thinking about stories. AC I think you and I are creatures of our time. I got interested in this idea that power now works not through traditional forms but through the idea of individualism; it says you should be allowed to do what you want to do, but we will serve you to get that. You and I both know what it’s like to be an obsessive individualist, but we’ve become intrigued by how that plays out in a society in which you’ve got lots of people wanting to be individuals. I’ve always had this theory that self-expression is the conformity of our age. The most radical thing you can do is something extraordinary like walking naked around the world, and not tell anyone that you’ve done it. You can’t post anything online. When you say that to people, they can’t conceive of it. JR I really like that idea. AC The other thing that we both do when we’re interviewing people is not follow a list of questions. You go into a situation where you have questions in your head but suddenly they’ll say something which is either funny or unexpected and you just learn to go with it. It’s like suddenly a little piglet swerves off from the herd, and you go with it up and over the hill. JR One positive thing that has been said about what I do is that there’s a sincerity to it. I never go into something with an idea of how it will turn out. AC We’re talking about sincerity? Don’t go there, Jon! You’ll be writing poems next. JR [Laughs] Well it’s really to do with trying to figure out what I think from my research without being told what to think by other people. I think people appreciate the fact that I’ve worked hard to come to the thoughts I’ve come to. AC Yes, I agree with that. JR I guess what we have in common is we’re not ideologues. We don’t go into a situation with a set of agendas. We’re more willing to be a twig in the river of the story and just go where it takes us. By doing that we’re forced to keep an open mind. I don’t even have a list of questions in my head when I’m interviewing somebody. I’m literally a tightrope walker with no safety net, and I have, on many occasions, plummeted to my death like in Squid Game. AC I think that open-mindedness is clear in your podcast. And it’s absolutely the right time to examine the roots of what we’re calling the culture wars, which is such a difficult and sensitive area. So much journalism, when it goes back into the past to see why something happened, always interviews the people who are defined as the actors, the people who consciously set out to [create conflict]. What I’m increasingly intrigued by is the people who were acted upon by that thing or idea. Because the way ideas or concepts play out in society are never the way that the people who started them think. What you’ve done in these programmes is follow individuals who are acted upon by these forces, because it shows you the real dimensions of what these things called culture wars are. JR Well, I realised that I would watch people become overconsumed by these cultural conflicts, to the extent that it was impacting their mental health and tearing families apart. But every show that’s about the culture ends up a part of the culture wars, and I didn’t want to do that. So I thought the way to do it was by focusing on a moment and a human story and tell that story in as unexpected a way as possible. In the end we found eight stories about the complexity of human life and they all happen to be origin stories. These are the pebbles being thrown in the pond and creating these ripples. AC Yes, these people have got caught up in the great tides of history that have come sweeping over them. It feels real. If you follow people who are acted upon, you start to understand, in a much more sympathetic way, why people do things that you might not like or approve of. You see how someone is led to something, with no idea of the consequences. In the first two episodes, you talk about how the evangelical movement up until the early 1970s had been completely detached from any involvement in the moral, political or social questions of American society. And what you trace is how two people got sucked into a particular issue, which then acted like a fuse to reawaken the evangelical movement. JR For decades the Christian right were silent: they consumed their own media, they went to their own churches and they listened to their own radio shows, and they were totally unengaged with what was happening. But then a few things happened that finally galvanised them into becoming soldiers in a culture war, and one was a new diversity of thought in school textbooks. In the series I talk to Alice Moore, who is in her 80s now and was one of the earliest cultural warriors for the evangelical right. She was a church minister’s wife in West Virginia who discovered there was going to be a new sex education lesson taught in schools, and she wasn’t having that. So she got on to the school board, and then the new curriculum arrived in 1974 that was full of all these multicultural voices, and things got so heated over just one semester that school buses were shot at – in fact, shots were fired from both sides – and a school was bombed. And I discovered while talking to Alice that one of the reasons for the intensity of the anger was a misinterpretation of a poem [that appeared in one of the new school textbooks]. AC By Roger McGough! JR Yes. It was a poem [1967’s At Lunchtime: A Story of Love] that featured a spontaneous orgy that takes place on a bus, because the passengers thought the world was about to end at lunchtime in a nuclear war. So Alice was reading out this poem to me and I was thinking: “I don’t think this is in favour of spontaneous orgies on buses. I think this poet is agreeing with you, to an extent.” So then I went off to talk to Roger about it. AC And then you went back to Alice, and she was quite grumpy about it, which was funny. But I think this is a beautiful example of what we were talking about. As I was listening to that episode I was thinking: “Hang on, this isn’t quite as bad as she thinks it is.” And then, Jon’s brain is thinking the same thing, but without judgment. JR I like to steer clear of conflict as much as I can. AC Which is good and also rare. Most people would pursue her with their agenda. Right now, everyone is judged as either being good or bad. It’s good versus evil – that’s where journalism has got to now. But yours doesn’t do that. JR I’m interested in everybody as a human being and I’m quite startled by the myriad examples of the media being a part of the culture wars. It seems to happen everywhere, this mistelling of a story so it fits into a particular ideology a little more clearly. It happens on all sides. I get very disheartened when CNN lies to me or is biased or omits certain aspects of the truth to tell a certain version of the story. During the Trump years I really felt that with CNN. I felt like I was in QAnon and my Q was Anderson Cooper. AC I would read the New York Times all about the close friendship between Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump. And I know enough Russian journalists who I trust to know that it’s just complete rubbish. So hysteria happened on both sides. I mean if you go back over reports even from my own organisation, the BBC, about how Trump was actually an agent of Putin, it’s extraordinary. It’s a conspiracy theory. That’s as much of a panic as anything else you get on the right. JR I also think a lot of journalists are, like: “Oh my God. All this time I’ve just been a liberal but look at these things that are happening: Trump’s election, George Floyd.” So they think it’s not enough to be a liberal journalist, they have to be an activist journalist. And I think it’s completely understandable and, in some cases, it’s a great thing. But then in other cases, it’s really troublesome because journalism now has pre-existing ideologies. AC And then journalism lifts off from Planet Real and goes off into the realms of histrionic personality disorder. I actually think histrionic personality disorder describes most of the progressive classes in western societies, in that they’ve given up on their progressivism and retreated into a histrionic attitude to the world. JR I do think these stories tell us an awful lot about the way we live our lives today. In the satanic panic episode, which is about moral panics in the 1980s, you think it’s going to be about the parallels today with QAnon. But it becomes clear that there are also parallels with the panics on the left today, and that we all have these cognitive biases. I tell this story in which daycare workers are being accused of satanic activity, which clearly never happened, and where people actually went to jail. Suddenly it wasn’t just the Christian right worried about satanic cults at the end of your street, but mainstream America. When the flame is burning hot, we can all act in irrational, brutal or inhuman ways, and you see it across the spectrum. AC The series did make me think: how has this happened? Not just the culture wars but their ferocity. And where is the escape hatch? Because I think all sides now feel that there’s something not quite right. If you examine the years since Trump and Brexit, there has been this enormous hysteria in newspapers and on television about it. But actually the politicians have done nothing to change society. It’s almost been like a frozen world. So, I think the real answer to why this is happening is because politics has failed. It’s become this dead area, this desert surrounded by thinktanks, and someone’s got to get in there and regenerate it. The new politics is waiting to come. And I think it will happen. Jon Ronson’s Things Fell Apart continues Tuesday, 9am Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. It will be available in the US and Canada exclusively on BBC Podcasts Premium on Apple Podcasts. Adam Curtis’s Can’t Get You Out of My Head is on BBC iPlayer.* solutions defined by links to their clue number Across 9 overusing cOVER US IN Garments (hidden) 10 ulcer hellfiRE CLUb (hidden rev) 11 e-book (timb)E(r) + BOOK 12 in the know NO in WHEN KIT (anag) 13 ladette D(ay) in LA(y)ETTE 14 tea urns NATURE’S (anag) 17 Somme SOM  E 19* … odd 0 + D/D [odd number] 20* … score COR! in S(ancerr)E 21 adjusts A(merican)/D  USTS 22 Camelot C  OT 24 peroxides PE + R  IDES 26 tonic TO/NIC(k) 28 ultra ART (rev) after (c)UL(t) 29 at a low ebb double def Down 1* … sole SOL (Latin sun) + (performanc)E 2* … second SE  ND 3* … Musketeers (Elon)MUSK + TEE in ER’S 4 simile S&lt;1&gt;MILE 5 agitated AG  ATE + D(emocrat) 6* … June JUNE(a/u) 7 scenario A SCORE IN (anag) 8* … crew RE in WC (rev) 13 Lassa L  A 15* … Assumption ASS/(g)UMPTION [RC feast held on 15 August since 1950] 16* sweet S  T 18* … majority MAJOR + 1/T(or)Y 19 obsidian O(ld) + I (current) in BAND IS (anag) 22 casual AS/U in CAL(ifornia) 23 lender LE(a)NDER 24 pout P/OUT 25* … Xmas 25/12 27* … cube CU  EA third draft of the outcome of the Cop26 climate summit retained key resolutions to pursue greenhouse gas emissions cuts in line with holding global temperature rises to 1.5C. Nations will be asked to return next year to strengthen their targets on emissions cuts, which are so far inadequate, and to accelerate the phase-out of coal power and fossil fuel subsidies. The text was not substantially weakened overnight, but there is a long process still to go through on Saturday, and perhaps Sunday, in which some countries are likely to attack some of the key provisions. The text of what the UK hosts said should be the final draft of the outcome of the Cop26 climate summit was released in Glasgow at about 9am on Saturday. Delegates will pore over the decision until noon, when they will be asked for their reactions in a “stocktake”, after which the presidency will seek to move quickly to a final session at which the decisions can be adopted. The final stages of the process will last at least until Saturday afternoon, and could stretch on much longer. Bob Ward, policy and communications director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics and Political Science, said: “This text is still pretty good and one I hope that all countries can embrace. It continues to request countries to deliver more ambitious pledges next year. “Countries will leave Glasgow painfully aware that collectively current pledges for emissions cuts by 2030 are not ambitious enough. They are not aligned with the goal of the Paris agreement of holding the rise in warming to well below 2C degrees, and to pursue efforts to limit it to 1.5C. The draft text also still calls on all countries to accelerate efforts towards the phase-out of unabated coal power and inefficient fossil fuel subsidies. “Importantly, the UK presidency has now published draft text that outlines a good process for agreeing a significant increase in investment in developing countries to help them make their economies zero-carbon and climate-resilient. It is time for countries to stop arguing over the text and to start taking the action that has been promised, particularly to increase the flows of financial support to developing countries.” The mood of the talks has been generally characterised as constructive, though some nations have sought to water down agreements on seeking to phase out fossil fuels and limit global heating to 1.5C above pre industrial levels. Developing countries also want further assurances on climate finance, needed to help them cope with the impacts of extreme weather, and loss and damage, which refers to climate-related catastrophes. The cover decision is the key outcome of the talks, outlining how countries will seek to fulfil the aims of the 2015 Paris agreement and limit greenhouse gas emissions. It was one of a raft of documents released on related issues such as adaptation to the impacts of climate breakdown, finance and some of the technical aspects of the Paris agreement, such as carbon trading. Current national plans – known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs) – would lead to 2.4C of heating, according to an analysis this week by Climate Action Tracker. Countries are expected to return with better pledges in 2025, under the Paris agreement, but many are now demanding the deadline should be brought forward. This is seen as the most closely fought area of disagreement as the UK hosts struggle to broker a deal. Since the Paris agreement was signed, binding countries to limit temperature rises “well below” 2C above pre-industrial levels while “pursuing efforts” to a 1.5C limit, new science has shown that breaching the 1.5C threshold would lead to disastrous impacts, some irreversible, including the inundation of many low-lying areas. Heating has now reached 1.1C, and extreme weather is already taking hold around the world. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has said emissions must be cut by 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 levels to stay within 1.5C.To be paid $25,000 to show up to an event was the most ridiculous thing I’d ever heard. In 2014 my manager at the time, Evan, informed me that the billionaire financier behind The Wolf of Wall Street was offering to pay me that much to go to the Super Bowl with him. He explained that this person, Jho Low, “just liked to have famous men and women around” and there would be other celebrities going too. “He’s just one of those insanely rich guys from Asia.” Jho Low’s fortune came from family money, Evan said. “I’m sure Leo will be there, and a bunch of other people you’ll know, or, er, recognize. You know their movie is up for five Academy Awards next month?” “I don’t have to, like, do anything specific, right?” I asked. Was being at the Super Bowl my only task or was there some other more covert expectation? Evan told me he’d insisted that he accompany me, “Just to make sure you feel comfortable.” I knew Evan was coming along as a chaperone; but what he was protecting me from exactly, I wasn’t sure. The money, of which he got a 10% commission, would be wired ahead of time. I’d never cared about football, but my father did. When I told him I was going, he yelped, “Ah, Emily! I’m so jealous!” We’d been instructed to meet at the Plaza, where we were directed immediately on to a bus. Evan had been right about the other guests: there were two famous models, one known for her recent appearance on the cover of Sports Illustrated’s swimsuit edition and the other for her stint as a Victoria’s Secret Angel. There were a few male actors, accompanied by their posses. The rest of the group seemed to work for Jho Low. He boarded last. I was surprised by how young he looked in person, younger than 31. As his short, pudgy frame moved down the aisle, Evan jumped up to introduce me. Was it part of the job to act excited? I mustered some enthusiasm. “Thanks so much for having me,” I offered, smiling up at him. “Yeah, yeah, sure, sure.” He nodded and grinned distractedly before taking a seat in the back. Several police cars and motorcycles appeared, surrounding the bus. Evan explained that we were being escorted to the stadium to avoid traffic. “The city shuts down an avenue so that people who can afford it get this treatment.” He chuckled, shaking his head. “Nuts, right?” As an adolescent, wealth was an abstract concept to me. I was not yet able to grasp the difference between rich fathers from my hometown and billionaires like Jho Low. To me, rich was just rich. I started making my own money at 14. I thought it important to never be indebted to anyone. In high school, I once paid for a date with a boy I wasn’t interested in, just to ensure that I wouldn’t have to go out with him again or, my worst fear, owe him something sexually. Paying made me feel that I was in control. *** When I moved to LA and started working full-time, there was a girl who had a look similar to mine. Even though we were both 19, I felt older than Isabella. She was soft-spoken and timid. We’d see each other at castings, where we bonded over the loneliness of living in a new city. She told me she’d recently started going out to clubs with her housemate, Chloe, a blond model who was almost six feet tall. “You should come with us sometime,” she offered. I’d only spent a handful of nights in clubs, but I knew that I didn’t particularly enjoy them. I didn’t like the music they played, or how drinks spilled on my bare legs, or how someone always seemed to be groping me. Still, it seemed stupid to turn down an opportunity to meet new people. We made plans for the following week. We met at a Japanese restaurant that felt more like it belonged in Las Vegas than in Los Angeles. I told Chloe and Isabella that I was nervous because I’d lost my fake ID. Chloe laughed and reassured me: “You don’t have to worry about anything like that.” A short man in his mid-30s, wearing a black button-down shirt, greeted us at the entrance to a private dining room, kissing Chloe and Isabella. I was surprised – I’d assumed we’d be going out with people closer to our age. He smiled widely and introduced himself to me as “Sacha, Chloe’s friend”, telling me to drink and eat whatever I wanted. Unfamiliar with extensive cocktail lists, I blanked when the waiter came for my order, and asked for a tequila sunrise, a drink I remembered my mother liking. The sweetness of the grenadine made me feel nauseous and my teeth ache. As dish after steaming dish theatrically appeared on a long table, underage models trickled in, smiling nervously as Sacha stood up to greet them. “What do you need, ladies?” he asked every time, signalling to a waiter. He was animated and anxious, unable to sit still. “What up, Sach!” a woman dressed in chunky heels and a leather jacket hollered as she strutted over to the private dining room. Sacha popped up. “Kim! Gorgeous as always.” Kim was our age, but it was clear that she was different – confident and at ease, a veteran. She wrapped her arms loosely around Sacha, placing her chin in the crook of his neck, and surveyed the table of quiet young women, assessing us, her gaze jumping from one to the next. “The guys are almost here,” she whispered, pulling away from him and taking a seat. Not long after, Sacha announced it was time to leave. The long table was still covered with full plates of food. When I stayed seated, waiting for a check to appear, Isabella whispered to me, “No, no, no. We just go.” Realizing that someone else was paying, I felt a twinge of uneasiness. Outside Sacha directed us to several black SUVs and told us to “hop in”. As I climbed in, using one hand to hold down my short dress to keep it from riding up over my ass, I saw several men around the age of 40 already in the car. “Hello,” said a big, bald man who appeared too large for his seat. His massive hand sat heavily on the thigh of a petite, pale woman who seemed just a few years older than me. “This is my fiancee,” he said. She waved listlessly. From the back seat, an unshaven, chubby man with a greasy nose called out, “Hi girls, let’s party!” At the club, the men kept offering us cocaine, which they snorted with their backs to the dancefloor. They ordered bottles of alcohol that arrived with sparkling flames, grabbed our bodies and fed us shots, sang along to the music and pumped their fists in the air. Mostly, though, Isabella and I stood around in a booth, not speaking much. Chloe was slouched in a corner. At some point the three of us must have managed to leave, because I woke up the next morning in Isabella’s room with a pounding headache to a text: “So much fun last night! It’s Sacha btw, save my number.” After that, I made a habit of ignoring Sacha’s weekly texts, which were always versions of the same message: “Hiiii babe. Thursday. Big meal at Nobu tonight before we go out! Gonna be sick, roll through.” When I told another model about him, she said that Sacha was a party promoter. “He got your number? He’s never going to stop texting you, girl. The rich dudes pay him to wrangle models. They always start the nights off with a big dinner, so that girls who aren’t making much cash come for a free meal.” The whole situation gave me the creeps, but when Sacha texted me along with Chloe and Isabella about a free trip to Coachella, including tickets to the festival, a place to stay and a ride out to the desert in a limo bus, I was too excited to turn it down. The three of us pored over the lineup and circled the acts we wanted to see. Coachella was expensive. Just the year before I’d driven there with my best friend and spent two nights sleeping in my Nissan with the seats laid flat, parked in a hotel lot. It had been fun, but now I could be in the VIP section and the front row at the concerts. The prospect made me feel grown up. “I mean, if we’re there together it’ll be fine,” Isabella texted me. We figured we could ignore the men while taking advantage of their setup. We hit gridlock traffic leaving Los Angeles. There were about 15 of us plus Sacha on the party bus, which was tricked out with purple neon lights and a bar filled with ice and bottles of alcohol. Sacha kept the music loud, walking the length of the aisle refilling drinks and smiling broadly. A tall model with thick black hair and a nasally voice came and sat next to me. “So you know the big bald one is, like, a prince, right?” She melted into the seat, her long legs extending across the aisle. She was dressed straight out of the 70s: long skirt, crop top and stacked bracelets. “His mom is super-famous obviously. But yeah, I’ve heard him and his fiancee like to have threesomes.” Grinning, she retied a colourful silk scarf around her forehead. “So they’re, like, always looking for girls for those.” When we finally arrived at the massive Spanish-style house in the desert where we’d be staying, we’d been in traffic for nearly six hours and were all exhausted and ready for bed. Sacha became frantic. “Girls! Look how dope this house is!” he squealed when we entered the foyer, grabbing at us and ordering us toward the pool in the backyard. “Go for a night swim!” Outside, we found the prince and his pale fiancee in the Jacuzzi, along with some broad-shouldered man I’d never met before. We stood uncomfortably around the edge. A few girls changed into their swimsuits and got in the water. When I stripped down to the bikini I’d been wearing under my denim shorts, I felt the prince’s eyes land on my body. “OK,” he said, nudging his friend. “I’m always interested in something like this.” He pointed at me. “A girl like you, what do you want to change about your body? Like, what’s the thing you’re hung up on?” They both stared at me. I froze. “I don’t know,” I responded, mentally running through the things I’d like to change about myself: a smaller nose, longer legs. He sipped his drink as his attention shifted elsewhere, bored when I didn’t play along. Despite being a little scared of him, I felt a strange sense of loss. Powerful men have always had that effect on me; they make me want to be noticed but also to disappear. I watched the prince as he laughed. The lights from the Jacuzzi lit his face from below, casting grotesque shadows. I went back inside. The unshaven guy with the greasy nose I’d met in LA was blasting music in the kitchen and pouring drinks, wearing sunglasses and a pink hat with oversized bunny ears. I let out a small laugh at the sight of him. He looked up and shrugged. “Care to join?” He seemed goofy and self-deprecating in a way that endeared him to me, or at least made me less afraid. I threw on a hoodie and sat on a stool, bringing my knees up to my chin. “Have some chocolate,” he offered. “It’s mushrooms and maybe some MDMA, mostly just a body high.” He broke off a piece and popped it into his mouth. “It’s mellow. Trust me, you’ll feel great.” I bit off a small chunk and opened a bag of chips while he did a line of coke off the counter. He told me his wife and kids thought he was on a weekend yoga retreat in the desert. “They have no idea. They think I’m recharging,” he muttered, and bent over to snort another line. “Did you know I recently slept with a girl who woke up before me in the morning and blow-dried her hair and did her makeup, and then crawled back next to me to pretend she’d been asleep?” Spit flew out of his mouth. I thought about the girl and how much she wanted to impress him, to look naturally beautiful first thing in the morning. I could barely keep my eyes open and my jaw was tight because I’d been grinding my teeth, from either nerves or the drugs, I wasn’t sure. Isabella came in from the pool and quietly said she’d found a room off the kitchen with a queen-size bed that we could share with Chloe. We tiptoed off, found our bags piled up in the comically grand foyer, and carried them into the bedroom. The music from the pool got louder before we shut the door. Chloe face-planted on to the bed. Isabella brushed her teeth and I put on sweatpants, hoping we’d escaped. But Sacha found us almost immediately. He opened our door. “What is this? Chloe!” he whined. “Chloe, wake up!” Chloe was a party girl but she was not one to be bossed around. “Too tired,” she muttered into her pillow. He scowled at me and Isabella, knowing we were even less likely to rally. Then Kim, the girl Sacha had greeted so warmly at the restaurant in LA, suddenly appeared behind him in nothing but a black string bikini. He turned to her, his tone shifting. “All right,” he said seriously. “Remember what we talked about? I need you to go and do your thing out there.” She nodded twice quickly and, without speaking a word, swivelled around and skipped out of sight. “Jacuzzi time!” I heard her sing out. Silently, I shut the door, wondering what I’d just witnessed. Was Sacha Kim’s boss? Or were they cohorts? And what was she expected to go and do exactly? I could not sleep that night, squished between Chloe and Isabella under a comforter that smelled stale and of someone else. I thought about the way the Jacuzzi’s pink and green lights lit up the prince’s face and how his body had appeared monstrous next to his tiny fiancee’s. I realized I’d felt safer last year sleeping in my car in a crummy hotel parking lot. Isabella and I had been wrong. This was no free ride. *** At the Super Bowl, I was surprised to find that we weren’t in the stands but an indoor suite, complete with a full bar, several attendants, and a lavish spread of food. An Oscar-winning actor and his girlfriend stopped by. Jho Low beamed when the actor became loud and gregarious. The image of a king being entertained by a jester came to mind. I wondered how much Jho Low was paying him, and thought of our fees tallied in a ledger on some underling’s computer. Hours passed. People looked at their phones and sank down in their seats. I hadn’t realized how long the game would be, and after a glass of wine and several trips to the buffet, I was bored and tired. Jho Low himself seemed unenthused, staring vacantly. I wondered whether he even liked football. Toward the end of the game, Evan reported that we were headed to an afterparty. I was surprised and disappointed; I’d been looking forward to the end of this uncomfortable day. I asked Evan when he thought it would be OK for me to leave. He checked the time. “Probably a few more hours, let’s feel it out.” I’d been reminded: I was not free to come and go as I liked. I was on the clock. The music was loud and the lights were low at the party space, a two-story lounge dripping with red velvet. After an hour or so, Evan finally indicated that I’d stayed long enough. I peered around. Who had released me? As I walked toward the exit, I passed a group of people dancing. I saw that Jho Low’s face had grown red and sweaty. He was drunk. A tray of shots appeared in front of him, and he grabbed two, handing one to the Victoria’s Secret model. She had ignored me and the other guests, her attention focused on Jho Low. Now she kept her eyes locked on him as he took his shot, throwing her head back dramatically as he did, only to quickly toss the alcohol over her shoulder. When he faced her again, her eyes sparkled and the famous dimples appeared on her cheeks. Damn, I thought, what a manoeuvre. I liked to think that I was different from women like her and Kim. But over time, it became harder to hold on to that distinction or even believe in its virtue. I watched models and actresses guarantee themselves financial success and careers by dating or marrying rich and famous men. I couldn’t help but wonder whether those women were actually the smart ones, playing the game correctly. It was undeniable that there was no way to avoid the game completely: we all had to make money one way or another. So they were the hustlers, and I was – what, exactly? I posted paid Instagram ads. And I was no stranger to commodifying my physical presence, posing next to CEOs in their suits at their store openings and parties. Wasn’t I hustling just like they were? A few years after the Super Bowl I learned, along with the rest of the world, that Jho Low didn’t come from a super-rich family after all. He had stolen billions of dollars by funnelling money from the Malaysian government into a fund that he managed. Jho Low is now an international fugitive, wanted by the Malaysian, Singapore and US authorities. Federal prosecutors seized almost a billion dollars in assets that were purchased with his stolen money: properties, yachts, artworks and entertainment (more than $100m was put into The Wolf of Wall Street). The film’s star, Leonardo DiCaprio had been given a Picasso and Basquiat, both of which were returned to the feds. A week after the Super Bowl, Jho Low threw the Victoria’s Secret model a birthday party and gave her a heart-shaped diamond necklace engraved with her initials. It had cost $1.3m. Eventually, she had to return an estimated $8m in jewelry. One of his gifts, a translucent baby grand piano, was not seized. It was so big that there was simply no way to take it out of her house. • This is an edited extract from My Body by Emily Ratajkowski, published by Quercus at £16.99. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. Emily Ratajkowski will discuss My Body with Nesrine Malik in a Guardian Live online event on Wednesday 8 December. Book tickets hereThese are not just turkeys, these are the “Rolls-Royce of turkeys”. Landowner Robert Wynn, Lord Newborough, is gazing out over the rolling hills and green fields of his organic farm of the Rhug Estate near Corwen in north Wales, where the birds lead a suitably luxurious life, eating organic oats, beans and peas and listening to classical music. The Thanksgiving and Christmas tables of local families, upmarket London restaurants and even exclusive Hong Kong hotels depend on receiving one of his 1,300 Norfolk Bronze and Hockenhull Black birds in time for their festive meal. This autumn, Newborough has spent several stressful months worrying whether the birds he had so carefully reared would reach their final destinations, as acute staffing shortages across the UK poultry processing industry threatened millions of Christmas dinners. When their time comes, the turkeys are transported about 50 miles to Cheshire, where they are dispatched, plucked and packaged at Bailey’s Turkeys near Knutsford, which like many others has been struggling to fill vacancies and find the additional seasonal workers needed for the busiest time of year. This weekend, 15 temporary staff are flying to the UK from Poland to spend six weeks at the processing plant run by Michael Bailey and his brother David, which is gearing up to process 2,000 birds a day. But the firm will have to make do with five fewer workers than usual. Most of them are regulars, coming over year after year for the festive season. However, in the first Christmas since Brexit, and without permission to work in Britain, their annual journey proved far more complicated than ever before. “We were asking and asking and asking. That is what we want, a seasonal poultry worker,” said Michael Bailey. “This is a seasonal demand such as fruit picking, hop picking.” “We have a seasonal Christmas need for people for six weeks. That is not a realistic job for somebody, that is a six-week seasonal job; far better to bring somebody in to do that. Locals want a 12 months-a-year job, so we do need that flexibility to bring someone in.” Thousands of additional workers are required by the meat processing sector to slaughter and prepare the 10m turkeys eaten in the UK every Christmas, at a time when companies already have significant numbers of vacancies, after EU workers returned home as a result of Brexit and Covid. Britain’s meat processing industry, which is two-thirds staffed by non-UK workers, is missing nearly 15% of its total 95,000-strong workforce. However, despite pleas from industry, poultry processors were not included in the government’s seasonal agricultural workers visa pilot scheme, which allows 30,000 people from anywhere in the world, not just the EU, in to the UK – but only to work in edible horticulture, picking fruit and crops. After the poultry processing industry sounded the alarm over what lack of staff would mean, warning that many families would end up without their Christmas turkey, the government U-turned and in October said it would allow 5,500 seasonal poultry workers into the UK until the end of the year, along with HGV drivers. The warnings sent many shoppers rushing to supermarkets to buy a frozen bird to avoid disappointment come Christmas Day. Food retailers Iceland and Aldi have reported frozen turkeys flying out of the freezer far earlier than in previous years. Bailey, who not only processes poultry but farms turkeys too, and is chair of the National Farmers’ Union’s turkey group, reported receiving his first inquiries from local butchers in September. “I have never known it like this,” he said of the business he has worked in all his life. “It’s quite weird to have people ringing up, saying: ‘You’ve got my birds, haven’t you?’” Richard Griffiths, chief executive of the British Poultry Council, expects up to 3,000 temporary workers to arrive in the coming weeks on the seasonal scheme. Even though the government decision came later than desired, it should allow the industry to keep operating during the busy period. “These temporary visas got us over the line and I’m confident it will help and will just make everything a little bit easier,” Griffiths said. “We think we are still at a point where we may see less variety in products, but the overall quantity is there.” Inside the chilly packing hall at Bailey’s Turkeys, workers in hairnets and white coats are warming up for the busiest time of the year. Before the government U-turn, Bailey set about applying for settled status for his Polish temporary staff, even though they have no intention of moving to the UK or working in the country for more than a few weeks a year. He describes the four-month process as “stressful”, which included various setbacks and was enough to put off five members of the usual cohort. Bailey also tried to fill the gap using the government’s labour providers accredited to find people for the temporary worker scheme, but drew a blank. Despite having voted for Brexit, Bailey said he had hoped the government would have shown more understanding as the UK transitions to life outside the EU. “They are taking a very hard line, and there is a consequence for that,” he said. “We have been very lucky over the last 20 years to have a good supply of eastern bloc labour; we could just pick the phone up and get as many staff as we wanted, good quality staff.” Despite having increased all staff wages by 15% over the past six months, Bailey said he has had little success recruiting local, British staff. “We have tried in the past, we’re still trying. The problem is processing poultry is not seen as a progressive career move for youngsters and probably the industry has got to promote it better.” Increased staffing and electricity costs mean Bailey has just hiked what he charges customers such as Newborough for slaughter, while he has seen farm gate prices for turkeys raised by between 7% and 10%. Back on the Rhug Estate, Newborough is also facing the biggest storm of rising costs in his 15 years of raising turkeys, forcing him to increase the price of his premium product. “Feed, fuel, machinery costs and now labour costs; we are being hit on many fronts,” he said. “Down the line this is going to cause food price inflation. We just put up prices 10% across the board but I anticipate we will still have margin erosion.” While the farm is running as usual, Newborough has struggled to find workers for the estate’s cafe, which was closed for several weeks, and is currently trying to recruit local retirees who want to work part-time. Over in Cheshire, as Michael Bailey prepares to welcome his Polish workers, he is looking ahead to Christmas Day when he sits down to his own turkey meal. “It’s always a big relief, we are all shattered, and have all the kids round the table,” he said. “Another year over, another season finished.”The Port of Baltimore dazzled in the setting sun. Giant cranes arched over the Chesapeake Bay, the shoreline stacked with colorful shipping containers. At the center of the tableau was the American president, on a mission to promote his hard-won $1tn infrastructure package. “Infrastructure week has finally arrived,” Biden said last week, beaming at the mix of elected officials and local union leaders in attendance. The president’s visit to the bustling port came at the start of a cross-country tour to sell his sprawling public works plan to the American public, in the hope of parlaying the policy achievement into a political victory that will help Democrats keep their slim majorities in Congress. But while his policies are popular, Biden and his party, presently, are not. Last week, voters turned sharply against Democrats, delivering a number of surprising Republican victories in states Biden won handily in 2020. The losses jolted Democrats into action on Capitol Hill, even as some moderates wondered if the president had misread his mandate. Within days, they sent the infrastructure bill, gridlocked for months amid intra-party feuding over a separate pillar of Biden’s agenda, to his desk for his signature. In the weeks ahead, the president’s promotional tour will test his political salesmanship and his theory of governance: that delivering concrete benefits is the best way to rise above the political tribalism roiling the country. “The American people sent us here to deliver. The American people sent us here to make the government work,” Biden said on Friday, during a cabinet meeting to discuss the implementation of his infrastructure bill. “They sent us here to make a difference in their lives. And I believe we’re doing that.” Facing daunting odds in next year’s midterm elections, Democrats are pleading with “Amtrak Joe” to make the pitch loud and clear. Congressman Sean Patrick Maloney of New York, who leads the campaign committee for House Democrats, pleaded with the White House to put Biden on the campaign trail as frequently as possible to trumpet his domestic agenda. In an interview with the New York Times, he said his message to the White House was, “Free Joe Biden.” “That campaign needs to start now before the next crisis takes over the news cycle,” he said. On Monday, Biden will sign the measure into law during a ceremony at the White House, surrounded by a bipartisan group of legislators, governors and mayors. Following that, the president will hit the road, with plans to visit a bridge in Woodstock, New Hampshire, and a GM electric vehicle plant in Detroit, according to the White House. In addition, Biden is dispatching his cabinet members, including the transportation secretary, Pete Buttigieg; energy secretary, Jennifer Granholm; and interior secretary, Deb Haaland, to promote the bill’s investments in states, cities, towns and tribal communities. So far, the strategy echoes the administration’s “Help is here” tour to showcase the Democrats’ $1.9tn coronavirus relief package Biden signed into law shortly after taking office. But the presidential messaging blitz was soon swamped by the US’s withdrawal from Afghanistan, a summertime resurgence of the pandemic and a rise in inflation. Even though the legislation sent $1,400 stimulus checks to millions of Americans, expanded the child tax credit program and increased unemployment insurance – all tangible, popular benefits – Democrats hardly reaped the political rewards. An August poll by Daily Kos/Civiqs found that 57% of voters said the Biden administration had not done anything that has benefited them personally. “Voters don’t go to the ballot box with a spreadsheet of policies. They go with a feeling about who values them,” said Jesse Ferguson, a senior Democratic strategist. The way to show that, he said, was “to deliver on the things that matter to people who work for a living”, like lowering the cost of prescription drug prices, making childcare more affordable and providing paid family and medical leave. Whether a concerted appeal from the president can overcome a toxic political climate is an open question for Democrats. Biden’s standing with voters has dropped sharply, particularly among independents. Wide majorities say the nation is on the wrong track. A CNN poll released this week found that six in 10 American believe Biden has the wrong priorities. The number climbed among voters who ranked the economy as a top priority. As the administration’s messaging campaign ramps up, the White House says its digital team is developing explainer videos and other social content to educate voters about the Democrats’ initiatives. They are also planning for a burst of TV appearances, including with media outlets that serve Black and Latino communities. The push also includes an emphasis on local news organizations, such as WKRC-TV in Cincinnati, which sat down with Biden on Monday. In the interview, he predicted a long-overdue upgrade for the deteriorating Brent Spence Bridge that stretches between Ohio and the Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell’s home state of Kentucky. McConnell was one of 32 Republicans in the House and Senate to vote for the legislation that has divided the party. Donald Trump savaged those in his party who supported the measure, blaming them for voting for “Democratic longevity” while his loyalists in the House accused them of disloyalty. Many of them have faced vicious backlash from constituents, including vulgar insults and even death threats. Speaking in Kentucky, McConnell squashed any suggestion that the unusual display of bipartisanship might extend beyond the realm of roads and bridges. “Let me sum it up this way,” he said. “I think every step we took this year … except infrastructure is in the wrong direction.” At home during the congressional recess, Democrats donned hard hats and lined up next to union workers to highlight how the once-in-a-generation investment in the nation’s infrastructure would benefit the wishlist of long-neglected public works projects in their districts and states. The plan, they said, would touch all 50 states, creating high-paying jobs and helping to rejuvenate the economy. The package, which includes the largest investment in infrastructure since Dwight Eisenhower began the interstate highway system in the 1950s, is popular with voters. But many of the projects won’t be started, much less completed, until long after the midterm elections are decided. “It is part of our job to let people know exactly what Congress did for them,” Madeleine Dean, a Democratic congresswoman from Pennsylvania, said on a press call showcasing the infrastructure bill’s investments in her state. “We have a lot of educating to do.” A Monmouth University poll released this week found 65% of Americans support the infrastructure bill while 62% approve of the Democrats’ spending measure. Yet the poll showed that voters increasingly believe Biden’s policies have not helped middle-class or poor families. Taken together, the results suggest the White House and Democrats “lack a cohesive and concrete message about how this bill will help the American public”, said Patrick Murray, director of the Monmouth University Poll. The measure’s bipartisan passage has given some Democrats fresh optimism that they can muster the votes to pass a second, even larger domestic policy measure and begin to reverse their political fortunes ahead of next year’s midterm elections. “Democrats are delivering – and we are making sure that the American people know it,” Jaime Harrison, chair of the Democratic National Committee, said in a statement. The DNC is “doubling down” on their outreach to voters, working with state and local parties to help translate how the plan will benefit their communities. Matt Barreto, a Democratic pollster and senior adviser to Building Back Together, a group advocating for Biden’s agenda, said voters were swayed by results. “I really like our chances if we are messaging on very popular policy that we have passed and signed into law and the other side is complaining about cultural issues,” he said. A Navigator Research survey found that Biden’s overall approval rating climbed in the days since Congress passed his bipartisan infrastructure deal. The same survey showed that support for the major pieces of Biden’s agenda remains high as a growing number of voters say they’ve heard about the bill. Yet the challenges threatening to derail Biden’s PR campaign are myriad. When Democrats return to Washington next week, a new fight awaits over the next phase of his agenda. Republicans are eager to weaponize rising inflation, using it to attack the spending plan as reckless. And even when Biden attempts to take a victory lap, as he did in Baltimore on Wednesday, the news of the day interferes. Designed as a solution to fix the nation’s crumbling infrastructure, Biden said the measure would also address immediate economic concerns caused by rising inflation and supply chain bottlenecks. The obstacles were underscored by his appearance in Baltimore. In his speech touting the “once-in-a-generation investment” in the nation’s infrastructure, he also delivered a lengthy explanation of supply chains and conceded that “consumer prices remain too high”. After his remarks concluded, Biden, a retail politician at heart, waded into the crowd, joking and laughing as he worked the rope line and glad-handed local officials.Six years ago, in Paris, countries reached an historic agreement to limit the global temperature rise to less than 2C, targeting 1.5C. In finance, we launched the task force on climate-related financial disclosures so that companies would disclose their climate-related risks, allowing finance to measure what matters. Despite these breakthroughs, in the years that followed, action didn’t match ambition. Few countries pursued the necessary policies, and business investment in decarbonisation was limited. Too many in finance thought that the climate crisis was someone else’s problem. People will no longer tolerate worthy statements followed by futile gestures. They won’t settle for governments making announcements at Cop summits that they don’t meet at home. Or for companies that speak green but don’t act. That’s why, on the road to Glasgow, we’ve worked to transform the heart of finance. In April, we launched the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ), which now covers the entire waterfront of finance: banks, insurers, pension funds, export credit agencies and asset managers. It comprises more than 450 leading financial institutions from 45 countries. Its members have committed to managing their assets, which total more than $130tn, in line with achieving 1.5C. The total cost of the global transition is estimated to be about $4tn every year for the next three decades, so there are now more than enough readily available resources to do the job. New loans and investments from GFANZ members will not only fund green projects such as renewable power, but will also go where the emissions are – in sectors such as autos, steel, cement – and back those companies with plans to decarbonise, while withdrawing capital from those companies that aren’t moving fast enough. While this is a watershed achievement, some are understandably sceptical. After all, if governments didn’t follow through after Paris, why would finance after Glasgow? There are several ways we can ensure that, for private finance, the road from Glasgow will be paved with credible actions, not just good intentions. First, GFANZ is focused on near-term results. Our members haven’t just committed to net zero financed emissions by 2050 at the latest. They’ve also agreed to target their fair share of the 50% greenhouse gas emissions reductions by 2030 that are needed to keep the world on track for 1.5C. And within 18 months of joining, banks must also set out detailed sector-specific emissions reduction plans. You can’t greenwash emissions. They’re hard numbers that either go up or down. That’s why every member will also report their progress annually, allowing all stakeholders to judge who is moving fast enough and to challenge those who are not. Second, our members are required to use the most rigorous science-based transition scenarios, such as the most robust 1.5C pathways from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the International Energy Agency. Third, the group is already working with stakeholders to translate these science-based pathways into real-world transition plans for both its members and the companies they finance. In this, guidance will be given by an expert advisory panel of independent NGOs and academics, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change’s Race to Zero campaign, and the UN secretary general’s new group of experts on net zero standards announced at Cop26. GFANZ will also have an ongoing reporting relationship with the G20’s financial stability board. We welcome action to regulate these transition plans, and we’re calling on countries to follow the UK’s lead at Cop26. There are limits, though, even to this rigorous approach. Members will support the initiatives of people, businesses and governments to build a sustainable world, but a financial sector relentlessly focused on the transition cannot drive down emissions by itself. Governments, in particular, must now step up with ambitious, credible and predictable policies that match their own net-zero pledges. And consistent with the GFANZ call to action, which makes a series of asks of G20 governments to help build a net-zero economy and meet the goals of the Paris agreement, governments must phase out unabated coal and oil power plants by 2030 in developed economies and by 2040 in the developing world. We’re also calling on governments to remove fossil fuel subsidies and adhere to the imperatives of a just transition. Our enormous financial resources mean the world can now finance the transition to net zero including through new “country platforms”, which will deliver a blend of public and private finance to locally driven initiatives in emerging markets and developing countries. We are working to identify, scale and invest in catalytic initiatives to do just that. We must use the momentum of Cop26 to drive near-term delivery on the various commitments made. But the world can do more. Given GFANZ’s resources, companies and countries can now raise their ambitions further. After the delays and detours on the road from Paris, we must be sure to travel fast and far on the road from Glasgow. Mark Carney is UN special envoy on climate action and finance and former governor of the Bank of EnglandEd Kashi regards his shot of a California aerial tram ride as a personal turning point. For three decades, on assignment in countries including Nigeria, Iraq and Pakistan, he had taken countless images of civil discord and extreme suffering. “I had absorbed that trauma – many photojournalists do. Often our singular goal is to get as close as possible to the most horrible things on Earth and document them,” Kashi says. “I needed to rehabilitate myself, to make a photo that was soft, beautiful and candy-coloured – to expand my emotional range. This image was a breakthrough. I began to see the world anew.” Kashi describes this period as the “Plasticine era of Instagram”, a time when the smartphone was transitioning from “a fun, novelty toy to a viable tool for an image maker”. The shot was taken at an amusement park in the US city of Santa Cruz on a day trip with college students, during the afternoon session of a photography workshop Kashi was conducting. “When I’m ‘on’ as a photojournalist, I’m always looking for and responding to visual clues, whether it’s the horizon or the light,” he says. Spontaneously boarding the aerial tram, he reached for his iPhone 5 instead of his usual 35mm camera. Even in an amusement park dedicated to pleasure and fun, he saw darker undercurrents (not least the plastic figure taking a ride). “The people in the shot aren’t beaming,” he says. “Their facial expressions suggest that perhaps they’re hungry, or tired, or just had a fight. That’s just being human.” And, as the cabin rose, a thought he’d had in far more serious contexts urged him on: “The photo gods have bestowed this upon me – don’t screw it up.”The five-star Claridge’s hotel in Mayfair has lost its chef after it rejected his vision for an all-vegan menu at his restaurant. Daniel Humm, 45, will leave Davies and Brook at the end of the year after talks with management about transforming the kitchen in his London restaurant at Claridge’s hotel to serve only plant-based dishes. The central London hotel posted a statement on Twitter on Friday saying that it is “not path we wish to follow” at the restaurant, which offers a four-course menu at £125 a head including caviar and foie gras. “We completely respect and understand the culinary direction of a fully plant-based menu that Daniel has decided to embrace and champion and now wants to introduce to London. However, this is not the path we wish to follow here at Claridge’s at the moment, and therefore, regretfully, we have mutually decided to go our separate ways. “We wish to thank Daniel Humm and his extraordinary team at Davies and Brook for what they have created here at Claridge’s since they opened in 2019, gaining accolades along the way under challenging circumstances.” It follows a source in the hotel telling the Daily Mail that bosses were concerned that “if they turn the restaurant vegan, they will upset thousands of regular guests”. “Daniel has been a longstanding friend of the hotel for many years and we wish him nothing but continued success as he spearheads this bold new vision,” the statement continued, adding that Davies and Brook would “continue to operate under his direction” until the end of December, after which “future plans” for the eatery would be announced. Humm reinvented his New York restaurant, the three-Michelin-starred Eleven Madison Park, as a vegan fine-dining experience earlier this year, with a message on its website saying the modern food system was “simply not sustainable”. Reopening its doors after the pandemic as the first fully vegan restaurant with three Michelin stars (there are 12 meat-free restaurants with at least one Michelin star), the chef said: “It was clear that after everything we all experienced this past year, we couldn’t open the same restaurant.” The eatery’s new menu featured dishes such as vegan caviar made from tonburi, a type of edible seed. In a statement posted to Instagram on Friday, the chef underlined that his principles were paramount in the “mutual announcement” to “go … separate ways” with Claridge’s, saying: “Standing behind this mission, and what we believe in, is most important and is unfortunately not something we can compromise on.” Echoing his comments when he moved his New York restaurant away from meat-centric dishes, the chef added: “The future for me is plant-based … It has never been more clear that the world is changing, and we have to change with it.” Humm recently attended the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow, where he said his life’s work was “to make plant-based food delicious, magical and luxurious”, adding that plant-based food was “better for our planet and our health”.Fill a planter with colourful blooms There is nothing jollier: fill a 20cm pot or a window box with peat-free compost and get going. Hellebores are my top winter flower: Ashwood Garden Hybrids has them in pink, red, purple, white, yellow and even black. Partner with a small Polypodium fern or grass-like Carex “Everest” with its variegated leaves. Underplant with white or pink Cyclamen coum. Plant everything in a rough triangle, with the larger hellebore at the back, the carex or fern in one front corner, and the cyclamen in the other. Sow seeds for winter leaves Sunny indoor window sills are prime real estate for growing fresh salad leaves. Fill a regular seed tray with peat-free compost, placing a water tray beneath. Sow lettuce seeds sparingly on the surface: “Salad Bowl” and Amaze are good, but any cut-and-come-again variety will do. Sow every three weeks for a regular supply and pick outer leaves from each plant, leaving the younger leaves to grow. Create a dried flower display to last all winter Pop outside now and you’ll find plenty of plant material to create a dried arrangement. Fallen twigs for structure, grasses for fluff and seed heads for shape. Miscanthus and Cortaderia (pampas) grasses work well alongside poppy and allium seed heads. Look on verges for wild grasses, teasel and wild carrot, but leave enough for birds. Some dried flowers keep their colour, such as Helichrysum and Persicaria amplexicaulis, or you could cheat with paint. Grow a Christmas cactus Retro wonder Schlumbergera x buckleyi, the true Christmas cactus, has smooth-edged segments, not toothed ones like its relative S truncata, known as the Thanksgiving cactus. Both are available in shops or on eBay in red, pink, white and apricot. Easy to care for Schlumbergera aren’t real cacti, but succulents from humid Brazilian forests. Grow near a window out of direct sun and allow compost to dry before watering. Snap stem segments off, and place the bottom third in compost to grow new plants for presents. Make leaf mould Fallen leaves make excellent compost: rake up as many as you can – or collect them with a lawn mower, which can help with chopping tougher leaves, like oak. Pile into a compost bin or keep in bags with drainage holes for water to run out. After a year or so, it will be soft, crumbly compost. Plant witch hazel for scent and colour Jazz up your winter garden with the colour and scent of witch hazel, Hamamelis x intermedia, a large shrub flowering on bare stems. Aphrodite has orange flowers and Goldcrest yellow, both with a strong scent. Ruby Glow doesn’t have much scent, making up for it with flowers that do exactly what they promise. Plant in a sunny to part-shaded sheltered spot to protect from wind and enclose the scent. Sow broad beans This is your last chance to sow broad beans outside for a spring harvest. Sow the seeds 5cm deep, 23cm apart in rows 30cm apart. In exposed or colder areas, cover with a cloche or a horticultural fleece. They need little care through winter and are one of the best groundcovers, slowing weeds by blocking light. Plant tulip bulbs for a spring colour burst November is tulip-planting month. I prefer those that reliably flower every year, such as Spring Green and Negrita. Tiny T turkestanica has cream flowers and will multiply every year, as will fuchsia Little Beauty. Plant three or four times the depth of the bulb. Prune apples and pears While they’re dormant, apples and pears should be pruned for a better crop next year. First cut out dead, damaged, diseased or rubbing branches. Then identify four to five main branches that form a cup shape, removing others and any upright shoots in the middle. Reduce main branches by a third and cut long side shoots to 20cm (the length of secateurs). Plant an edible hedge Now’s a good time to buy “bare root” hedging, plants that are dormant in winter and sent without pots or compost, making them cheaper. Informal hedges can be planted with edible plants for us and birds to eat, including: elderflower (Sambucus nigra), hazel (Corylus avellana), dog rose (Rosa canina), blackberry (Rubus fruticosus) and crab apple (Malus sylvestris). 10 gardens for winter inspiration Many public gardens still have lots to see, from autumnal displays to winter walks planted for seasonal colour Bodnant, north Wales A dedicated winter garden planted in 2012 is now overflowing with colourful stems, fluffy grasses and striking bark. nationaltrust.org.uk Grey to Green Scheme, Sheffield New public street planting by designers Nigel Dunnett and Zac Tudor is the largest such project in the UK, and also acts as a water sump to reduce flooding. greytogreen.org.uk Pensthorpe Park, Norfolk Renowned designer Piet Oudolf’s first UK public garden shows off winter stems, grasses and seedheads. pensthorpe.com National Botanic Garden of Wales Winter flowers and a larger, covered glasshouse offer plenty for all to see year-round. botanicgarden.wales RHS Bridgewater, Salford The RHS’s newest garden has acres of woodland paths and a walled garden full of winter displays. rhs.org.uk Horniman Museum, London This south London museum houses a little-known experimental garden, with formal beds, new perennial meadows and shrubberies. horniman.ac.uk Lytes Cary Manor, Somerset In winter, this National Trust garden’s topiary hedges and structure hold everything together to create intimate spaces. nationaltrust.org.uk Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh Winter light shows add to equally exciting winter planting. rbge.org.uk Stourhead, Wiltshire Even in winter, Stourhead’s follies set around a beautiful lake remain atmospheric. nationaltrust.org.uk Yorkshire Sculpture Park A constantly changing collection of outdoor sculpture to explore against wintery skies. ysp.org.ukWhen Mike Howorth’s brother was diagnosed with terminal cancer the Australian national arranged to fly to the UK to look after him and booked a Hertz hire car to use during his stay. Three weeks after he arrived, his brother died and Mike returned to his family in Australia. The hire car had been booked for 28 days and Howorth returned the vehicle two days early to catch his flight home. Later he found that he had been charged more than double the £617 rental price. On contacting Hertz he was told that his bill included a £670 surcharge because he had ended the contract early. “It’s beyond me how they can charge a customer more for hiring a car for less time,” Howorth says. “I was in the UK because my brother was dying, so I did not know how long I would need a car for. If he’d lived longer, I may have needed to return the car and hire another.” Car rental companies are notorious for funding headline bargains with hidden extras: insurances, upgrades that were not requested, costly fuel policies and sudden debits for unexplained damage can add hundreds of pounds to the quoted hire price. Howorth’s 109% fee increase was, according to Hertz, part of a policy to keep prices low. “To offer our customers competitive rates and to manage our fleet we have minimum and maximum day rental rates in place,” a company spokesperson says. “This means that the longer a customer rents a vehicle for, the lower the daily rate will be. However, this only applies when customers keep the vehicle for the intended rental length.” Howorth’s premature departure caused his special 28-day deal to be scrapped and the rental to be recalculated at a different daily rate to reflect the time the car was in his possession. Many customers sign for the keys to their vehicle without reading the small print, which may contain costly commitments of which they are unaware. However, even the most meticulous scrutiny of the documents sent out to customers would not have warned Howorth that an early return would send the price rocketing from £617 to £1,288 because Hertz failed to go into any detail. “The four-page email confirming my reservation does mention on page four under rental terms and conditions that an ‘early or late return charge may apply’,” Howorth says. “It asks customers to check the terms and conditions. There’s no mention of it in the rest of the document, nor is there a link to any other T&amp;Cs.” Nor was any charge mentioned when Howorth collected and returned the vehicle. A Google search produces a webpage called Your Complete Guide to Car Hire with Hertz, which mentions the possibility of a late return charge but says nothing about costs for an early drop-off. A search for early return charges on the Hertz homepage brings up the warning that customers will not be refunded for any pre-booked hire days if they drop off their vehicle early. There is not a whisper about daily charges being recalculated. Hertz told Guardian Money that the charge was “clearly outlined” in the terms and conditions on its website, even though we could not find a document there. It sent a link to a booklet that is available to customers when they get to its “review and book” page. Customers are warned that there may be a charge for an early return but they are given no detail about how it will be calculated or when it will be applied. According to the trade body the British Vehicle Rental and Leasing Association, it is common practice for rental companies to use flexible pricing models based on the duration of a booking but additional fees should be reasonable and clearly flagged. “The rental operator should make it clear at the time of booking, and on the rental agreement if any potential changes to the offered rate may be incurred,” a spokesperson says. “In the case of a vehicle being returned earlier than agreed, we encourage our members to take any extenuating circumstances into account and ensure any changes are justified.” Hertz was unmoved when Howorth explained about his brother’s death and the restrictive quarantine rules in place in Australia at the time, which gave him little leeway with his return flight. “There were reduced caps on the number of residents allowed to fly back to Australia, and talk in the media was of people struggling to return before Christmas,” he says. “Once you managed to get permission to travel, you then had to do two weeks hotel quarantine, which meant I was away a total of six weeks from my family, including a grandchild who was born during my absence. I couldn’t afford to wait.” A customer service agent assured him that it aimed to resolve his concerns to ensure he had an “extraordinary experience” on his next visit, then declared that the charge could not be amended. Only when the Guardian questioned the transparency of Hertz’s terms and conditions and reminded it of the BVRLA code of practice did the company relent. It admitted that circumstances such as Howorth’s should be considered on a “case-by-case basis” and refunded the £670 as a “gesture of goodwill”, although it still insisted the policy was made clear in the contract. But when asked again to produce this clear warning, a spokesperson said: “We plan to review our terms and conditions to make it even clearer to our customers that changing the return time of a rental with us may incur a recalculation of their rate and additional charges.” How car hire firms can part you from your cash Damage repairs These are unannounced, unexplained debits from a customer’s credit card after they have returned their hire vehicle. The excuse is most commonly damage and often there is little detail about the alleged problem and no cost breakdown for repairs. Customers who were aware that they had damaged their vehicle may find themselves charged extortionate sums for repairs that are never carried out. Leicester Trading Standards is in the fourth year of an investigation into Europcar’s alleged overcharging for repairs. When you borrow a car, make sure you take a close look, photograph any blemishes and ensure they are recorded by the company. On drop-off, check the car with the customer service person if you can, and take more photographs showing its condition. Pointless insurance This is how budget companies make their money. All rentals include basic insurance but customers are tricked or pressured into buying unwanted and unnecessary extra cover to reduce high excess liability, when collecting their vehicle. One reader, who had bought £20 insurance from a third party, was asked to sign a blank screen to confirm a £110 hire deal and later found he had committed to a £500 policy for a 10-day rental. It is a good idea to buy additional insurance to cover the usually very high excess, should anything go wrong. However, it is far cheaper to buy a standalone policy from a broker before you travel. Decent firms will accept that you have your own cover but when you are asked to sign the hire contract, check what you are signing for and never sign a blank screen. Unfair fuel policies Full-empty is a lucrative ruse – the customer collects the car with a full tank and returns it empty. Firms bank on the fact that no driver will return it with a completely empty tank – and they charge a premium a premium for filling it at the start of the hire. Rental firms will usually give you the option of full-full – you get a full tank and must return the vehicle with the same. The firm won’t charge you for the initial petrol, and you should be able to get a better deal on the refill. Mysterious charges Outrageous sums can be deducted by stealth for add-ons, including extra cleaning, senior (or young) driver fees and extra mileage. You cannot do much about the second two but you may be able to avoid being landed with a costly cleaning bill by giving the car a quick vacuum before you return it. Some car hire customers have reported being charged to clean up things such as sand or mud in the footwells, which they could have removed themselves. Late pick-up This catches out customers who book a vehicle from an airport depot. If they neglect to include their flight number or are unable to warn the hire company that they are delayed, they may find their vehicle has been given to another customer and they are not due a refund. Some firms reallocate cars if a customer is as little as an hour late, effectively earning double money for a single rental period.Tammy Kim, the vice-mayor of Irvine, California, won her seat with more votes than any candidate in the city’s history. But that hasn’t stopped the racist attacks. Kim, originally from South Korea, is one of three Asian American members of the southern California city’s council, which gained an Asian majority with Kim’s election. During a recent public discussion about a proposed veterans cemetery, she faced a xenophobic rant from a man who asked how she felt about the “36,574 Americans who died trying to save your country for freedom” during the Korean war. “I am an American,” she responded emphatically. “This is my country. And I am an American.” The exchange has drawn widespread attention, and turned a spotlight once again on the rise in anti-Asian hate during the Covid-19 pandemic and the vitriol that Asian American lawmakers face while doing their jobs. Hate crimes in Orange county, where Irvine is located, are on the rise too, while a new study found they increased in nearby Los Angeles county by 20% in 2020. The Guardian spoke to Kim, a non-profit leader, about the experience, the racism she’s faced as a lawmaker and changing demographics in Orange county. This interview has been edited for length and clarity. What happened at the 26 October meeting? This particular gentleman who spoke, it wasn’t the first time. During public comment you’re supposed to just listen and let everyone have their first amendment. He talked about the fact that I’m from Korea and they saved “my country” so therefore I should feel a certain way. That happened before, I didn’t say anything. That’s why, when it happened again, I just said: “This is my country. I’m an American, and this is my country.” I didn’t need to say anything more. The Korean war was 17 years before I was born and we did not come here as war refugees. His comments were based on ignorance and the white savior complex of thinking they went to Asia to save us … and that I owe him something. At every level that is the core of white supremacy. Had you thought about how you might respond or was it just an immediate reaction? It just came out the way it came out. As an immigrant, you are constantly challenged to prove how American [you are]. This is land that was stolen from Indigenous tribes and built on the backs of slaves and everyone here except those who are native to these lands are immigrants. People of European descent are not questioned about their loyalty or patriotism. After you responded to his comments and he finished speaking, what happened next? The small group of his supporters applauded and patted him on the back. The camera didn’t pick up on [that]. It’s infuriating when you see that being encouraged. It’s exhausting being the perpetual foreigner and it’s exhausting to have to prove my loyalty and my right to be here. You think you get to a certain point where this doesn’t matter any more but then it does. I’ve experienced more direct xenophobia as a candidate and a person in elected office than I have in my civilian life. It always exists, it just comes out because they’re thinking those thoughts anyway. That’s why you have anti-Asian hate. It’s very easy when you’re already viewed as the other. This is all part of a bigger systemic issue in this country. This is just a small manifestation of what’s under the surface. What response have you received? People were so glad I said something. Other communities have had these issues. In Orange county something similar happened to a supervisor who is Vietnamese and [was] told [in a meeting] to go back to Vietnam. This has happened before. I’m not the first person. Orange county has a history of rightwing extremism and white supremacy. How has the region changed in your time there? Orange county has long been a bastion and a safe haven for extremist white nationalists, the Klan. In Santa Ana they had lynchings of Chinese people in the early 1900s. Orange county has a long history of overt racism toward people of color, but demographics are changing. Irvine in particular has changed a lot. Orange county has changed a lot. Asians are the fastest growing population in Irvine by far. The demographics are changing, the stores are changing. When the Albertsons closed and then it was announced that H-mart would occupy the space, there were residents who were not happy. When I came here there wasn’t a boba place and now there’s about 40. What has your tenure been like on the Irvine city council? There were 14 candidates I ran against. I ended up being the highest vote-getter in the history of Irvine. It felt great that I could be me and true to who I am and that resonated. I’ve been able to move a lot of progressive items forward. The first thing I did was work with the police department to establish an anti-hate incident and hate crime portal in multiple languages. When we were working with the rental relief program during Covid, I insisted that the applications be in all the threshold languages [Farsi, Korean, Chinese, Vietnamese], as a result we had people that had never been able to access rental relief before. This is what we talk about when we talk about equity and access. That’s what I wake up in the morning to try to accomplish. The flipside is that being a public figure people think they can do or say whatever they want, including that I’m a reverse racist. Everything I do, I’m fighting for all citizens. When you’re fighting for clean air, you’re fighting for clean air for everyone; when you’re fighting for equity, you’re fighting for equity for everyone. Across the US, the tenor of city council meetings and other other meetings has intensified with public officials facing increased vitriol. What do you think is driving that? We live in a very polarized society right now where it’s like good versus evil and everything is very black or its white. I think unfortunately these are the times we’re living in. Everyone’s in their bubble, their echo chamber, whether it’s social media or the news they watch. I also think just not seeing people, it’s very easy to be a keyboard warrior. It’s not just one thing.Across corporate America, relations between companies and their labor unions range from chilly to ice-cold. Not at Kaiser Permanente – the California-based healthcare giant. Kaiser has long been seen as having the nation’s best labor-management partnership. Now the partnership finds itself in crisis as 34,000 Kaiser Permanente healthcare workers prepare to strike on Monday, in what would be the largest walkout in this fall’s strike wave. After risking their lives during the pandemic, many Kaiser workers are asking how things could have turned so sour in the much-praised partnership, in which managers and union members team up at hundreds of Kaiser facilities to find innovative ways to improve care and efficiency, saving the company tens of millions of dollars a year. Last week one of Kaiser’s nurses’ unions served notice it would strike on 15 November, and soon after, several other unions also voted to strike. The nurses’ union – United Nurses Associations of California/Union of Health Care – complained that management’s latest employment offer would “depress wages for current employees and slash wages for incoming workers”. Saying that its labor costs were far above its competitors, Kaiser initially proposed raises of 1% a year for three years and cutting the pay of new hires to 26% below those of its current employees. “The partnership has been built on it being a leading payer in the market,” said Adrienne Eaton, dean of the Rutgers School of Management and Labor Relations, who has written about Kaiser. “If they’ve decided not to do that any more, it’s going to cause a strong reaction among the unions.” It certainly caused a strong reaction in Semanu Mawugbe, a Kaiser nurse in Los Angeles. “It’s a slap in the face,” he said, noting that the 1%-a-year offer was well below this year’s 5%-plus inflation rate. “They tell us we’re heroes and we’re much appreciated because of everything we did during the pandemic”, he said. “But their offer shows they don’t mean it. We’re the ones who sustained the hospitals and took care of the sick like it’s a war zone.” The unions say Kaiser is seeking to squeeze wages when the non-profit company is doing well, with $45bn in cash reserves and $6.8bn in operating profits the last three years. Since Kaiser’s labor-management partnership was founded in 1997, none of its 35 union locals has gone on strike. The partnership includes over 100,000 union members. Kaiser overall has $89bn in annual revenues, 12 million health plan members, 39 hospitals and more than 700 other medical facilities spread across eight states and Washington DC. “The challenge we are trying to address in partnership with our unions is the increasingly unaffordable cost of healthcare,” Arlene Peasnall, Kaiser’s senior vice-president of human resources, said in a statement. “The fact is wages and benefits account for half of Kaiser Permanente’s operational costs.” Peasnall said Kaiser’s wages have risen to the point where its union members earn “on average 26% above the market rate”. “This is unsustainable,” she said. Facing a strike, Kaiser management increased its contract offer to a 2% raise in each of four years with a 2% lump sum payment in the contract’s first two years. Under Kaiser’s revised proposal, new hires would be paid 15% less than current workers. Several labor experts said Kaiser made some elementary bargaining mistakes that were bound to inflame its workers. Kaiser offered just 1%-a-year raise while its largest union, a service employees’ local representing 46,000 Kaiser workers, has a contract that calls for raises of 3% a year over the next two years. Other unions felt shortchanged to be offered less than that. “It does seem like a provocation,” Dean Eaton said. Labor experts also said Kaiser’s two-tier proposal to pay new hires significantly less was bound to anger workers and worsen staffing problems. “It generally doesn’t make sense having two tiers of staff and it makes even less sense when we’re going through a pandemic.” said Peter Lazes, former director of the Health Care Transformation Project at Cornell University. “I have to blame management for not being sensitive. It seems hard to understand why they’re doing this when there’s a nursing shortage nationally.” Lazes, who has studied Kaiser’s partnership, isn’t so sure that the labor dispute will jeopardize the partnership long-term. “The idea that you’re going to have differences between labor and management partners that might result in a strike or a strike vote is part of the labor-management process,” he said. “Union and management have to know how to dance together and box at the same time.” Denise Duncan, president of the United Nurses union, called Kaiser’s offer “totally unacceptable”. She derided the proposal to pay new workers less: “You can’t solve a nursing shortage that way.” She faulted Kaiser’s wage survey, saying it should have been done in cooperation with Kaiser’s unions. She said the survey, comparing Kaiser’s pay levels with those at smaller, less sophisticated medical institutions, often in rural areas, was apples and oranges. “Ultimately, we just had to pull our levers [for a strike]”, Duncan told the Guardian. “Our members were angry. Everyone worked so hard. We feel Kaiser let our principles of partnership go.” Lazes said that Kaiser’s new CEO and leadership team do not seem nearly as committed to making the labor-management partnership succeed and run smoothly as was Bernard Tyson, a Kaiser CEO who died of a heart attack in November 2019. Duncan wholeheartedly agreed. “We believed Bernard to be a purist on social justice and working people and having the utmost respect for the history of the partnership,” she said. Duncan said Tyson’s successor, Greg Adams, had been doing little to ensure the partnership’s success. “You got to invest in it. You have to bring in the next generation of workers and leaders,” she said. “If you don’t invest in it, it dies.” Peasnall said the company was devoted to the partnership. “Don’t mistake passionate advocacy in bargaining with actual changes in a relationship,” she told the Guardian. “Our labor-management partnership remains strong and is a significant source of our strength as an organization.” Peasnall added: “We absolutely believe that as we conclude bargaining this cycle, and get through the disastrous pandemic, we will emerge stronger and more united than ever before.” Meanwhile nurses like Semanu Mawugbe are angry and ready to walk out. “None of us want a strike, but there are times it has to be done,” he said. “We’re hoping for a last-minute, 11th-hour turnaround.”When Zane Powles realised that the UK was probably going into a lockdown in March last year, his first thought was about the schoolchildren. Specifically, their stomachs. “I thought: how will the kids get their free school meals?” says the 49-year-old assistant headteacher from Cleethorpes. “I know our kids live hand to mouth.” Powles’s solution was straightforward: he would personally deliver them all. And so he did: 15,000 meals, over a distance of 900 miles, through lockdowns one, two and three. In rain and hot sun, Powles pounded the streets, meals in tow, for the next 12 months. Christmas lights appeared in windows, and were packed away again. “I delivered meals for one week short of a year,” says Powles. “It’s mad looking back. Crazy.” “He’s an absolute hero without a cape,” says Claire Pulfrey, a parent at Powles’s school. “I have a son with ADHD and it got to a point at the end of the last lockdown where I was struggling to cope. Seeing Zane every day was like a little ball of happiness.” Before Covid, Powles ran a unit attached to a Grimsby primary school for children with challenging behaviour. “I’ve been running the unit for nine years,” he says. “I get hit by a kid probably six times a week. They’re just communicating with me the only way they can. You have to get past that, and find out what the real problem is.” Grimsby is one of the most deprived areas of the UK. “Families haven’t got much,” says Powles. “The vast majority of families are trying their best, but they are struggling. The issues are cyclical and generational.” Students often go to school hungry. On 23 March 2020, when lockdown was announced, Powles looked at the list of children on free school meals, and mapped out their home addresses. There were 85 meals to be delivered each day. Powles would get into school at 7.30am to prepare the lunch bags with the headteacher and whoever else was around. Then he’d set off, wearing two backpacks – one on his front and one on his back – and carrying a bin liner full of crisps. “I was carrying around 50kg a day,” says Powles. “I’d have to come back mid-morning to reload.” The bags dug painful welts in his shoulders. When it was hot, his back would be covered in sweat. Powles damaged his knee badly as a result of all the walking, and is currently awaiting surgery. Later, when vouchers for free school meals were introduced, the parcels got even heavier. Powles was cramming jacket potatoes and baked beans into the backpacks. “Bloody hell,” he says. “It was very heavy.” At Christmas time, Powles became a festive carthorse, dragging 250 Christmas hampers loaded on to a trailer. “Man,” he says, “that was painful.” Despite his aching shoulders and damaged knee, Powles was glad to see the families face to face, to check all was well at home. There was one mother who would normally save a few pounds a week during term to put towards feeding her children over the holidays. But she wasn’t prepared, as schools had shut suddenly, and only one of her children was entitled to free school meals. “I realised,” Powles said, “she was halving his meal to feed the other child.” Powles arranged for an extra meal to be delivered every day. “The kid said to me, ‘Mr Powles, you saved the world!’.” Powles can relate to these families. “One of the reasons I have such a connection to these children,” he says, “is because I have been that person.” As a child, he attended six different primary schools, and was also on free school meals. “My mum masked a lot of it,” he says, “because she was a great mum and did her best, in tough circumstances.” Despite receiving an MBE for his charity work, he does not see what he did as remarkable. “I was just doing my job,” he says. When I ask Powles what he’d like for his treat, his answer surprises me. “This will sound really weird,” he ventures. “Have you ever seen the show Naked and Afraid?” Powles hastily clarifies: “I love being challenged. Being out in the wild on my own, and enjoying the beauty of it.” Trueways Survival, one of the UK’s largest providers of survival courses, kindly offers Powles a complimentary space on its two-day urban survival course, held near Cranleigh, Surrey. I catch up with him shortly afterwards. He is parked in his camper van, near Marlow, Buckinghamshire. It’s half-term. “The instructor was brilliant.” he says. Powles learned to boil water in a plastic bottle and to sterilise and filter water on the move. He plans to buy the special UV pen the instructor recommended for sterilisation. “I’d love to go for three or four days’ wild camping at a time,” says Powles, but he was always put off by the prospect of bringing a four-day supply of water. “I can never carry that much.” Now, with the pen, he has found a useful workaround. He plans to take it when he goes wild camping in the Peak District during his next holiday. “I’ll put that knowledge to good use,” says Powles, ever the teacher – and can-do adventurer. Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comIn the summer of 1956, Patricia Highsmith was living in upstate New York with Doris Sanders, an advertising copywriter with whom she professed to be in love. The novelist was, at 35, worried about a mid-career slump, although this was more routine anxiety than reality. For the previous seven years, Highsmith had enjoyed a stretch of extraordinary creativity, resulting in the novels that would make her reputation – Strangers on a Train, The Price of Salt (published in 1952 under a pseudonym and later republished, under her own name, as Carol), and The Talented Mr Ripley. And, after years of turbulence in her private life, she seemed, finally, to have achieved a measure of tranquillity. She and Doris bought a car. Highsmith started a vegetable garden. Improbably, she joined a church choir. A few months after moving upstate, however, she noted ominously in her diary: “The danger of living with somebody, for me, is the danger of living without one’s normal diet of passion. Things are so readily equalized, soothed, forgotten with a laugh, with perspective.” This might sound pleasant, to some. To Highsmith, it was hell. Two years later, she was living in a different town, with a different woman, from whom she was already plotting her escape. As she noted at the end of that diary entry in 1956: “I don’t really want perspective, except my own.” It is more than 25 years since Patricia Highsmith died of lung cancer, in Switzerland, at the age of 74. While her reputation as a writer has never been higher, her personal image remains a mixed bag. Before reading her diaries and notebooks, published for the first time this month after a Stakhanovite editing job by Anna von Planta, my view of Highsmith was in line with the common perception that she was savagely impolite, racist, alcoholic and impossible. (Also scowling; in photos from her later years, the person she most resembles is Richard Nixon.) Her own publisher, Otto Penzler, described Highsmith to Joan Schenkar, her biographer, as “a horrible human being”. And while she tore through countless love affairs and infidelities (prior to moving in with Doris Sanders, Highsmith had been in love with Lynn Roth, Doris’s girlfriend – although this may say more about incestuous lesbian New York than Highsmith’s rapaciousness) with a swagger that, in a male writer of the period, wouldn’t have been considered remarkable, Highsmith’s eccentricities went deeper. “I am becoming a little odd, personally,” she wrote in 1954, a fact that grew more pronounced as the years went by. It’s a startling effect of reading the diaries that one begins to understand not only why this occurred, but the impact it had on Highsmith’s fiction. As related by von Planta in the book’s foreword, the job of decoding Highsmith’s private papers was almost comically fiendish. As well as publishing 22 novels and scores of short stories, Highsmith produced, in terrible handwriting, 8,000 pages of private writing across 18 diaries, 38 notebooks and five languages, of which English was the only one she spoke proficiently. The notebooks are where Highsmith worked out her stories and ideas; the diaries, written in a French, German, Spanish or Italian so terrible as to constitute encryption, are where the juicy stuff lies. In Von Planta’s 1,024-page volume, the two sources are combined to offer a portrait of Highsmith from the jolly solipsism of her 20s in New York – when, to read her diaries, you’d have had no idea the second world war was ongoing – to her sombre 50s and 60s, when she became increasingly bitter about the world and her life. In between are years of turmoil and heartbreak consistent with a truism about diaries: that you never write down the happy stuff. And yet alongside Highsmith’s rage and despair there is a great deal of joy, courage and unvanquishable still‑in-the-game spirit. Here she is in 1942, still a student at Barnard in New York: “I looked very good today, even though my teeth are tormenting me. It’s only in my head: they aren’t in bad shape, but I keep getting more and more brown stains. Don’t know what to do.” One of the delights of the early diary entries is the unlikely spectacle of Highsmith as steward of a lot of glancing – Bridget Jones-type material (8 November 1943: “Nice day. Wore moccasins to work with great success.”) Born in Fort Worth, Texas, she had, at the age of six, been transplanted by her mother and stepfather to Manhattan and, by her early 20s, was already an ambitious artist and writer. Highsmith is by turns cocky (“don’t need anyone. I have my art, and my art alone is true”), self-romanticising (“man, and Patricia Highsmith, were born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward”) and sardonic. “One of those days when I made dinner,” she notes in the summer of 1945. “And I will say here and now: it’s not worth the trouble.” Given the proprieties of the era, however, the most striking thing about the novelist in her early 20s is – there’s no polite way to put this – what an extraordinarily unapologetic shagger she is. 23 December 1942: “Buffie’s skin is like exquisite liquid, sliding over mine like a piece of satin … Buffie would happily have me as her only lover instead of her husband. Perhaps we’ll keep our Wednesdays.” Buffie needn’t get too comfortable. There is competition from, in short succession, Rosalind, Allela, Chloe and Virginia, a handful of the names that will populate the grid Highsmith keeps during these years ranking her lovers. (These women are as hard on Highsmith as she is on them; “Comb your hair,” snaps Rosalind in 1943. “You look like Byron with a hangover.”) When she writes, dreamily, of “the day we say goodbye forever to each other”, it triggers a note from the editor: “It is unclear what woman inspired this and the following entry.” Well, quite. If Highsmith’s nights are fuelled by martinis often chased with a bout of self-loathing (“Damn it, why do I drink so much?”), in daylight hours she is clear-eyed. “What to do with homosexuality?” she writes in an entry from December 1942, a question that will occupy her for the next 50 years and that, obliquely or otherwise, many of her novels will confront. It is the central pathos of the diaries: the journey taken by Highsmith from these carefree days of her 20s, when after dinner one night she writes “a woman at the restaurant read our palms and gave me the best reading, that I won’t get married”, to a place of much guiltier and more ambivalent feelings. By the early 1950s, Highsmith’s flippancy is starting to erode, as the permissiveness of the war years gives way to the more socially conservative America of the day. Uneasily, she watches as friends – many of whom she has slept with – marry off and have children. In spite of the fact that she considers men, at best, a “dead weight” in bed, she wonders if she should be doing the same. “I’m making the greatest effort with Marc,” she writes in 1948, before fairly howling: “He was drunk, ugly, not at all appealing. I lay there thinking how beautiful and lovely and pure girls are! And I was terribly sad.” By 1955, the first note of bitterness creeps in when, with an eye on her hastily marrying peers, she writes: “Maturity descends like a slowly collapsing cake … maturity destroys the self, and makes you like everybody else.” Highsmith does not marry Marc. Instead, she becomes a famous novelist and her success buys her not only time and money, but a portion of the social capital that as a single woman – never mind a lesbian – she would have otherwise been denied. It’s a piece of escape art that shows up in her novels, which at the most basic level are about people getting away with things – murder, most obviously, but also, in The Price of Salt, which tells the story of an affair between two women, romantic love. As Highsmith wrote in the afterword in 1989, when she finally came out as the author: “Prior to this book, homosexuals male and female in American novels had had to pay for their deviation by cutting their wrists, drowning themselves, switching to heterosexuality, or by collapsing – alone and miserable and shunned – into a depression equal to hell.” The Price of Salt sold a million copies in paperback. Strangers on a Train, Highsmith’s first novel, written two years earlier, was snapped up by Alfred Hitchcock and turned into a film. Her fourth novel, The Talented Mr Ripley, would become the basis for a five-novel series and an extraordinary success. In spite of these triumphs, Highsmith spends her life relitigating her choices. She finds herself simultaneously heroic, tragic, thwarted, constrained and doomed to repeat her worst pathologies, caught between a desire to be happy and the conviction that “happy days lead to stagnation of the mind”. At her happiest, in the diaries, one is reminded of that line from Loitering with Intent, the novel by Muriel Spark – who was knocking around Rome in the 1960s while Highsmith was in France and ended up, deliciously, in a complicated cat-sitting arrangement with her – in which Fleur Talbot considers “how wonderful it feels to be an artist and a woman in the 20th century”. But Highsmith was also plagued by the image of what life “should” have been, and from a dozen comments in the diaries, it’s clear she couldn’t bear this: the fact that, for all her accomplishments, in the eyes of large swathes of society she would still have ranked lower in the hierarchy than the average country club wife. In 1960, shortly before leaving America for good, she writes: “Without liquor I would have married a dull clod, Roger, and had what is called a normal life. A normal life is also often boredom or violence, divorce, unhappiness, unhappiness for the children I never had.” And yet the shadow of that life tormented her. It shows up in the novels as an almost pathological dislike of women chasing marriage, from poor, pathetic Miriam in Strangers on a Train to Marge in the first Ripley, to Therese’s horror, in Carol, of the “55-year-old faces of women who worked at Frankenberg’s, stricken with an everlasting exhaustion and terror”. Highsmith hates a lot of other people, too, of course. Her novels reserve a particular scorn for the male dilettante, hiding his mediocrity behind his father’s money. There is Dickie Greenleaf in Ripley, Richard in Carol and, as one understands from the diaries, Marc Brandel, the British novelist she almost married, in real life. When she confesses to Marc she is attracted to women, he is, at first, “amazingly tolerant”, an opinion he revises when Highsmith turns him down. Marc writes her a letter that she reproduces almost verbatim in Carol, in which he calls her sexuality “rootless and infantile”, and concludes that he feels nothing towards her but “disgust”. In Highsmith’s novels, men like Marc inevitably wind up with an oar to the side of the head. By contrast, Highsmith is quite fond of her antiheroes. It is often remarked that the author identifies as much with the aggressor as the victim, but this isn’t quite right; one of the appeals of her writing is that in many of the novels, she has no time for the victim at all. “People dancing around the fringes of the law, living purely by skulduggery, are my delight!” she writes in an entry in 1960. Her male antiheroes, while shady and desperate, are not the straightforwardly charming psychopaths of lesser writers. They are impressionable, socially awkward outsiders, willing to do anything to avoid being nobodies. Highsmith, while exposing their weakness, understands their pain. They are also, inevitably, in love with the person they set out to destroy. In the diaries, Highsmith records a remark made by her friend, Lil Picard, in 1954, who suggests: “No one murders who has a satisfactory sexual outlet.” In 1963, Highsmith leaves America for Europe in pursuit of a woman – “Caroline” – with whom years of tortuous involvement await. And yet, from affair to doomed affair, something unjaded remains. If her addiction to drama – “I prefer to be romantic. I want the strand of hair … the telephone call that means life or death” – is a kind of evasion, it is one that generates the energy that Highsmith clearly finds artistically useful. In middle age, Highsmith can still be quite jolly. In July 1967, she writes, “my oldest snail died today, or maybe yesterday as Camus would say”. (Famously, Highsmith bred snails, smuggling them across the Channel in her cleavage. This one was three years old and produced 500 eggs.) She has a few startling stabs at self-help: “Just decide you’re going to feel happy. Forget your bank account. Possibly make a martini. But only one … Smile – inside!” She will, she decides for the umpteenth time, give up women. But within days, she has fallen off the wagon. “Race, fire! Catch my love! Brand me with her. This is for always.” For future reference, she advises herself: “Avoid sadists.” There are omissions. For an account of the sheer violence of her relationship with her mother, you need the biographies. And there are long, slow stretches. The European travelogues of the 1960s and 70s drag. Highsmith is financially secure and her reputation, at least in Europe, is assured. But her love life is, as usual, unhappy and even as the successful novels keep coming – her acclaimed The Cry of the Owl; four more volumes of Ripley – she grows increasingly sour. She goes on great tirades about Israel, and is justifiably accused of antisemitism. (“I am sick of the Jews,” she had recorded in her diary, years earlier, and now refers to the “Holocaust, inc”). She gets angry with the women’s movement, attacking women with husbands and children who complain of being denied careers. “Women are, alas, showing themselves more infantile and incapable than ever in whining about their lot,” she writes, and it’s easy to see where this comes from. For years, Highsmith kept in her head “the vision of a house in the country with the blond wife whom I adore, with the children whom I adore, on the land and with the trees I adore”, before concluding, sadly: “I know this will never be.” Now, women who had all these things wanted the one thing Highsmith held over them – professional success. It wasn’t fair. It was also bigger than Highsmith’s individual pathologies. In 1961, she wrote: “Homosexuals prefer one another’s company not so much because of a common sexual deviance from what is socially accepted, but because they know that they have all been through the same hell, the same trials, the same depressions – and those who met have survived. Those not present have killed themselves, or have managed, or decided, or were able to conform.” Many of Highsmith’s former girlfriends had, indeed, killed themselves. Others, including Caroline, had gone back to their husbands and children. “The strongest of all emotions is the sense of injustice. A baby can feel it,” writes Highsmith, and if her work ethic, and the tenor of her prose, were partly driven by energies ignited by a sense of indignation and rage, she became fiercely – and perversely – protective of the conditions creating it. When she died, in 1995, Highsmith was living alone, the bravado of her early years curdled into hostility. A modern therapist would probably say her serial choice of women who were either unavailable or treated her horribly was an expression of internalised homophobia. As it is, the therapist she visited in the late 1940s, in a last ditch attempt to “cure” herself, as recorded in her diary, told her she was actually heterosexual and only attracted to women because of her unhealthy hatred for her mother. Highsmith gave this diagnosis serious consideration. And then, a few days later, she binned it, concluding with a mixture of regret and defiance: “Alas, I know the truth – I do not wish to change.” • Patricia Highsmith: Her Diaries and Notebooks, edited by Anna von Planta, is published by W&amp;N (£30). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.I have been preparing for the long nights ahead, resisting White Lotus and the latest seasons of Sex Education; instead, I have demijohns of marrow rum gently bubbling away, and I have bought some Iris reticulata “Harmony” bulbs. I will plant them in shallow bowls to bring indoors to flower during January, when the sight of such delicate beauty will sustain me after the box sets are finished and the rum is drunk dry. I would have bought more than just these – I would have filled the house with forced hyacinths and paperwhites narcissus, but I have yet to find a source of organically grown versions. So it’s all on the shoulders of the humble I. reticulata “Harmony” to keep me buoyed up over the darkest months. In the wild, I. reticulata grows in Russia, through the Caucasus and into northern Iran, where it is found in sunny spots on cold, dry mountains with free-draining soil. The spring’s snow melt provides moisture for early growth, but after that, conditions dry out and this is the key to longevity for the bulbs in our gardens. A wet autumn and winter spot will rot the bulbs, so add sand or grit to heavier soils, along with leaf mould or well-rotted homemade compost, to ensure the best blooms. Indoors is a slightly different matter. Go for a few smaller terracotta pots, or one large centrepiece in a wide shallow bowl. If you want to give your grandmother’s porcelain bowl a new life, add drainage holes using a fine tile drill bit that will do the job without it cracking. You’ll need good-quality, peat-free compost mixed with grit for drainage, roughly three parts compost to one part grit. For the best displays, plant the bulbs 5cm deep, but close together – you can get 10-15 bulbs in a container 22cm across. To force the bulbs, keep the container somewhere cool, dark and out of the rain. If you don’t have a shed, leave it outside with a larger pot on top for cover. They need about 10 weeks of this treatment, so if you get to it pronto, you can bring them inside to flower in January. In a pretty pot they make lovely Christmas gifts, and it’s a great project for kids. Once indoors, keep them somewhere light and they’ll grow at an extraordinary rate, up to 6cm in 24 hours. The blooms are gently scented too. You can buy bulbs online from Natural Bulbs and Organic Bulbs. Once the blooms are finished, store the pot outside to allow the leaves to die back naturally. Once this has happened, keep them somewhere they won’t get drenched if it’s a wet summer so you can bring them back indoors next autumn. Or plant them 10cm deep and the same distance apart in your garden.“I can’t risk not being believed and people thinking I’m exploiting what happened to me,” says Ed Gavagan, a survivor of child sexual abuse and one of the participants in this remarkable documentary. He is one of six adult men who work with director Robert Greene, their lawyer Rebecca Randles, child actor Terrick Trobough and drama therapist Monica Phinney to make a film about their experiences of abuse by Catholic priests in their home town of Kansas City. What could have been a disaster in the hands of a less sensitive film-maker ends up an extraordinary feat of care, collaboration and creativity. Greene, who also directed innovative nonfiction projects Kate Plays Christine and Bisbee ’17, learned of the men via a TV press conference. Given that they were already public advocates for justice, he felt they might be interested in bringing their stories to a wider audience. Yet the film ends up being more about the act of healing than simply raising awareness. It moves between dramatised scenes written, directed and performed by the men, and more traditional behind-the-scenes footage of their process. Catharsis, we discover, can be elusive; it’s haunting and incredibly moving to see survivor Dan Laurine attempt to location-scout a site of abuse that appears to have since vanished without a trace. The deliberately artificial dramatisations are a safe place to explore the reverberations of trauma, in the form of time-warped memories, abstract dream sequences and, crucially, alternative endings.Name it The government to formally recognise femicide – the killing of women by men. Know it Data on the killing of women to be gathered in an accessible central repository; the domestic abuse and victims commissioners to have the power and resources to ensure recommendations to tackle femicide are implemented. Stop it An ambitious cross-party, long-term strategy to be established to tackle femicide and all forms of men’s violence against women and girls. Read more on the End Femicide campaign on theguardian.comHis voice choked up and his face went red. The young man squinted and panted, his mouth pulled up plaintively towards his nose, his answers to the questions coming out in gasping little bursts. Kyle Rittenhouse, on the stand testifying at his trial for killing two people and wounding a third last summer at a racial justice protest in Kenosha, Wisconsin, was not crying for the men he killed, Joseph Rosenbaum and Anthony Huber. He was crying for himself, describing what he said was his mortal fear that night in August 2020, when he opened fire on the protesters using an AR-15. “I didn’t do anything wrong,” Rittenhouse gasped, describing how he had confronted and ultimately killed the two men while he was guarding the lot of a car dealership. “I defended myself.” Rittenhouse was 17 at the time of the shooting; he is 18 now. The young man’s emotional testimony had a practical purpose: it was a performance meant to make him seem helpless and childlike, and to convince the jury in his homicide trial that there was a reasonable possibility that he was in fear for his life when he shot the three men. But to many, the emotion of Rittenhouse’s testimony seemed to stem not from his memories of the incident, but from the indignant entitlement of a white man thwarted in the enforcement of his own privilege. Many compared Rittenhouse’s tears during his testimony to those of Brett Kavanaugh, who shouted, red-faced and spitting, during his confirmation hearings, when he was asked questions about his alleged assault of Christine Blasey Ford, back when he was Rittenhouse’s age. Both of the displays prompted questions about their sincerity and opportunism. Was Rittenhouse really crying? Was Kavanaugh just putting on a show for Donald Trump to watch on TV? But they both also pointed to a peculiar phenomenon that remains little understood: the rightwing use of public displays of white male emotionalism as a political tool. In one sense, the two men’s conduct under oath was quite strange. Both of them appear to be self-conscious avatars of white conservative masculinity, and their ideology would seem to preclude male emotionalism, as traditional gender norms have historically justified male dominance precisely because of men’s supposed stoicism and self-control. As Vox’s Jamil Smith put it: “We’re generally unfamiliar with seeing boys and men exhibit their emotion in such a public way. Vulnerability and common conceptions of manhood, especially among conservatives, have not traditionally been bedfellows.” And yet conservative white men’s emotions are increasingly coming to the forefront of political life, and they seem to animate much of the Trumpist right. In practice, such men express their emotions all the time. They express them at Trump rallies, when they jeer at the mention of perceived enemies and cheer for lines of chauvinism and anger. They express their feelings when they picket abortion clinics, screaming at women walking inside and threatening the staff. They express their feelings when they fly Confederate and “Blue Lives Matter” flags; they express their feelings when they vote, and when they pick petulant fights with the service workers who ask them to wear their masks inside stores and restaurants. The common thread in these rightwing expressions of masculine emotion is that when conservative men express their feelings, they don’t do so as a gesture of humility or need. Instead, they wield their feelings as a threat. Arguably, both Rittenhouse and Kavanaugh were expressing their emotions when they committed their famous acts of alleged violence. It’s impossible to know what was in his mind, but Rittenhouse’s actions leading up to that night in Kenosha indicate that what brought him there was anger, or maybe a desire for glory. Rittenhouse says that he came to Kenosha to protect local businesses from demonstrators; he had appointed himself a vigilante, out avenging the interests of property and police against the protests. It’s hard not to suspect that he daydreamed about himself as a lone wolf who doesn’t play by the rules, like an action movie hero who wears a bandana as a headband and a cutoff denim vest. The rifle that Rittenhouse used to kill Rosenbaum and Huber had a barrel more than 16 inches long. Asked why he didn’t use a handgun, he told the court that he had chosen the semiautomatic rifle because “it looked cool”. For Kavanaugh, the project of decoding his emotions the night he allegedly assaulted Christine Blasey Ford is also speculative, but Ford’s testimony, along with documents made public during the hearings, paints a portrait of Kavanaugh as a young man with a vivid, if not especially varied, emotional life. His calendar from what was probably the month of the party shows him working out and calling his football friends by nicknames; he goes to their houses for “’skis” (“brewskis”: beers). In Ford’s account, he sounded satisfied with himself. “Indelible in the hippocampus is the laughter,” she said. “The uproarious laughter between the two, and their having fun at my expense.” Kavanaugh was a boy, like Rittenhouse, with an inflated sense of his own importance. The emotion he seemed to have expressed most clearly in those years was a consuming and profoundly unearned sense of his own superiority. The fact of the matter is that for Rittenhouse, the question of emotion will be central to his case. The question of his legal guilt or innocence hangs on whether he felt endangered at the time of the shootings – a subjective experience that, conveniently, only Rittenhouse himself can speak to. Meanwhile, Kavanaugh now sits in a position of superlative power. Maybe the problem is not that these white men don’t express their feelings enough. Maybe the problem is that their feelings have too much power. • This article was amended on 17 November 2021 to remove text stating that the rifle used to kill Joseph Rosenbaum and Anthony Huber was illegal for Kyle Rittenhouse to possess. Moira Donegan is a Guardian US columnistThe new Cop26 draft text released on Saturday morning has relatively few changes, showing that the global climate summit is narrowing down on the most contested issues that will make or break a strong agreement. The call for the phaseout of coal and fossil fuel subsidies remains, which is positive as many observers thought fossil fuel-rich nations would get it deleted. It has been slightly softened again, with “accelerating efforts towards” inserted before “coal phaseout”, rather than a straight call for a phaseout. That may be the price of keeping the clause in – no Cop document has ever named fossil fuels. Also added to this section is “recognising the need for support towards a just transition”, highlighting that funds may be needed to retrain fossil fuel industry workers. The all-important “ratchet” remains, asking nations to return to the next Cop in 2022 with more ambitious pledges to cut emissions. The current ones to 2030 are forecast to lead to a catastrophic 2.4C of global heating. The most substantial changes are on “loss and damage” – the compensation vulnerable and poor countries want for the destruction already being caused by the climate crisis they did little to cause. It is perhaps the most bitterly fought section of all, with low-income nations believing they have a moral right to this money and rich nations such as the US and EU fearing exposure to unlimited financial liabilities. The new text introduces a specific mention of “funds”: Decides that the Santiago network will be provided with funds to support technical assistance for the implementation of relevant approaches to avert, minimise and address loss and damage The previous text said “will be supported by a technical assistance facility to provide financial assistance”. It’s a small change, but a group of 130 nations, called the G77 + China and representing 85% of the world’s population, have been demanding the inclusion of text to establish a “loss and damage facility”, a specific delivery mechanism for funding, rather than more vague words about assistance in setting something up. The text also says: Decides to establish the [NAME] dialogue between parties, relevant organisations and stakeholders to discuss the arrangements for the funding of activities to avert, minimise and address loss and damage associated with the adverse impacts of climate change to take place at the first sessional period of the SBI, concluding at its 60th session This gives a specific timetable for dedicated work on loss and damage. These are concessions from rich nations, but it may not be enough. The G77 + China have been clear that loss and damage is a critical issue for them. Saleemul Huq, a veteran from Bangladesh of every Cop, tweeted that the language on loss and damage had “gone backwards” from the previous day’s text, while Mohamed Adow of the thinktank Power Shift Africa said vulnerable countries “can’t afford to leave Cop26 with this current version of the text on loss and damage”. There has also been a little movement on funding for adaptation – preparing for climate impacts like floods and droughts. The new text specifies the date – 2019 – from which the money must be doubled by 2025. That implies about $40bn a year. There are also highly complex negotiations taking place over issues including the rules to ensure that carbon trading markets do not have loopholes. However, Panama’s delegate is furious about the current state of these talks. Tracy Carty, the head of Oxfam’s Cop26 delegation, said: “Here in Glasgow, the world’s poorest countries are in danger of being lost from view, but the next few hours can and must change the course we are on. “What’s on the table is still not good enough. We need decisive progress on finance to help countries adapt and for the loss and damage endured. It is of deep concern that developing countries’ proposal for a loss-and-damage finance facility has not been included in this new draft. Negotiators should come back to the table armed with cans of Irn-Bru and stop at nothing to get an ambitious deal over the line.”Jelly is always a gorgeous way of highlighting fruit in all its glory. When it comes to November, it’s time to shine a light on quince. We grew them in the garden when I was a child, but none of us knew what to do with them; my brother and I used them as balls to play cricket. Since I’ve been enlightened, I look forward to getting my hands on them and making jelly (using up the poached quince and liquid makes me very satisfied). Any leftover poached quince can then be sliced and baked into a bakewell tart, or used to top yoghurt and granola in the morning. Poached quince, jelly and shortbread Prep 15 min Chill Overnight Cook 2 hr 45 min Serves 8 For the quince 1.9 litres water  400g sugar (or caster sugar) ½ lemon 4 quince 6 gelatine leaves (I use Dr Oetker) For the shortbread (makes 8 pieces) 60g caster sugar , plus extra for sprinkling 140g plain flour  A pinch of sea salt 115g cold unsalted butter, cubed Start by poaching the quince. Put the water and sugar in a large saucepan, squeeze in the lemon juice and add the spent shell. Peel the quince, throw the skins into the pan, then cut the fruit into quarters and add them, too. Make a cartouche: cut a circle of baking paper to fit the saucepan, run it under a tap, scrunch it up, then un-scrunch and lay over the quince in the pan and put a plate on top to hold the fruit down. Set the pan over a medium heat and, once the liquid comes to the boil, reduce to a simmer and cook for two to two and a half hours, until the quince is tender when a knife is inserted. Take off the heat, leave to sit for a few hours, then pour the liquor and fruit into a container and place in the fridge. The quince will develop in colour over the next few days. Before using, remove the core and strain the skins from the liquid. Meanwhile, heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Line the base of a 20cm sandwich tin with greaseproof paper (or use a similar-sized square baking tin). In a large bowl, stir the sugar, flour and salt, addthe butter and, using your fingertips, mix until the mix resembles breadcrumbs. The flour should be golden with butter and look rich.  Tip this into the lined tin, press down well, then prick all over with a fork.  Bake for 35-45 minutes, until lightly golden, then remove and sprinkle liberally with sugar and a pinch of salt, if you like.  Cut while warm, but leave to cool fully before removing from the tin and eating. To make the jelly, measure 750ml quince poaching liquid into a large jug, then taste: does it need more sweetness or acidity? If so, add 30g sugar or squeeze in half a lemon. Pour half the liquid into a small saucepan and warm gently until steaming. Soak the gelatine leaves in ice-cold water until soft, squeeze out the excess liquid and stir into the hot poaching liquid. Remove from the heat and, once fully dissolved, pour into the remaining poaching liquid. Stir well then pour into a jelly mould of your choice or individual ramekins. Cool to room temperature, then refrigerate overnight. To serve, dip the jelly mould in hot water, dry the base and flip over on to a plate. Serve with slices of quince, the shortbread and a dollop of thick Jersey cream. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoI have been immersed in the world of autism since my son was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome. Graham had many of the traits of autism from when he was a baby: speech and motor skill delays, sensory sensitivities, anxiety in big social gatherings and more. He had seen professionals for evaluations, but did not get a diagnosis until he was seven. This was a kid who had meltdowns over the sound of a blowdryer one floor up, the feel of a new shirt and the sight of a slice of cherry pie. Our lowest point was when he started refusing to enter homes he hadn’t been in before, or getting so upset at entering a restaurant that he would throw up. At least now I can sort of laugh when I think of the strangers in the grocery store who would approach him, then a cherubic toddler, and ask what his name was. “Mr Stupid Nobody,” was his reply. Like many parents, I was initially frightened by the diagnosis. Then, the more I learned about autism, the more I realised that many things I loved about my son were related to it. He is bright, curious, passionate and sensitive. His unusual and erudite use of language has delighted us since he was a toddler. On the way home from a Star Trek movie, his cousin told the then 12-year-old Graham that he spoke like Spock and he replied: “I believe I have a higher register.” Recently, he was helping in the kitchen and asked: “Mom, is there a good place for this bowl, because in my experience the counter space during dinner preparation is dynamic and mercurial.” Seven is not an unusual age to get a diagnosis, yet we could have made his and our lives so much better if we had known sooner. Knowledge about autism is not that widespread. This lack of understanding compounds misinformation and stigma. We need to better understand autistic people, not only to make the world a kinder place for them, but to broaden our own perspectives. I started photographing other children and families affected by autism in 2014 because the autistic people I knew were so different from stereotypes. A common statement in the autism world is: “If you’ve met one autistic person, you’ve met one autistic person.” This project depicts a range of individuals who inhabit their own unique place on the spectrum and in the world. Their autism doesn’t define them, but many would say it is integral to who they are. Many of the portraits were taken in quiet, contemplative moments. Sometimes the subjects are interacting with a person, animal or object, and sometimes they seem absorbed in their thoughts. Often what catches their attention is a detail that would be overlooked by others. I then invited the subjects or their parents to write anything they wished people to know about them or autism. Taken together, the entries describe many facets of their subjects: how they are both ordinary and extraordinary, their strengths and challenges, and how they adapt to the neurotypical world. Because many are written by parents, a large number touch on the transformative experience of being a parent of a child with a disability. I will say, and I think many of these parents would agree, that it has helped us find meaning in the world that we would not otherwise have found. Graham is now 18. He drives a car and is applying to colleges. While he sometimes gets annoyed when he thinks I am talking about autism too much, he recently wrote an essay about how his autism has made him an exceptionally engaged learner. I often think about a quote from Graham when he was 13. He had come across a post online asking how a “cure” would affect autistic people. He replied: “I would die. Then someone else would wake up in my body. I would no longer hold my interests. I would lose almost all my friends. Without what made me ‘me’, I would be a shadow of what I was. Ironically, I would be almost disabled, the very thing they would be trying to ‘cure’.” Graham, 2015 It is amazing to me that Graham, pictured here with his cousin, looks so disconnected and pensive in the middle of some very tumultuous wrestling. It was fleeting, although it doesn’t look that way. He says it was likely he was contemplating his next move. Newton, 2015 Strangers frequently feel compelled to touch Newton’s luxuriant red curls. This would make a lot of kids nervous, but it’s especially anxiety-provoking for an autistic person, who has difficulty reading facial expressions, body language and social cues. Newton often responds by becoming a chicken (chickens are a special interest of his), squawking and flapping his arms. This can have the desired effect of getting rid of unfamiliar people quickly. Jeff, 2018 Like many level 1 autistic adults of his generation, Jeff was diagnosed in middle age. “I was going through a difficult time at work,” he says, “and was seeking help in a number of ways. Somehow, everything pointed at Asperger syndrome. While I did not learn much new about myself, it did explain a lot to me about neurotypical thinking and why so many people behave the way they do.” Alex, 2019 “When I look at him,” says Santana of her husband Alex, pictured with her above, “I see so many things. I see someone who’s kind, gentle and remarkably intelligent. I also see someone who stirs his veggies around, who only likes the grey non-itchy, non-spidery sweaters, and who sees me and shares in the same love and passion I have for him every day.” For Alex, “Santana is an amazing person and a pillar of my life. She helps me feel like I am able to live a true existence and not merely a shadow. Love is an important force for connecting people together; it can be given away and shared but does not diminish with the sharing.” Tristan, 2015 “He is sweet, goofy and oh-so-chatty,” his mother says of Tristan, pictured here with his twin sister. “He is a passionate learner and loves to discuss what he’s reading or watching. He is especially interested in telling ‘mashup’ stories he creates using characters from books he loves and topics he’s learning about.” Mia, 2016 Mia is a charming teen who “has a big heart and brings joy to all who know her”, her mother says. She was adopted as a baby from China and underwent four years of weekly developmental and physical therapy before starting kindergarten. She is comforted by the feel of rubber and likes to wear what she calls her “life suit” when it seems as if “life is too much”. Mia is very open about being on the autism spectrum and someday wants to teach others about her journey. Joshua, 2018 “Joshua loves playing outside, blowing bubbles and feeding the animals and birds,” says his mother Danyale, pictured here with him. “He insisted that we get a bird feeder because he wanted to make sure the birds had their breakfast, lunch and dinner every day. I don’t really know where this autism journey will lead us, but I certainly love my tour guide. What I admire most about Joshua is his ability to see the good in everyone and everything, and that he always tries his best.” Natalia, 2015 The first time Natalia saw Goofy, her parents say, was at Disney World, where she was scared of him. Eventually she came to love him and would try to carry about 10 Goofy dolls with her everywhere she went. To her parents, Goofy was her joy, her comfort for anxiety and even a fear she had overcome. Graham, 2018 In kindergarten, Graham could cite in great detail what happened in scores of battles of the American revolutionary war, including precisely how many soldiers were killed and wounded in each. Then he was interested in the second world war, then military issues in general. At 13, he was considered a world expert on Game of Thrones, frequently posting about the book and television series on the Q&amp;A website Quora. At 15, he had 1.1 million views of his answers on a range of subjects. • Visible Spectrum: Portraits from the World of Autism by Mary Berridge is published by Kehrer Verlag.Presenter Vick Hope, AKA Victoria Nwayawu Nwosu-Hope, was born in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1989, before she and her family – mother Ady, father Nigel and three brothers – moved to Northumberland. After graduating from Cambridge with a degree in modern languages, she moved to London, working as an MTV runner before landing gigs hosting Crufts, the Capital FM Breakfast show and backstage reporting on primetime series incuding The X Factor. An Amnesty International ambassador, and judge on this year’s Women’s Prize for Fiction, she hosts Radio 1’s Going Home With Vick and Jordan, Life Hacks and The Official Chart: First Look, plus her podcast series, Songs to Live By. Ady That’s my husband’s leg behind me – we’re at his grandmother’s house in Newcastle. I’d just come home from work and I’m smiling so much because Vick had just stood up on her own. I’m thinking: “Oh, isn’t she clever?” I loved putting her in lively clothes. Vick’s outfits were always odd shapes and full of joy. I like to joke I am truly a woman of colour! Not one for boring greys. I grew up in Nigeria during the civil war. Fear was a constant presence: there was very little food and we were always hearing bombs going off and having to scramble for shelter. I knew it was bad, but there were fun times, too – me and my siblings played at being soldiers and were always trying to pinch each other’s food. We had to work on the land to produce crops and fetch water from the river. To this day I think getting hot water from a tap is weird. Once the war ended, I came to England to live with my grandmother, but you can’t escape your past and it’s had a profound effect on my parenting style. I brought Vick up to never waste food or water, to appreciate everything. I was also fierce about her education. When I came to Newcastle, I didn’t speak a word of English. Less than a year later I sat my 11-plus. “First name” I could do. But “Surname”? No idea what that was. Needless to say I failed. Thankfully, Vick has always been very scholarly. She could talk before she could walk and she hasn’t shut up since! When she was a teen, there was never any great rebellion; it was more quiet stuff. She’d wear big earrings at school which wasn’t allowed, and we fought when she wanted to shave her legs and wear makeup – I thought she was too young. Vick was so studious, though, she got away with an awful lot. I’d always raised her to want to leave home and go into the world, so when we went to visit Cambridge University, I remember looking around, thinking: “Yeah, I’m quite happy for you to live here.” I didn’t feel sad that she’d left us at all. After she graduated, Vick was always thinking: “What next?” She’d done a demo for an online channel called Jump Off TV – and was reporting on hip-hop and rap. I remember proudly saying to my friends, “Look what Vick’s doing! And if anyone understands the language and the music – please let me know.” Ever since, she’s not stopped working, inching closer to where she is today. It’s been an amazing ride. She probably knows more than me about the modern world, but I still like to think I can impart a bit of my own wisdom. When Victoria was born she came out with her eyes wide open. I remember the medical professional with her at the time saying, “Oh – this one has been here before!” What I saw was my grandmother. And I think she is the essence of who I am. She had this strength – to just take life on. Deal with it and move forward. Victoria is the same. It’s why she is so good at her job, and why she is such a wonderful person. Vick I’m less than one in this photo, so I don’t remember it, but I know that it’s a typical setup – at Grandma Pauline’s for a cup of tea; Mum with a very loud laugh and always wearing red. She loved wearing bright Nigerian clothes: for her wedding, she wanted to have a red dress but my dad’s mum didn’t think it was appropriate. Instead, she got a gold one lined in red – and kept flashing the underside of it at everyone. Our house was full of chatter and people. Mum loved to entertain and we were encouraged to have friends over and throw parties. But I didn’t know anyone else who had a mixed-race family. I didn’t see people like me in my local community or represented on TV or in books. I felt stuck in the middle and a bit unsure. When I was little and in the bath, I remember asking: “Mum, please can you wash the brown off me? It would be OK if I was the same brown as you, but I’m not.” Mum’s response was to tell me I was beautiful as I was. “This is who you are: you are not black, or white, or half, you are both – you are your mum and your dad. You are mixed.” She always told me I was enough – that I was everything and could be anything. Her stories about being hungry and running from air raids as a child instilled a sense of awareness in me – that life is not fair and we should be grateful for what we have and help people not as fortunate. She gave me a moral compass and inspired me to work hard. It did mean at school I was teased for being a geek, though. There were times I would have preferred to have been super-sporty, pretty or have big boobs because that’s what was considered cool. Now I look back, I’m proud of how I nourished my mind. When I got to Cambridge, I quickly became aware of the class divide. In my first term I got an email asking if I’d be interested in having my picture in the prospectus – I’m a bit of a showoff so of course I wanted a photoshoot! When it came out, I was surprised: underneath my image they put a quote saying: “‘Anyone can get in’ – Victoria, Newcastle.” I was like: oh, I see. I’m ticking boxes here. I’m not angry, though. If being on the prospectus is a part of encouraging others like me to apply, then that’s what it takes. We had a TV when I was little but we never unpacked it when we moved from Newcastle to the countryside. I think that’s why I find my job so exciting – television is still this magical thing, there’s an ephemeral quality to it. Whether I’m on screen or on the radio, my main purpose is to be uplifting. As for my mum, she is a real storyteller. She holds an audience captive – even at the shops buying our school shoes, she’d be engrossed in conversation with the person measuring our feet. She is amazing at communication, which I like to think I’ve inherited. Mum is very positive and spiritual – no matter what is going on in her life, nothing is ever that bad. We can get through anything – and we’ll get through it smiling.Despite relentless Soviet efforts to tame the music of Dmitri Shostakovich, his creative spirit “always sprang back, as if made of tempered steel”, wrote his lifelong friend, the literary critic Isaak Glikman. The composer perhaps burnished that steel best in his 15 string quartets, intimate personal testimonies that chart his life and fortunes in the vice-like grip of totalitarianism. Deliberately abstruse about his intentions, Shostakovich is easy to misinterpret, even today. So the Carducci Quartet’s latest music and words project, Shostakovich: Life, Letters &amp; Friendship, is a welcome, richly rewarding contribution to our understanding of one of the great figures of the 20th century. We learn, for instance, that Quartet No 8, perhaps Shostakovich’s most widely known, though dedicated to “the victims of fascism and war”, is also the composer’s howl of shame and fury at being forced in 1960 to join the Communist party, the party that had publicly denounced and once banned his music. Its savage allegro molto takes on extra meaning after the actor Samuel West reads from Glikman’s recollections of that shameful incident. Letters to Glikman and the critic’s book on Shostakovich, Story of a Friendship, are just some of the sources used by the Carducci’s cellist, Emma Denton, to devise this brilliantly constructed programme. We hear absurd yet menacing official pronouncements on what was considered to be “healthy” Soviet music, alongside a moving description of the premiere of the Fourth Quartet, where a violinist describes Shostakovich’s haggard face, the product he believed, of living “permanently in the expectation of violent death”. Yet this journey through selected movements from relevant quartets isn’t always gloomy. Much vodka is taken, laughter ensues; musicians talk of feeling like “fearless unmaskers of hypocrisy”. There is even a funny story about the great cellist Mstislav Rostropovich hitching a ride on a motorbike and arriving “looking like a chimney sweep”. Throughout, the Carducci Quartet play with total commitment, forcing you to think afresh about the music and its context. I’m told several festivals around the UK are considering whether to stage this profound event next year. They shouldn’t hesitate. Bluebeard’s Castle is another chillingly cold, darkly menacing place. Bloodstained horrors lurk here, but as the spoken prologue to Béla Bartók’s one-act opera asks, is the grim tale unfolding before our eyes or behind them? His Bluebeard hides his secrets behind locked doors; we hide ours away in our heads. Is there really any difference? A rare opportunity to explore these questions came about last weekend when it was possible to hear two interpretations of Bartók’s masterpiece in one day, each outstanding, each dramatically different – first at the intimate Stone Nest, right in the heart of London’s theatreland (a Welsh chapel that once housed the colourful Limelight club), and later in the wide open spaces of the Royal Festival Hall, with the London Philharmonic Orchestra. Staged with alternating casts, the new company Theatre of Sound took the Bluebeard story of a doomed marriage and used it to explore a pressing contemporary theme: dementia. In director Daisy Evans’s new translation, bass-baritone Gerald Finley’s Bluebeard was no distant, brooding tyrant but a caring, if bewildered husband, welcoming his wife, Judith (Susan Bullock), back to a suburban home she does not recognise, while also attempting to shield her from his secrets. Those fearsome doors were replaced by a single suitcase, repository of a lifetime of memories, each one more difficult for Judith to grasp. As each memento was revealed, actors spilled on to the stage, portraying Judith in her past life as lover, wife and mother and possibly also as Bluebeard’s three former wives, an ambiguity cleverly handled, helping us share in Judith’s bafflement. In such a tiny venue, with the audience just feet away, every glance, every nuance, was on display. Finley and Bullock were superb, both in glorious voice, both utterly convincing as their marriage dissolved into the darkness of dementia. Conductor Stephen Higgins had reduced Bartók’s massive orchestral score to just eight parts, played by members of the London Sinfonietta. Inevitably, some of the brilliant colours of the original were lost in the process, but Bartók’s spirit and intent were still firmly in place. Across town, those colours dazzled in the inspirational hands of the LPO’s dynamic new chief conductor, Edward Gardner. Marshalling 111 players, his Bluebeard’s Castle became a towering edifice of sound, particularly as Judith opened the door on Bluebeard’s vast kingdom, where Bartók calls for extra trumpets and trombones to swell the sound, reinforced by a triumphant organ. Gazing out over these sonic hills and mountains were creamy mezzo Ildikó Komlósi, as dignified yet implacable Judith, and imposing bass John Relyea, rock-solid as an imperious Bluebeard. Unforgettable. Star ratings (out of five) Shostakovich: Life, Letters &amp; Friendship ★★★★★ Bluebeard’s Castle Stone Nest ★★★★★ Bluebeard’s Castle Royal Festival Hall ★★★★★ Bluebeard’s Castle is at Stone Nest, London, until 14 NovemberRolling out Covid booster jabs to younger people could help drive down transmission of the virus to “low levels”, according to the scientist whose modelling was instrumental to the UK going into its first lockdown. More than 11.8 million people in the UK have received a third jab, which is given to counteract the gradual waning of protection provided by the first two shots. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Prof Neil Ferguson said modelling by the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine suggests that rolling out booster shots to younger cohorts, once the over-50s and the clinically very vulnerable have been immunised, could help “drive down transmission to low levels” in the UK. Ferguson said he was “quite optimistic” about the winter months ahead, stating that he thought it was “unlikely we will get anything close to what we had last year, that catastrophic winter wave”. The epidemiologist said he expected the enhanced protection offered by booster doses “to continue for several months and get us through the winter at the very least – maybe even longer”. Although he warned against complacency, Ferguson said he hoped the UK could avoid returning to social distancing measures, such as were implemented last year. “We can’t be complacent, but at the moment I don’t think we’ll be in a situation the Netherlands is coming into where they really do need to get on top of rising case numbers using social distancing.” The scientist’s comments came after Boris Johnson warned on Friday of “storm clouds” forming over parts of Europe, with Germany recording its highest-ever case numbers and Austria, Slovakia and Croatia also recently seeing a surge in Covid cases. The prime minister called on elderly and vulnerable people to get their booster jabs in order to prevent a rise in Covid cases in the UK, saying: “We’ve been here before. We remember what happens when the wave starts rolling in.” While the UK had one of the highest case rates in Europe in October, daily case data and the latest figures from the Office for National Statistics on infection levels suggest there has been a fall in recent weeks. An estimated one in 60 people in the community in England had Covid in the week ending 6 November, compared with one in 50 people in late October. There has also been a drop in Wales, but the rate of people testing positive in Scotland has remained level and the trend is unclear in Northern Ireland. After falling cases and hospital admissions in the past two or three weeks, Ferguson said there had been a “hint of an uptick in the last few days”. However, he said the UK was in “quite a different situation” to countries such as Germany, as UK cases had been “very high … for the last four months”. While the high rates “obviously had some downsides”, Ferguson said, “it has also paradoxically had an upside of boosting the immunity of the population compared with [European countries] … which have had much lower case numbers and are only now seeing an uptick.” In a study showing how protection against Covid begins to wane several months after full vaccination, researchers at Imperial College London found that infection rates rose from 0.35% in the three months after the second dose to 0.55% three to six months after the second shot.“I had courage,” Glenn Hoddle says during a long conversation about life and death, football and identity, heartache and glory, playing and coaching. It is also a conversation about Hoddle himself and where he fits among diverse football figures from Danny Blanchflower, Brian Clough and Johan Cruyff to Arsène Wenger, Daniel Levy and Antonio Conte. Hoddle was a gifted footballer who played in a way that belonged to Europe rather than England, 30 years before the game in this country caught up with his vision and creativity. He stuck to his playmaking principles and, as a tactically astute coach and manager of England, developed off the field until he was brought down by his own words. Then, in October 2018, Hoddle almost died when he suffered a cardiac arrest, and that experience has made him even more reflective. “I had a strong belief in my ability,” Hoddle continues as he remembers playing for Spurs, his boyhood club, between 1975 and 1987, when his sumptuous talent collided with the brute force of English football in an era defined by crunching 50-50 tackles and long-ball tactics. He was derided as “Glenda” or a “luxury player” as much as he was revered. But Hoddle remained true to himself. “I had a lot of stubbornness. I was very shy but, when it came to football, I had to do what was natural. If people didn’t understand me, so be it. “Perhaps if I’d been Dutch or French or Spanish it would have been very different. When I finally went abroad to play [for Wenger’s championship-winning Monaco team from 1987 to 1991] I realised that No 10 was my prime position. I played once at No 10 for England.” That was against Hungary in 1983 when Hoddle scored and created two other goals. In his enjoyable new autobiography, Playmaker, written deftly by the Observer’s Jacob Steinberg, Hoddle admits he felt “suffocated” playing for England and how “we were painfully small-minded and it took us an eternity to change”. As he says now: “It was always a very rigid 4-4-2 and for England I got chucked out on the right-hand side. Even for Spurs I didn’t play where I should have done until the last season when Clive Allen scored 49 goals and I played as the 10.” Hoddle was a man out of his time. “I knew that but I couldn’t admit it as a player. People used to say: ‘You should have got more than 53 caps,’ and my answer was always pretty bland and steadfast: ‘I’m proud of the 53 I got.’ But, deep down, I knew I was a continental player. You either give in, and go against your instincts, or you fight it.” He was strengthened by the belief of others. “I was 19 and Danny Blanchflower [who captained Spurs to the Double in 1960-61] said: ‘Glenn, the luxury player is the one that cannot do what you can do. He cannot see a pass. He keeps giving the ball away. Don’t ever think you’re a luxury player.’ It was a real boost of confidence from the great Danny Blanchflower.” Brian Clough was another admirer and he even tried to sign Hoddle. “I’ll never forget it,” Hoddle says. “My mate Sean was a good mimic and I picked the phone up and heard this voice: ‘Young man, it’s Brian Clough of Nottingham Forest Football Club.’ I went: ‘Fuck off, Sean,’ and put the phone down. It rung again and it really was Brian Clough. He spent 10 minutes talking to me and I was embarrassed. Clough sussed it and went: ‘It’s pretty obvious you’re staying at Tottenham. It’s been good talking to you and good luck with your career.’ He also said he’d build a team around me if he was England manager. I’m not just saying this because he’d have played me but it was a huge mistake not to appoint him – without a doubt.” In his book Hoddle laments the fact that, in England, “we were insular and closed off. Our island mentality stood in the way of progress”. He thrived on inclusivity – whether it was genuine delight in playing alongside Ossie Ardíles and Ricky Villa, at a time when there were so few foreign footballers in England, being man-marked by Cruyff or agreeing to join Wenger at Monaco. “I was opening up spiritually,” he says of meeting Wenger. “My intuition and the connection with Arsène told me this is the right move. He wanted me to play No 10 and I loved every minute of being with Arsène and we won the league the first year.” There was a stark difference between Wenger at Monaco and Arsenal. “Ian Wright, Lee Dixon, Tony Adams and David Seaman all said he’d come in at half-time and would hardly say anything. That wasn’t the Arsène I knew when he was 36. He came into the dressing room sometimes and the old Lucozade bottle would hit the floor. He would shout in French and I’d just look at Mark Hateley and go: ‘He’s not happy, is he?’” Wenger ignited a fire in him to coach and, in his first managerial position, Hoddle did exceptional work at Swindon. He helped them win promotion to the Premier League and had his happiest time as a coach with a team that, he says, “had something I don’t think I’ve seen even with Barcelona. I’d even go as far as to say maybe with Man City. We had Mickey Hazard, Ross MacLaren, John Moncur and me all being naturally two-footed. It was amazing.” But the club were so broke that Hoddle loaned Swindon £200,000 to buy Shaun Taylor, a tough defender from Exeter. “I never managed a club that had money. Tottenham didn’t have money, Southampton didn’t and Chelsea didn’t when I arrived [in 1993]. I wanted Andy Townsend to stay because he was Chelsea’s captain. But Villa were after him and Andy wanted to go. “The facilities at Chelsea were disgraceful. My office was in the staff changing room where there was an old BT phone with the bottom pulled out. They told me to put in a 50p coin and it would drop through to the bottom. You would then put it back into the slot before the call cut out. I’ve got everyone walking in and out and Ron Atkinson [the then Villa manager] said: ‘Glenn, what’s them noises?’ I said: ‘Ron, I’m not even going to tell you.’ We were trying to compete a £2.1m deal and, God, it was horrible.” Hoddle convinced Ken Bates, the owner, finally to spend some money and he also brought Ruud Gullit and, slowly, began a transformation of Chelsea that would culminate in Roman Abramovich buying the club. In 1996, three years into his managerial career at Stamford Bridge, Hoddle was shocked to be offered the England job. He did well, especially as a young manager, and England played some fine football before losing on penalties to Argentina in the 1998 World Cup. It is a match Hoddle cannot bear rewatching because he believes that, if they had beaten Argentina, they had a team with the potential to have won the tournament. His England tenure ended in chaos and embarrassment in January 1999 when, during an interview with the Times, he was quoted as saying that disabled people were being punished for sins they had committed in a former life. In his book, he stresses that: “I never spoke about punishment. I never used that word, nor did I talk about karma working from another life or the disabled having to reap what they sowed.” Matt Dickinson, who carried out the interview, is highly respected and so I ask Hoddle what he thinks when I mention his name. “I’ve managed to use it spiritually, because one of the biggest things is forgiveness. I talked to him about reincarnation, and my belief that it’s an opportunity to learn when we come back. I’ve forgiven him and, in a way, I think spiritually I’ve gained.” Hoddle denies he said the alleged words and told me: “Before I was 30, I probably would never have been able to forgive, but my faith and spiritual life has allowed me to see this is an opportunity. I haven’t got any feelings of bitterness about what happened.” A day after our interview, on Friday, Dickinson wrote a column in which he stressed the veracity of his reporting and said how he wished Hoddle would “take responsibility” for the interview. *** On 27 October 2018, his 61st birthday, Hoddle suffered a near fatal cardiac arrest while working in the BT Sport studios. He was only saved by the quick response of Simon Daniels, a sound technician who gave him CPR and knew how to use a defibrillator. “One of the few things I remember from that day was that I said to Johnno, my driver who dropped me off: ‘See you at half past five.’ You know what I say now when I go back to the same studio? ‘Johnno, see you at half past five … God willing.’ He says: ‘Oh, don’t say that!’ But I do. That’s how close I was to going. I think: ‘Please God, let me come back and get in that car at half past five.’ It was frightening for everyone, not just me.” Hoddle looks well now and we are soon talking football and Spurs again – for he managed the club he loves from 2001 to 2003. He remains a fan and I ask him if he has ever met the reclusive owner of Spurs? “No. I’ve never met Joe Lewis. Never even had a phone call. Never had a conversation with him and Spurs were always my club. That was the happiest I should have been but it was probably the most disgruntled I felt – at Tottenham. It was such a shame because I wanted it so much. I wanted to build a side to win the league like we did at Monaco. That was one of my big regrets but the money wasn’t there.” He could have bought both Fernando Morientes from Real Madrid and Samuel Eto’o from Mallorca for just £12m in 2003. But, he says, Lewis and Daniel Levy, the Tottenham chairman, moved too slowly. “That hurt me big time,” Hoddle says. He gets on passably with Levy but he makes it plain that life is never easy with a chairman who like to haggle over every aspect of Tottenham’s business. Hoddle nods when I ask if he believes Levy has backed himself into a corner after his recent choices of managers have failed and he has had to make concessions to lure the driven but combustible Conte to Spurs. “I’m not privy to it but, looking from the outside, he has exhausted other opportunities. He’s had to go back for Conte [after they failed to reach agreement in the summer] so there must be a difference in the negotiation. This is a crucial time for Daniel because his track record of sacking managers is there for everyone to see. We could have brought in three good players for the amount of money given to pay out managers.” The old playmaker looks up and, still full of hope and yearning, he smiles. “I’m praying to God that we get it right because, as a Spurs man, I just want them to be successful.” Playmaker by Glenn Hoddle is published by HarperCollinsRebecca Hall The British actor turned to directing and writing with her debut film, an elegant, intense adaptation of Harlem Renaissance writer Nella Larsen’s 1929 novel Passing. With strong reviews, Rebecca Hall’s film, shot in a beautiful monochrome, has had a limited cinema release and appeared on Netflix . Hall in the family Her family can’t help but loom large: father Peter was the celebrated theatre maestro; her Detroit-born mother is the opera singer Maria Ewing. Ewing gained widespread acclaim in the title role of Richard Strauss’s Salome. The art nouveau-style 1986 production, directed by Peter – later screened on Channel 4 – culminated in a notorious nude performance of the Dance of the Seven Veils. A stage hoo-ha In opera and beyond, there have been many interpretations of Oscar Wilde’s salacious 1891 play based on an ancient tale. Fast forward to shouty-era Al Pacino and you’ll even find that he directed 2011’s Wilde Salomé, a docudrama about making stage and screen adaptations of the work (following his Looking for Richard in 1996). Jessica Chastain Long before her breakout roles, Jessica Chastain was Salome to Pacino’s King Herod in a 2006 stage production that was the basis for the film. In this early part of her career, Chastain also had some small TV roles in ER, a Law &amp; Order spin-off and teen mystery series Veronica Mars. Passing to Thompson Numerous up-and-coming actors featured on Veronica Mars in the original three-year run from 2004: Tessa Thompson appeared in the second season, before leaping into the Marvel universe and much else. In her latest, she plays opposite Ethiopian-Irish actor Ruth Negga in none other than Passing, Rebecca Hall’s aforementioned deft exploration of race, class and sexuality. Pairing notes Watch Thompson can be found in another exploration of race and class, 2018’s Sorry to Bother You. Drink In the original Passing novel, an early scene is set in the Drayton Hotel in Chicago, which is said to have been modelled on the city’s Drake hotel where afternoon tea remains a staple.Pip Brown was less than a year into motherhood when the mole on the back of her leg started to itch. The synthpop musician known as Ladyhawke had already been through the wringer with postnatal depression; now another life-altering situation was on the cards. “I’d always known it was there,” says Brown of the mole, “but when I got pregnant I noticed that it had started to change and was acting weird.” After being distracted by what she calls “new baby haze”, Brown finally had the mole examined and was immediately told that it was potentially melanoma. “I knew it was going to be bad,” she remembers, speaking from her home in Auckland, where she lives with her now three-year-old daughter Billie Jean and her wife, the actor and director Madeleine Sami. “I just had this sick feeling.” Brown’s worst fears were realised. She was diagnosed with a Clark’s level-four melanoma, meaning the cancer had reached the bottom layer of her skin and the likelihood of it spreading was high: “There were a couple of weeks where they couldn’t tell me if I was going to live.” But after what felt like the longest wait of her life, Brown was told by her specialist that she was in the clear. That it had not spread was something of a miracle. “The level of it was so bad that it sort of should have gone everywhere,” she says, still sounding in a state of disbelief. That Brown’s new album is so utterly joyous, then, is no surprise. Time Flies is a glitzy reminder of everything that made Ladyhawke unique when the New Zealander first emerged with her self-titled debut album in 2008: a sumptuous rush of electronica that’s icy cool, yet warm and human; a celebration of simply existing. “I just felt so lucky and privileged to be alive and in a room making music,” she beams, even in yet another lockdown in Auckland. She is in the purple-lit room she uses as a backdrop for her live gaming sessions, having started dabbling as a Twitch streamer during the pandemic after being inspired by the British songwriter and fellow gamer Shura, who has since become a close friend. Brown became obsessed with playing The Last of Us, Part II, a post-apocalyptic adventure game with a gay female lead and a trans character, as well as sharing the experience with likeminded viewers. “It’s amazing to see yourself represented in a game,” she says. “Being a female gamer you’re so used to seeing the female body represented from the male gaze, think of Tomb Raider and Lara Croft. But in The Last of Us, they just look like real girls.” Time Flies is Brown’s fourth album under the Ladyhawke name. The first single, a gutsy disco belter called Guilty Love, owes as much to the stomping sci-fi rock of Muse as it does to Donna Summer. It is deeply personal, too, about Brown’s experience growing up gay while going to a Catholic school that regularly told her any such life was sinful. “My sexuality was something that I buried and it delayed me realising that I had those feelings,” she says. Despite her education, Brown’s parents were not religious. Her dad was an atheist and her mum “sort of a hippy”. Yet Brown was still terrified of coming out to them, which she did in her early 20s. “I was really scared about rejection and being shut out of the family. I can’t even believe I thought like that, but that’s how extreme it was. When I finally did come out, they were like: ‘Duh, we always knew!’” she chuckles. “No one was surprised!” Brown made much of Time Flies over video calls during the pandemic, collaborating with fellow New Zealand pop act Broods, Empire of the Sun’s Nick Littlemore, and producers Tommy English and Josh Fountain. They used a shared Ableton screen, which allowed Brown to send live feedback to whomever she was working with. But she won’t be swapping the studio for remote recording in the future. “It was really cool but it’s not the same as being in the same room,” she says. “I’m pretty stoked that we managed to get it done.” As well as motherhood and cancer, there have been other big life changes for Brown since the release of her last album, Wild Things, five years ago. Then she had been living in Los Angeles since leaving London after the release of her debut. But when Brown was five months pregnant, police shot dead a man on a balcony metres from her Runyon Canyon apartment. Spooked, she decided to leave the city. “I heard the whole thing happen,” says Brown, who headed home to be near her family. “I was like: ‘See ya, LA!’” Brown had long used alcohol to manage the depression and anxiety that had plagued her since her teens, but while in Los Angeles she finally gave up drinking. When we speak, she’s proudly seven years sober. Yet on returning to New Zealand, her mental health continued to deteriorate. By the end of 2019, something had to give. “I felt like I was a bit of a punching bag,” she says. “I got to the point where I couldn’t take it any more.” So for the first time, at the age of 40, Brown committed herself to having therapy. She rapidly saw an improvement, switching to Zoom sessions when the pandemic prevented in-person meet-ups. “I talked to him earlier today, actually!” she smiles. She has also started taking medication for the first time: “I was really resistant because I thought: ‘No, I can manage it on my own.’” Now, she says with a smile, she’s the best she has been in decades. “On paper, it’s a long-ass journey to where I am now. But, you know, everyone gets there in their own time.” Time Flies is out on 19 November (BMG).Players may still be suffering their post-Euro hangovers, the last of the broken glass may only just have been swept up from Wembley Way, but the World Cup is already only a year and a week away. For England the lessons of the Euros are still being assessed and assimilated and yet, already, FA officials are travelling out to Qatar to scope out training bases. The final run-in has already begun. Suddenly a 5-0 win over a desperately disappointing Albania – how on earth had that side, even allowing for defensive injuries, beaten Hungary home and away? – is not just a jolly night out, a chance for Harry Kane to regain his form and pull level with Jimmy Greaves in the all-time scoring charts, and three more points collected towards a ticket to the finals, it becomes a vital indicator of what lies ahead. And there was a change here, another shift in the endlessly fascinating patterns of Gareth Southgate’s use of a back three or a back four. To recap briefly‚ England used a back four throughout qualification for the 2018 World Cup, but then a back three at the finals itself. After defeat to Spain at Wembley with a back three, the back four returned for the rest of the 2018-19 Nations League and brought a 3-2 victory in Spain. It was a back four for all of Euro 2020 qualifying, which yielded a lot of goals but left England defensively vulnerable. It was still a back four for the World Cup qualifiers played in spring this season, but by the Euro finals, a new formula had been reached: a back four in games in which England expected to dominate the ball (Croatia, Scotland, Czech Republic, Ukraine, Denmark) and a back three for the games on which possession was expected to be more closely contested (Germany, Italy). It had been a back four throughout World Cup qualifying until Friday, and that is why the shift feels significant. There had been experimentation in the previous qualifier, the drab 1-1 draw against Hungary at Wembley, with Phil Foden and Mason Mount both included in midfield in a 4-3-3, a performance that served as a useful reminder, for those who constantly clamour for Southgate to squeeze in more of England’s attacking riches, that having more creators doesn’t necessarily mean more creativity. For the back three to return against an Albania was a major shift from the post-World Cup consensus. The 3-4-3 matched Albania shape for shape but that surely can’t have been the principal reason for the change against a team who were always going to sit deep and allow England the ball. After the disappointment of that Hungary performance, this felt like a return to basics. And for all the grumbling about the number of forwards who were omitted, it is a structure that is both flexible and feels as though it fits England’s players. Most significant, perhaps, is the fact it gets the best out of England’s attacking full-backs, a strength that was exploited only infrequently during the Euros. Reece James and Ben Chilwell both excelled on Friday, Kyle Walker, Kieran Tripper and Luke Shaw can all fulfil the role and Trent Alexander-Arnold is probably more comfortable at wing-back than full-back in a system such as England’s in which there is not a high press to guard against balls played in behind him. The central midfield pair probably have more freedom with three central defenders behind them, with two of Kalvin Phillips, Jordan Henderson and Declan Rice operating as pistons rather than slightly uncomfortably serving as a more creative third party. Golden Generation nostalgists will be excited by the prospect of a brave new era of debates about whether Rice and Henderson can play together, and there is an argument that England are better served by only one alongside the rapid passing ability of Phillips. Jude Bellingham will increasingly come into that debate, and either Mount or Foden could play there against weaker opposition. Then there’s Kane, flanked by any two of Mount, Foden, Raheem Sterling, Bukayo Saka, Jack Grealish, Jadon Sancho and Emile Smith Rowe. It’s balanced and can be tweaked relatively easily to combat the strengths of an opponent. Centre-forward is the only position in which England don’t have obvious cover – the prospect of Foden as a false 9 is enticing, but possibly too difficult to enact at international level given the lack of time available to Southgate to prepare. Foden was probably the brightest element of the win, his best performance in an England shirt despite playing off the right. None of which matters, of course, if England’s response to taking the lead in a major game is to drop deep, the national obsession with the trenches played out through football. And as Alf Ramsey always maintained, winning the World Cup has very little to do with cuffing aside lesser opponents. Preliminaries are there to be got through: what matters is the structure and the ability to outthink, outfight and outlast big sides in the knockout stages. That’s why the shift to the back three on Friday felt so significant, Southgate perhaps beginning the preparation for those greater challenges to come. In that sense winning 5-0 was a bonus. Far more important was that the players looked comfortable within the shape and, one poor Walker back pass aside, were in total control. The real test comes in December next year.Around this time of year and at Rugby World Cup time, I’ll get some emails or calls from journalists all pretty much saying the same thing: “So Fiji, they always get a short straw etc, etc. Players in other teams, no training time, no money, no resources.” It’s always the same. There was a time not very long ago that those statements held true. Pacific teams were on the back foot all the time. Tonga and Samoa are still in need of serious help but for Fiji, who play Wales on Sunday, life is very different now. Yes, they aren’t an England or New Zealand, who can negotiate with the clubs to get large training blocks – they get the window that World Rugby sanctions. This does have its merits – sometimes a short runway into the November games is no bad thing. Keeps it simple, focuses the mind. Players will come in fit as they have been playing regularly and it is a question of putting a simple framework in place and creating some connections and alignment. A few years ago, players would often come into the national team having not played much for their club team or playing out of position. That lack of game time and not having trained or played that much together was not a good combination. Now, the team is full of players central to their clubs and used to winning. Winning club tournaments, Olympic golds, Test matches. The coaching staff, headed by Vern Cotter, are largely not there as Covid entry regulations back to New Zealand following the tour could have left them stranded for a long time. So Gareth Baber, recent sevens head coach and Tokyo Olympic gold-medal winning coach, heads up pitchside operations. He will, I’m sure, be constantly in conversation with Vern and the strategy and selection will come from Cotter, albeit virtually. I’m not sure anyone will use that as an excuse either. Pacific Islanders are used to being adaptive and it will test out their togetherness as a group which I think is always a strength of the island nations’ teams. Massive changes have also been bubbling away in the background. The Fijian Drua will play in Super Rugby. It’s a game-changer – the first fully professional team on the islands. The pipeline of talent, for once, will be coming from players developed in Fiji with academies and full-time staff being developed and nurtured too. Of course there will be some teething problems. The salaries will not match those in Europe so those agents that were picking up Fijian talent after dredging Facebook videos and local tournament footage will only have to watch the Drua play to spot a talent that will still, in the first few years, be tempted overseas. But there are so many positives to counter anything negative and Fijian rugby has never been in a better place to move up the rankings and begin to regularly take the scalps of the top teams. Some like Viliame Mata, Leone Nakarawa, Josua Tuisova and Waisea Nayacalevu are well-established, world-class players. There is also a new group including out and out gas man, Aminiasi Tuimaba, now playing for Pau; Mesulame Kunavula, a rampaging, power forward and back-rower at Edinburgh; Castres midfielder Vilimoni Botitu, and Apisai Naqalevu, who, although the other side of 30 now, is creating carnage for Clermont – his weight has been used to full effect. Add a couple more gold medallists, Jiuta Wainiqolo and Masivesi Dakuwaqa, and you have seven players in the squad that have stood atop of the podium at an Olympics. A change in eligibility rules could also benefit the island nations if it gets voted in soon. Currently, if you have played Test rugby or international senior sevens in a recognised tournament, you are locked in. There is one small loophole via Olympic sevens but it is not an easy one to manage so only a handful have gone that route. The new rule, if passed, would mean if you have not played for one of those teams for three years then you can play for another country you are eligible for. There are quite a few players that played a few sevens tournaments or the odd Test match that might be able to feature for their country of heritage soon. My gut is there are more of those from Tongan and Samoan heritage that will come forward but, again, it is another move in the right direction to help these countries. More than a dozen former sevens players will be on show in Cardiff. I hope it lends strength to the argument that in the vast majority of cases, a rugby player is a rugby player and they can convert successfully. On the Pacific islands, including New Zealand, it’s very common for a sevens player to bounce between XVs and sevens. It’s only Europe (and actually really only the UK) that sees a perceived division and gives ridiculous claims around huge amounts of time needed to condition a player. Wales’s excellent head coach, Wayne Pivac, knows Fiji well. He has been a coach to the Fijian sevens and 15s teams and will be acutely aware of the threat they pose. Collectively the group feels it is on a journey that will pave the way for future Pacific talent to benefit from. Previous generations have had to suffer from all sorts of undervaluing provision and help and they are also at the forefront of this new team. For decades, island rugby has been paid lip service by all around them. Their sacrifice finally looks like it will not be in vain. The light burns brightly for Fiji at the end of this tunnel and I hope, in turn, this will lead to similar efforts to help Tongan and Samoan rugby. But for now, expect consistent, professional performances from Fiji although I hope that with all the extra resources they are now getting, they will still retain the flair and excitement that befits their nickname – the Flying Fijians. Watch out world. • Ben Ryan coached Fiji to Olympic sevens gold in 2016“Loss and damage” is the phrase for the destruction already being wreaked by the climate crisis on lives, livelihoods and infrastructure. It has become a critical issue at Cop26, with the potential to make or break an ambitious deal in Glasgow. Vulnerable and poor countries, which did little to cause the climate crisis, arrived with a determination to win a commitment from rich nations to compensate them for this damage. It has become perhaps the most bitterly fought-over issue of all, with the low-income nations believing they have a moral right to this money – some call it compensation or reparations. Rich parties such as the US and EU are very reluctant to comply, fearing exposure to unlimited financial liabilities. With vulnerable nations seeing the climate emergency as a matter of life or death for their people, emotions have run high in the summit halls. Kenya’s delegate told attenders that 2 million people were facing starvation due to a climate-caused drought, while Tuvalu’s delegate said his island nation was “literally sinking” amid sea level rises: “It is a matter of life and survival for many of us.” To date, just £2m has been offered for loss and damage, by Scotland, and potentially another few million from philanthropic organisations. But the costs are already many billions every year. This puts loss and damage funding far behind the other two main finance issues: money for clean energy in poorer nations is at almost $100bn a year and the funding to adapt to climate impacts is at about $20bn a year and expected to double by 2025. The push for loss and damage funding is coming from a powerful grouping of nations at Cop, called the G77 + China but actually representing 130 nations and 85% of the world’s population. They want a “loss and damage facility” to be established by Cop26, a formal delivery body for funding. They are not actually demanding cash on the table yet. They said that, despite the backing of most countries, the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, had not put the facility in the draft text and blamed the US and EU for blocking it. Instead, “technical assistance” was proposed. “If you had your house burned by fires or destroyed by sea level rise, the [proposal] the rich world wanted was only going to pay for the expert to assess the damage, but not to pay you to rebuild your house,” said Mohammed Adow, at Climate Action Network International. “The country that is actually [running] the talks, the UK, actually cut aid to climate-hit countries, just before we got to Glasgow,” he said. “So it has little credibility when it comes to getting the rich world, who are historically responsible for causing climate change, to create a facility and increase funding for loss and damage.” A new proposal in the draft text published on Saturday morning said: “Decides to establish [a] dialogue between parties, relevant organisations, and stakeholders to discuss the arrangements for the funding of … loss and damage.” Adow said: “We now have the rich countries pushing the developing countries to agree to a loss and damage outcome that is basically a never-ending talking shop on loss and damage.” Jennifer Tollmann, at the thinktank e3g, said: “There is a very clear crisis point around the issue of loss and damage. [Leaders of vulnerable nations] have come to Glasgow to get an answer to the question of how are they going to help their citizens deal with the devastation that they are experiencing on a yearly, sometimes monthly basis? They can’t afford to go back without an answer.”I was a serious little girl growing up in Leeds and had supportive parents who were instrumental in my success. My mother sold my first story to a children’s magazine when I was 10. My father, an engineer, funded my addiction to taxis when I started working on Fleet Street. At 16, I started my first job in the typing pool at the Yorkshire Evening Post and became a reporter after secretly slipping stories on to the subs’ desk. I was the only woman in the newsroom. My mother told me: “Keep your head down and don’t flirt at work. Your attitude towards men will dictate their attitude towards you.” The best advice I ever had. The red-haired rebel Keith Waterhouse took me under his wing at the Yorkshire Evening Post. It was a Tory-owned paper, and he walked the corridors singing The Red Flag. Peter O’Toole, a fellow reporter, had a real thing for me. He was lanky and dishevelled with acne. I refused to go to the movies with him, but he still edged up to me whenever the newsroom went to the pub. Years later, Keith and I were at an event where the producer Sam Spiegel introduced the star of his new movie. Out walked the most beautiful man I’d ever seen, dressed as Lawrence of Arabia. Keith said: “Don’t you wish you’d gone to the pictures with him now?” I never got over Peter’s transformation. No man has ever tried to pinch my bottom or lay a hand on me, and they’ve always shown me great respect. There’s a lot of rapists and bad men out there but a lot of decent ones too. I told Sean Connery he’d have to lose his Glaswegian accent and take elocution lessons if he wanted to be an actor. When he became James Bond, I never got a chance to tell him how wrong I’d been. The death of my beloved husband Bob [Bradford, an American movie producer] in 2019 was devastating because he hadn’t been ill. We were married for nearly 56 years and together for 58. He had a stroke in the night. His last words were, “I love you.” I’m so glad I told him, “I love you too, darling.” A week later he was gone. I try not to be a burden to people, I’m too strong and independent for that. Breaking the sound barrier in a fighter jet was thrilling. I’d wanted to know what it felt like to go faster than the speed of sound. So when I wrote a profile of a jet pilot, I persuaded a US Air Force general to let me fly in one of his planes. The silliest rumour about me is that I heated the lake at a former home in Connecticut to keep the swans warm. I didn’t. The previous owners did it to stop the swans freezing to death in winter. A good reason. There’s a lot I don’t like about getting older, but I don’t look my age because I take care of myself. I go to the hairdresser twice a week, don’t smoke, never drink alone and have a personal trainer. A Man of Honour, by Barbara Taylor Bradford, is out now, priced £16.99. Buy it for £14.78 at guardianbookshop.comThis year has seen no shortage of motivational music exhorting people to dance, protest or reconnect after shared trauma. But few fillips have been as instantly convincing as Open the Gates, the track heralding Irreversible Entanglements’ album of the same name. “It’s energy time!” declares the Philadelphia-based poet and activist Moor Mother – AKA Camae Ayewa – as Luke Stewart’s sprung bass line plays off against a skitter of percussion from drummer Tcheser Holmes. Ayewa issues a command: “Open the gates!” The chorusing of Aquiles Navarro’s trumpet and Keir Neuringer’s saxophone send the track into ecstatic orbit, alive with political fury and spiritual possibility. Irreversible Entanglements formed in 2015, after a Musicians Against Police Brutality concert. Their aim was to unite the words of Moor Mother with an unorthodox, improvised take on free jazz as a “vehicle for Black liberation”. Although this ensemble boast conservatoire rigour, their revolutionary, Afrofuturist music is imbued with punk spirit, a love of ambient spaciousness and electronics. Open the Gates – it’s a double album – was recorded in a day and builds on the outfit’s two previous bouts of boundary-vaulting sonic activism, their 2017 eponymous debut and 2020’s Who Sent You?. Key, too, is Moor Mother’s interest in quantum physics and its intersection with the trauma of the African diaspora, an affinity noted by Cern, which this year bestowed her organisation Black Quantum Futurism its Collide residency award. Open the Gates is out now via International Anthem/Don GiovanniA tale of two trials The comedian Beth Stelling once described the US legal system as “the white man’s FUBU: just for us, by us”. If you had any illusions that this description was a comedic exaggeration then the past week should have shattered them. Two high-profile murder cases have shone a bright light on the inequities of the “justice” system and made it very clear who the law is there to serve. Let’s start with the McMichael/Bryan trial in Georgia. To recap: three white men (father and son defendants, Greg and Travis McMichael, and their neighbor William Bryan) chased and brutally killed an unarmed 25-year-old Black man called Ahmaud Arbery last February. Arbery had been out jogging near his home; the defendants claimed they thought he was fleeing an attempted burglary. The first shocking thing about the McMichael/Bryan case is the resistance there was to a trial even taking place. One of the first prosecutors assigned to the case initially recommended not charging the men involved, saying their pursuit of Arbery was “perfectly legal” because of slavery-era law that gave private citizens the power to arrest people if they thought a crime was being committed. Had a graphic video, taken by Bryan, of the McMichaels confronting Arbery not gone viral then his death could easily have been swept under the rug. A trial may have been granted; whether it’s fair is another question. The jury are nearly all white; there is just one Black juror. This, by the way, is in a county that is nearly 27% Black. Worse still? The judge (who, I’m sure I don’t need to tell you, is a white guy), noted that there appeared to be “intentional discrimination” in the selection of the predominately white jury, but allowed the trial to continue anyway. Not only does the defense seem to have an issue with Black jurors, it has also made clear it has an issue with Black pastors. A day after the Rev Al Sharpton sat in the back of the courtroom, defense attorney Kevin Gough told the judge: “We don’t want any more Black pastors coming in here.” Gough was worried they could be “intimidating” for the predominately white jury. Unfolding at the same time as the McMichael/Bryan case, with a number of parallels, is 18-year-old Kyle Rittenhouse’s trial. Again, the simple fact that a trial is taking place is notable. Rittenhouse shot three white men, killing two of them and wounding the other, during police brutality protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last August. Had Rittenhouse been Black, do you really think he’d be alive to stand trial right now? Somehow I strongly suspect that he might not have been taken into custody healthy and well. Jacob Blake, whose shooting prompted the Kenosha protests, certainly wasn’t. Blake was left paralyzed from the waist down after a white police officer shot him seven times in the back; charges were not filed against the police officer after video showed Blake had been armed with a knife. Rittenhouse did not find himself at the Kenosha protest by chance; he crossed state lines to attend. He obtained a semi-automatic weapon and brought it with him. He shot three people. While out on bail, he showed up at a bar in T-shirt that said “Free as Fuck,” and took photos with members of the Proud Boys. Had he been Black, the conservative media would undoubtedly be treating him like a terrorist; instead, he’s being treated like a hero. Meanwhile, in the courtroom, the judge seems to be treating him with kid gloves. Judge Bruce Schroeder has raised a number of questions about his impartiality after making decisions that seem to strongly favour Rittenhouse. Last month, for example, he ruled that the people shot by Rittenhouse cannot be referred to as “victims” by prosecutors in court; defense attorneys may, however, call them “arsonists” or “looters”. Schroeder’s judgement has also been called into question after he made a very inappropriate joke about Asian food in the courtroom. It’s not clear what the verdict will be in either the Rittenhouse or McMichael/Bryan trial. But the dynamics of each case have made it more than clear who the – overwhelmingly white and male – US legal system is designed to protect. One nation indivisible, with liberty and justice for all? It’s a lovely sentiment. But it’s rubbish. Creepy Republican broadcasts his violent AOC fantasies Republican congressman Paul Gosar (whose own siblings urged people not to vote for him) has been criticized for tweeting a video which depicted him striking the New York Democrat Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez with a sword. Sadly, this isn’t anything out of the ordinary for AOC: she is routinely subjected to threatening behaviour from her Republican colleagues. AOC responded to the video by calling Gosar “just a collection of wet toothpicks” who “couldn’t open a pickle jar”. Why Japan hasn’t banned sexual depictions of children in manga The country prohibited the possession of child abuse material in 2014, but there is strong resistance to cracking down on porn manga depicting minors. Vice outlines the issue. New research shows men are just as emotional as women The study found that men and women’s emotional stability and fluctuations are “clearly, consistently and unmistakably more similar than they are different”. One of the latest TikTok trends involves squirting sexual lubricant straight onto your face Why? Because people want their skin to look dewy and wet, apparently. All I can say is that I am very glad I am no longer in my 20s. Oh, what a surprise! A feminist ‘world history’ ignores Arab women Sophie Lewis, writing in the LRB, has an interesting review of a new book by Mallory O’Meara called Girly Drinks: a world history of women and alcohol. Lewis notes that women from the Islamic and Arab world don’t make it into the book, despite rich topics like Arab women’s “wine poetry”. “Perhaps, in planning her ‘world history’, O’Meara subconsciously adhered to the Western idea that Arab feminism is a contradiction in terms,” Lewis writes. It’s a shame because, that aside, the book looks fascinating. The week in purrtriarchy Every move you make, every step you take, your cat is keeping track of you. A new study suggests that cats keep tabs on where people are in their homes, even when they can’t see them. “[It suggests] that cats have the ability to picture the invisible in their minds,” one of the researchers noted. “Cats [may] have a more profound mind than is thought.” Pretty sure zero cat owners will be surprised by this news. • This article was amended on 15 November 2021. An earlier version said an automatic weapon was used by Kyle Rittenhouse in Kenosha; it was a semi-automatic rifle. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for pre-orderIt’s only the first song of the night, but half the crowd are baying like dogs. Delirious enthusiasm is, of course, the correct response to Self Esteem’s maximalist pop. A few hundred people are crammed into what may be the last of Sheffield-bred singer-songwriter Rebecca Lucy Taylor’s many jaunts around the bijou venues of Britain, as Self Esteem and in previous bands. Taylor has recently released her second solo album, Prioritise Pleasure, an audacious hymn to self-actualisation and dreaming big, to rave reviews. Next year, Self Esteem is booked to play Manchester Cathedral. But the din, more suited to the peak of the encore, comes much earlier, at the close of the set-opener, I’m Fine. In a sample, a young woman describes warding off unwanted male attention by barking like a dog because “there is nothing that terrifies a man more than a woman that appears completely deranged”. The wolf noises that break out tonight are an echo of recognition – of the lunatic things women have to do to cope with the craziness of male threat. It feels so good, too, when your pack gives tongue. Taylor is a solo female whose flag of reckless good sense waves so high and so proud, you would strongly consider following her into battle. Her two albums as Self Esteem tell of how one woman shook off the torpor of a life wasted trying to please other people and decided to please herself instead. She’s too Sheffield to have a song called Carpe Fucking Diem, but she might as well have. Her works are like Thelma and Louise without the tragic ending, an invitation to anyone unhappy with their lot to stop being pliant – to “be braver”. Her music throws Robyn, Britney and Charli XCX into a blender. Set to dramatic electronics, I’m Fine deconstructs a toxic relationship. “I won’t rein in my need to be completely free!” Taylor staccato-chants, backed by three dancing vocalists – Marged Sion, Levi Heaton and Seraphina D’Arby – bassist and keyboard player Sophie Galpin and drummer Mike Park. For Taylor specifically, being free meant coming out – she is bisexual – to her parents, exiting unhealthy relationships and leaving the unthreatening indie band she’d been in for a decade – Slow Club. She came out again – as a lover of big, bold pop sounds and the heady slink of R&amp;B. Out went earnestness and underdressing, in came head-flicking 1990s R&amp;B dance routines, huge choruses and – on this latest album – nods to hyper-pop and the production work of Kanye West. A recovering indie kid, Taylor did not dumb down to pop dynamics: she smartened up to them, making arena-sized tunes out of the bleak, wry things women confess to one another in whispers. “What I might have achieved if I wasn’t trying to please,” she sings on Rollout, a song that heralded her debut solo album, Compliments Please (2019). As with so many of her tunes, it finds Taylor looking back on a relationship. But it speaks volumes, too, about her creative dissatisfaction in a middlingly successful outfit, being told how to present herself by the industry – yes, the notionally less cut-throat indie industry – playing the same venues year after year, her wit and ambition stifled by groupthink. Of Gorilla, she says: “I’ve had some miserable times here, so it’s quite profound to be playing here tonight.” That relief is in the songs. Moody, from Prioritise Pleasure, is a rallying cry to all “difficult” women. (Amusingly, some of her T-shirts have it as “mardy for life”.) I Do This All the Time is a spoken-word outpouring in which Taylor parrots comments said to her in her career. “You’re a good… sturdy… girl,” she says, pausing dramatically, the pain of it transformed by her biceps flexing. All her rage, lustfulness, regret and joy barely fits on the stage; it’s an arena-sized performance in a shoebox. Taylor’s backing singers cluster around her, a tableau of succinct limb movements, moving sideways in step, then dissolving away. A fan billows Taylor’s hair as she strikes pose after pose, only semi-ironically. Removing her shoulder-length black gloves, she wonders whether “Rita Ora has a glove tech”. When the crowd shout her granular confessionals back at her, Taylor whoops “I’m Robbie Williams!” There are echoes here too of early Christine and the Queens. Heloïse Letissier was given a new lease of life by drag artists; part of the catalyst for Taylor’s rebirth was watching RuPaul’s Drag Race. Tonight’s support act is drag artist Ash Kenazi. The clincher, though, is the quality of Self Esteem’s tunes. Many of these songs sound as though they were constructed by committee at an LA writing camp. In fact, they were all penned by Taylor and produced alongside Johan Karlberg (Radioclit, the Very Best). Her pre-choruses are on point, her synths stabs emphatic; every chorus is a triumph.Norwich City have offered the vacant manager’s job to Dean Smith. The Premier League’s bottom club have moved on quickly after Frank Lampard pulled out of the race to succeed Daniel Farke and they believe that Smith is capable of saving them from relegation. Norwich have held positive talks with the 50-year-old, who could make a swift return to management after his sacking by Aston Villa last Sunday, although the deal is not done yet. Smith, who would be expected to make Craig Shakespeare his assistant, must decide whether he needs time to recharge his batteries following his departure from Villa. Norwich, who sacked Farke last Saturday, will hope to have a new manager in place by the time they host Southampton next Saturday. The Carrow Road club spoke to Lampard on Thursday but the former Chelsea and Derby manager decided the job was not for him. Lampard, who has not worked since being sacked by Chelsea last January, did not feel that jumping into a relegation battle would have been right for his career. That has left Smith as the obvious candidate to replace Farke. Smith, who boasts vast experience of the lower leagues after spells with Brentford and Walsall, has an impressive CV. He was appointed by Villa in October 2018 and made an instant impact, lifting his boyhood club back into the Premier League at the end of his first season. Villa won promotion by beating Lampard’s Derby in the play-off final and Smith, who has been on holiday in New York, led his side to safety in their first season back in the top flight. He then went on to lift them to 11th place last season but he lost his job after making a disappointing start to the current campaign. Villa struggled after selling Jack Grealish to Manchester City and Smith was fired after five successive defeats. However, his coaching credentials are not in doubt and Norwich, who are five points below 17th-placed Watford, need someone to rouse them after an awful run of form. They have toiled since winning promotion last season and believe Smith is capable of sparking an improvement. Meanwhile, Steven Gerrard’s backroom staff have followed the former England midfielder in switching from Rangers to Aston Villa. The former Scotland midfielder Gary McAllister and Michael Beale will now assume the roles of assistant head coach at Villa Park. Tom Culshaw, Scott Mason and Jordan Milsom have also made the move to the Midlands club.The British government’s special envoy to Saudi Arabia has caused anger among MPs and human rights activists by saying concerns about the kingdom’s purchase of Newcastle United Football Club were just “noise” created by people jealous of the investment. The club was instantly ranked the richest in the world after the Premier League approved the £300m deal last month, with the state’s wealth fund now owning an 80% stake. But critics of the deal raised concerns over the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi by Saudi agents and the kingdom’s imprisonment of dissenters. Now a video has emerged of Ken Costa, the banker and Tory donor who was made a special representative to the kingdom three years ago, dismissing the concerns at a conference last month. Asked whether jealousy was behind them, he replied: “Yes.” “It’s a competitive world,” he told an interviewer from Arab News. “You see a strong player coming into your market, what do you want to do? You want to create noise. A lot of it is noise, a lot of it is trying to find reasons why [the takeover] couldn’t happen, but it has happened.” Costa, who was part of the British delegation at a Riyadh investment forum, said that the move by the kingdom’s Public Investment Fund would mean significant investment in the north-east. “There is a very real possibility of welcoming Saudi investment into a part of the UK to create jobs to be able to be working in and around something where people can really identify with, which is football and the football club. It’s a positive thing for the fans and for football generally,” he said, adding that Boris Johnson was committed to building a relationship with Saudi Arabia. “I have been the special representative of the prime minister for the last three years and, coming to the end of that, I have been able to see the extraordinary depth of the commitment between the two countries,” he said. His comments drew criticism. Felix Jakens, head of priority campaigns at Amnesty International UK, said: “It is disappointing that someone in Ken Costa’s position would describe the serious issues being raised over the Newcastle takeover as mere noise. “Under Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman’s leadership, the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia remains dire – with government critics, women’s rights campaigners, Shia activists and human rights defenders being harassed and jailed, often after patently unfair trials,” he said. “Both the UN and US intelligence services have said they believe he approved the operation to capture or kill journalist Jamal Khashoggi. “In addition to all this, Saudi Arabia is accused of a catalogue of crimes under international humanitarian law during the long-running conflict in Yemen. There is now huge disquiet over the cynical use of English football to sportswash human rights abuse. If this is just noise, it would be interesting to know what constitutes a bona fide concern for Mr Costa.” Layla Moran, foreign affairs spokesperson for the Liberal Democrats, said the remarks were “tone deaf”. “The Saudi Arabian government has one of the worst human rights records in the world: brushing that off as just noise is outrageous,” she said. “This issue goes much deeper than Newcastle United. Anyone who cares about the government acting with integrity should be highly concerned by the way in which Boris Johnson and his colleagues are cosying up to the Saudi regime. There needs to be lessons learned from the Newcastle deal but sadly our government and its shameful record has no leg to stand on.” Costa did not respond to requests for comment. The government said it had not had a role at any point in the takeover of Newcastle United. “This has been a commercial matter for the Premier League to assess under its owners’ and directors’ test,” a spokesperson said. While the government has maintained it played no part in the takeover, it has already emerged that Prince Mohammed warned Johnson in a text message that UK-Saudi Arabian relations would be damaged if the British government failed to intervene to “correct” the Premier League’s initial “wrong” decision to block the takeover.It was almost as if the pandemic had never happened. In Cologne, thousands of revellers in fancy-dress jostled side by side in a tightly packed throng as they counted down to the start of the annual carnival season at 11am on 11 November. In Paris, the bars and clubs were open late and filled to bursting on Wednesday, with Armistice Day a national holiday. In Amsterdam, it was business as usual in the overflowing cafes and coffee shops around the Leidseplein. But rather than heralding the start of a season of celebrations culminating in Christmas and New Year, those nights may have been a last hurrah as a fourth wave of coronavirus sweeps across Europe. Half a dozen Dutch towns have already cancelled the popular parades that, to the joy of the nation’s children, mark the annual arrival of Sinterklaas this weekend, and Germany’s celebrated Christmas markets could yet be called off. “You can’t imagine standing at the market drinking mulled wine while hospitals are full and fighting over the last resources,” the state premier of Saxony, Michael Kretschmer, said last week, urging the federal government to make the difficult call. As the Netherlands on Saturday became the first western European country since the summer to impose a partial lockdown, Berlin bars its restaurants to the unvaccinated, and France races to improve its booster campaign, Europe is once again the centre of the pandemic. According to the World Health Organization, coronavirus infections across the continent rose by 7% and deaths by 10% over the past week, making it the only world region where cases and deaths are steadily increasing. Nearly two-thirds of new infections – about 1.9 million – were in Europe, the WHO said, marking the sixth consecutive week that the spread of virus has risen across the continent, with several countries experiencing fourth or fifth waves. Except in central and eastern Europe, where vaccine coverage is significantly lower, admissions to hospital and deaths generally remain much lower than a year ago, and national differences in preventive measures make it hard to draw broad conclusions. But experts agree that a combination of low vaccine uptake, waning immunity among people inoculated early, and growing complacency about masks and distancing after governments relaxed curbs over the summer is the most likely cause. “The message has always been: do it all,” Hans Kluge, the WHO’s regional director for Europe, said last week. “Vaccines are doing what was promised: preventing severe forms of the disease, and especially mortality. But they are our most powerful asset only if used alongside preventive measures.” Vaccine take-up on the continent is highest in southern Europe, with Portugal, Malta and Spain all having double-vaccinated more than 80% of their populations, and Italy not far behind on 73%, according to figures from OurWorldInData. Seven-day rolling averages of new daily infections are the lowest in the bloc in those countries, at around 100 per million people – but they are edging up, and in pockets where vaccine take-up is low they have surged. Trieste, which last month saw major protests against Italy’s green pass – Europe’s toughest, requiring workers to show proof of vaccination, immunity or a recent negative test to access their workplace – has seen daily cases more than double. “We’ve returned to the dark days of the pandemic,” the head of one of the city’s intensive care units said last week after a boom in hospital admissions, 90% of whom were unvaccinated and most directly linked to protests. But the Netherlands, France and Germany, where vaccine coverage is only a few percentage points lower, have also begun experiencing a surge in infections, showing the challenge even for governments with relatively high acceptance rates. The Netherlands, which has fully vaccinated 73% of its population, entered a three-week partial lockdown on Saturday, closing bars, restaurants and essential shops from 8pm, shutting non-essential stores and services from 6pm, and limiting home gatherings to four guests after case numbers hit new records. The country, which relaxed most curbs over the summer, recorded a seven-day average of new infections of 609 per million this week, prompting the government to U-turn on its pledge to drop all restrictions by the end of the year. Nearly 69% of the population is also fully vaccinated in France, according to OurWorldInData (the government figure, which includes those who have had only one jab if they have previously had Covid, is slightly higher). A health pass showing proof of vaccination, recovery or a negative test has been needed since the summer to enter bars, restaurants, leisure venues and some shopping malls, board a plane or take a long-distance train, and masks remain mandatory in indoor public spaces – but new cases have been rising in double-digit percentages every week for a month. “What we are experiencing in France clearly looks like the beginning of a fifth wave,” the health minister, Olivier Véran, said last week, as the seven-day average of new cases, while still relatively low, climbed steadily to 134 per million. Emmanuel Macron said that from 15 December, over-65s and people in at-risk groups who had not had a third shot would no longer be entitled to a health pass, and at the same time the booster programme would be expanded to over-50s. Germany, where 66.5% of the population is fully vaccinated, is on the cusp of a fourth wave that could be its most severe yet, recording its highest daily infection rates of the last two years over the past five days, with 48,640 new cases on Friday bringing its seven-day average to more than 381 per million. The head of the German disease control agency warned that intensive care wards are facing an unprecedented squeeze, saying the country was at “five minutes to midnight”, while the hardest-hit states are contemplating lockdowns. From Monday, in Berlin, only people who have been vaccinated or have recently recovered will be allowed to visit restaurants, cinemas and hairdressers. The federal health minister, Jens Spahn, on Friday proposed similar rules for entering public events. Christoph Spinner, an infectiologist at Munich’s university hospital Rechts der Isar, questioned whether even these measures would be enough. “What we need now is concerted and stringent action from the federal government, and I am not sure we currently have that,” he told the Observer. At Spinner’s own hospital, he said, about three-quarters of those being treated for severe Covid were unvaccinated. Roughly half had pre-existing conditions. “Those who say this is now purely a pandemic of the unvaccinated are wrong,” he said. With the lowest inoculation rate (62.8%) and the highest infection rate (more than 1,000 daily cases per million) of almost all western European countries, Austria is to impose a lockdown for unvaccinated people in its two hardest-hit regions this week and could move forward with similar measures nationwide. Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg said on Friday that , unvaccinated people in the regions of Upper Austria and Salzburg will only be allowed to leave home for specific necessary reasons, such as buying groceries or going to the doctor. German-speaking Austria, Switzerland and Germany have western Europe’s highest rates of unvaccinated people, although the specific reasons behind people’s hesitancy to be inoculated can be hard to pin down. Compared with southern European states like Italy or Spain, all three have experienced relatively mild waves so far, perhaps leading many to underestimate how lethal the virus can be. They are also relatively accepting, even supportive, of “alternative medicine”: in Germany, for example, homeopathic remedies can be purchased at pharmacies and are covered by many statutory health insurance funds. In the former socialist German Democratic Republic, uptake for measles and flu jabs has traditionally been high – but Saxony, Thuringia, Brandenburg and Saxony-Anhalt currently sit at the bottom of the national Covid vaccination chart. The government’s special commissioner for eastern Germany, Marco Wanderwitz, has suggested vaccine resistance may have a political dimension in his home region of Saxony, a bastion of the far-right Alternative für Deutschland. “There is a clear link between support for the AfD and rejection of vaccines,” Wanderwitz has said. In Austria, the far-right Freedom Party (FPÖ) has also endorsed anti-vaxxer views with even more enthusiasm. In central and eastern Europe, meanwhile, much of which emerged from Communist rule barely 30 years ago, poverty, poor health education and misinformation have combined with an entrenched mistrust in government and state institutions to produce Europe’s lowest levels of vaccine take-up. As a result, nine central and eastern European countries currently feature in the EU’s highest 10 coronavirus daily death rates. Romania and Bulgaria have the bloc’s highest daily fatality rates at around 22 per million – more than 30 times the rates in France, Spain and Portugal. Despite ample vaccine supplies, the two countries have fully vaccinated the lowest proportion of their populations of all the EU27: just 34.5% of Romania’s inhabitants have received two jabs, and 23.04% of Bulgaria’s. Both have recently imposed tougher restrictions, while Latvia, another low-vaccinated country, imposed a four-week lockdown as early as mid-October. The Czech Republic, Slovakia and Russia have also tightened measures. In western Europe, the question now is whether countries can curb this latest wave without having to resort to full-scale lockdowns. Experts say the answer is probably yes – measures such as distancing, masks and vaccine mandates for indoor venues will be vital. “If one of these things is lacking, we will see situations such as we are now seeing in many European countries,” said Antonella Viola, professor of immunology at Italy’s University of Padua. Hans Kluge said last week that authorities must accelerate vaccine rollouts, including booster shots for at-risk groups and doses for teens. “Most people hospitalised and dying from Covid-19 today are not fully vaccinated,” he said. But public health and social measures were equally vital, he said, adding that the WHO estimated 95% universal mask use in Europe could save almost 200,000 lives. Applied “correctly and consistently”, preventive measures “allow us to go on with our lives, not the opposite”, Kluge said. “Preventive measures do not deprive people of their freedom, they ensure it.” • This article was amended on 15 November 2021. At-risk groups in France, including over-65s, who have not had a booster jab will no longer be entitled to a health pass from 15 December, not 1 December. The health pass itself is needed to enter bars, restaurants, leisure venues and some shopping malls, but not shops in general as an earlier version indicated. Further amended on 22 November 2021 to correct a caption saying that a Leipzig cafe sign said that only “2G” people could enter; rather, the sign said indoor dining was allowed for this group only.Once again the UK and Europe are heading in opposite directions. While Covid-19 cases in Britain have been declining, those in France, Germany, Austria and several other countries have risen dramatically in recent weeks. A fourth pandemic wave threatens to break over these nations, raising the prospect of renewed lockdowns there. This raises a critically important question: is the UK likely to follow suit in a few weeks, or will Europe’s rising numbers peak and start to decline, as they have been doing in Britain? Will Europe follow us or will we follow Europe? Prof Mark Woolhouse of Edinburgh University is clear on the issue. “I think the UK is ahead at present and Europe is following us,” he told the Observer. A major factor in this process was the arrival of the Delta variant of the Covid virus, he added. “It is substantially more serious than previous variants and it hit many European countries much later than it did in Britain. It has struck in these nations at a time when vaccine protection – typically in the most vulnerable, the ones who were vaccinated first – has begun to wane significantly. That is not an ideal situation at all.” This point was backed by Prof Neil Ferguson from Imperial College London, who told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that he thought the UK was in “quite a different situation” from other European nations, where curbs on freedoms are being considered. “We’ve had two or three weeks of declining cases and admission to hospitals – that may be petering out, it is too early to say. We’ve also had very high case numbers – between 30,000 and 50,000 a day – really for the last four months, since the beginning of July. “That has obviously had some downsides. It has also, paradoxically, had an upside of boosting the immunity of the population compared with countries like Germany, the Netherlands and France, which have had much lower case numbers and are only now seeing an uptick.” Michael Head of Southampton University also argues that European countries are now arriving at the point the UK found itself in a few months ago. “The UK rolled out a vaccination programme earlier than most countries, and therefore has experienced the impact of waning immunity earlier. However, the booster vaccines here in the UK are clearly having an impact around hospital admissions and new cases in older populations.” Prof Paul Hunter of the University of East Anglia is even more emphatic. “We are not behind Europe in this wave: they are behind us. We are not currently seeing a surge of the same magnitude as Europe at present largely because of the high case numbers over recent months, which most of Europe missed out on. The key exception is Romania, which has just had a large peak and which is now seeing a decline.” This type of behaviour is typical of an epidemic infection as it becomes endemic, Hunter adds. “As a disease approaches its endemic equilibrium you get oscillations around the eventual equilibrium. So we can probably expect oscillations across Europe for a year or so yet. Sometimes the UK will be worse than Europe: at other times Europe will be worse than us.”It was the show that made Manolo Blahnik a byword for achingly cool after the designer’s shoes played a starring role on Sarah Jessica Parker’s feet in the early noughties. Now fashion brands and retailers are hoping that the “Sex and the City effect” will strike again with And Just Like That, the much-anticipated sequel series. Last week, the latest image circulated of Sarah Jessica Parker wearing a pair of dungarees on the set of And Just Like That, sending newspaper fashion columnists into a frenzy. The power of the franchise means that this image alone could increase sales of the trousers. “Dungarees could definitely get a bounce from this,” says Jane Shepherdson, who was brand director for Topshop when Sex and the City hit its peak and is now chair of fashion rental platform My Wardrobe HQ. “The way that the show will do it – sort of sexy, feminine but also a bit rock. That kind of combination is attractive for a lot of people.” Shepherdson speaks from experience. While CEO at Whistles, the brand released a pleated coral midiskirt called the Carrie, named in honour of Parker’s character, Carrie Bradshaw, in 2011. An association with an era’s most fashionable TV show – and its most fashionable character – meant the Carrie quickly became a bestseller. Shepherdson believes the new series could have a similar impact. “I wouldn’t be at all surprised if they come up with some looks that are highly desirable and that we will all want to wear,” she says. “I think there will be people who will think ‘oh, yeah, that’s for me’, because they see it on the show.” There is already evidence that this may be the case – despite the fact that the show doesn’t air until next month. In July, Lyst reported that searches for Fendi baguette bags – a Sex and the City classic set to be reprised – were up 45% after Parker was seen carrying one. Platform heels, very much a new addition to Bradshaw’s shoedrobe, had a similar bounce, with searches up 21%. While some have questioned the outfits in images seen so far from the show – Rebecca Weinberg, who worked on the original, described the looks as “prim and polished” – a huge fanbase for the show means millions of viewers will be sizing up the looks. After Parker wore the Lena Non-Stop Disco platform by Terry de Havilland at the end of this summer, the style sold out (with a £275 price tag) and did so again when more were put on sale. The endorsement helped put the brand on new radars. “We found it helped enormously with brand exposure specifically in the American market and we gained a lot of new customers from there,” says sales and marketing director Josh Spurling. “The exposure gained by someone as iconic as the character Carrie Bradshaw really helped point customers in our direction.” Other items have had similar stories – a dress by British brand Emilia Wickstead worn by Kristin Davis sold out, as did Saint Laurent shoes worn by Parker. In July, a picture of Parker wearing the Bobbie Jean hat (£235) by New York-based milliner Monrowe was released, leading to a spike in sales. “It definitely won’t hurt the brand in any way having a style icon in one of your signature pieces,” says founder and designer Dani Evans. “I’m sure the brand awareness will become more highlighted after the show airs. I wouldn’t be mad if Carrie did for Monrowe what she did for Manolo Blahnik.” Long before the show hits UK TV screens on 9 December, Instagram has played its part in the anticipation around the outfits. Images of Parker’s Bradshaw, Davis as Charlotte Yorke Goldenblatt and Cynthia Nixon as Miranda Hobbes have been pored over. Accounts such as @justlikethatcloset and @everyoutfitonsatc document the looks in minute detail, to their thousands of followers. Sex and the City ran for six seasons from 1998 to 2004, and there have been two follow-up films, in 2008 and 2010. Manolo Blahnik and Jimmy Choo benefited. The show, in a way that seemed very modern at the time, name checked designer brands specifically, with shoes a particular focus. As it became more popular – with 10.6 million viewers in the US tuning in for the finale – the fortunes of these brands grew. According to a buyer at Neiman Marcus in 2000, Blahnik’s sales tripled thanks to the show. Molly Rogers, one of the costume designers for And Just Like That, has worked to update the wardrobes of the three main characters – who are now in their 50s. They re-wear items that were worn in Sex and the City – perhaps to please super-fans, but also as a nod to a more sustainable take on style. Blahnik’s blue satin shoes, worn by Bradshaw to marry Mr Big in the first Sex and the City movie, make an appearance. Vintage – a big part of the first series too – is also important. At one point, Davis wears a ruffled top by Givenchy from 1996, while Nixon has a vintage Bottega Veneta bag. The clothes reflect their characters, 11 years on from their last outing. “In our initial meeting with Michael Patrick King [the show’s executive producer and writer], he spoke to us about growth and changes in life and friendships,” she says. “These storylines sent us out into the world looking for a wardrobe to illustrate where they were.” Some things are constant, of course: “Carrie will forever be the NYC woman who mixes vintage and new, up and downtown, and Charlotte is obviously an Upper East Side mom with that lifestyle.” Rogers, who worked on the original series with costume designer Patricia Field, says digital culture makes the big reveal of broadcast trickier. “I have tried to keep some surprises but the paparazzi have really broadcast everything that was on the exterior [scenes shot outside] around the world.” She is, however, confident some surprises will only be seen when the first episodes air. “Hopefully not many of the interior scenes got out on to the airwaves,” she says. “There are no rules in costuming this show. I hope everyone has a great time watching.”News broadcasting on television once meant a desk and an obligatory suit and tie. And even when female news anchors became as commonplace a sight on Britain’s prime-time bulletins as the sombre, clean-shaven men, the way to imply authority and impartiality was always to adopt a calm, formal tone of voice. But with the departure this month of two of the great silverbacks of the news jungle, Channel 4’s Jon Snow and Sky News’s Adam Boulton, the future of the unflappable “voice of news”, coming out from above a sheaf of shuffled papers, is in doubt. A former generation of male titans, ranging from Richard Baker, Alastair Burnet and Reginald Bosanquet, to more recent stars such as Trevor McDonald and Jeremy Paxman, are no longer handling our headlines. And recently Huw Edwards-watchers have suggested the Welsh journalist may also be preparing to leave his prominent role at BBC News. Hourly bulletins from the network broadcasters have long lost their “appointment to view” status and have joined the general hubbub of satellite-channel and social-media updates. This means the commercial identity provided by a consistent newscaster now has arguably much less value. In a news market led by instant reactions transmitted via viral gifs and memes, the heavyweight anchor suddenly stands accused of holding news back. Among those assessing the value of the traditional format this weekend is Boulton himself: “Truth be told the news anchor has never really been a British concept,” he told the Observer. “We have news readers or presenters. And they have never really had the authority, or the public adulation of such as Walter Cronkite, Peter Jennings, Dan Rather or Tom Brokaw.” Boulton, 62, who leaves Sky News with a “wrench” after 33 years, first serving as political editor and then from 2014 as editor-at-large, is stepping away from his chair in the studio in favour of longer form journalism. And, tellingly, all the great American anchors he cites are from the fading past. Snow, 74, who will present his last C4 News later this month, is, for many viewers an emblem of fair-minded, liberal journalism. He, like Boulton, is a hardened hand who has tackled last-minute autocue changes, glib politicians and technical glitches live on air for decades. Yet for one anonymous former television news editor, the change is long overdue. “These people, Boulton, Snow, or over on the radio John Humphrys and Jenni Murray, became national treasures. But this also made them unsackable, big beasts.” It is a problem, he argues, because some of those anchors who remain on screen are beginning to drag the news down. Behind the scenes, the head of Sky News John Ryley is thought to be steering coverage towards a more agile, reporter-led delivery style. In fact, the prospects for the whole of Sky News are uncertain, with its loss-making future under its new owners, Comcast, only secured for another seven years. Times Radio’s new model is now thought to be influencing the agenda, with opinionated reporting and analysis becoming the relevant currency. But then, Boulton argues, the job of being a straight news anchor was always a slightly uneasy one in Britain. “For a start the budget was usually more limited here. I remember being delayed at some German airport while Dan Rather’s private plane took off after some Nato summit or other and thinking it would be rather nice to be an American-style anchor – only to be brought back to earth by the refusal of BBC expenses to compensate John Cole for an ink-spattered shirt.” Boulton suspects British news editors and producers were often resistant to the power of a presenter who had developed a public profile and a strong relationship with viewers. “It is hard to escape the view that British television managers, those behind the screen, have always resented the talent in public view and used their power to curb it,” he said. “The BBC was set up that way as a producer’s medium. In my experience independent television has always devolved more power to those in front of the cameras, but not too much. Reggie Bosanquet and Alastair Burnet were national figures but were also widely mocked for their alcoholic intake. Over on the BBC, Richard Baker, Robert Dougall and Kenneth Kendall were just as well-known, but not for their opinions. They were mellow voices reading scripts.” When female anchors, such as Anna Ford, Angela Ripon and Sue Lawley arrived, Boulton also notes, they were largely appraised for “their gender attributes not their undoubted intelligence”. Writing about the decline of the old-school anchor this summer, Ryley recalled Burnet’s farewell broadcast in 1991 and argued that the 1960s model he personified was “actually a triumph of form over substance”, with little depth of coverage. “It was akin to a daily act of worship, with Burnet performing the role of the nation’s vicar.” Before he pronounced that “the age of the all-powerful anchor is gone”, Ryley also pointed out that if millions do tune in now, it is to watch the prime minister instruct us to “stay at home”, or to see the Queen reassure us “we will meet again”. It looks as if the key organs of state have learned to go directly to their citizens and subjects. When the 24-hour news services arrived and needed to create a bit of audience recognition, it was as likely to come from a familiar reporter as from the face in the studio, said Boulton. In America, richly paid screen stars were rewarded for their biased slant on the current affairs, with Sean Hannity and Tucker Carlson, of the right-leaning Fox News, or Rachel Maddow, of the liberally inclined MSNBC, becoming national figures. “In the US, polarisation and prejudiced opinion works – a far cry from Walter Cronkite’s vision of himself as the conscience of the nation, on a par with a big city fire chief,” Boulton complains, also expressing relief that the trend has not yet entirely taken off in Britain. At stake is, well, what exactly? While some argue we are about to throw away concern for the serious tone of news, others warn of the greater danger of losing all contact with younger viewers. News habits will not form unless the hi-tech, staccato communications methods employed by the BBC’s Ros Atkins or by Anushka Asthana, standing at her data screen on ITN’s Peston, swiftly replace the static anchors. For one leading television news executive there is no point clinging to the old ways. “Anchors do not work in the digital news world. And the really big interviews, like Emily Maitlis meeting Prince Andrew, don’t come along very often.” The problem facing television is that while an avowed great like Boulton once ably held lengthy studio broadcasts together, “no one has that level of experience now”. For Asthana, watching Boulton work during her time at Sky News was a lesson in craft. “He is one of the most impressive broadcasters I’ve ever worked with,” she said. “I don’t think people realise how hard it is to do 10 hours of coverage of a live story and be over every twist and turn. Adam is a towering figure. And his transformation from political editor to presenter was seamless.” And Boulton? He is unable to stop himself mourning the death of the idea that the contract between a regular news anchor and a viewer is more than just commercial branding: “The relationship of an individual with the audience matters. Those who survive manage to establish an inadvertent rapport of trust with the audience over decades on screen. “These relationships have value for both the audience and the broadcasters.”Like a generic Christmas movie where the plot is staler than a shop-bought panettone, Pandemic Christmas 2: Numb Noel rolls around in less than six weeks. As I write, Germany has recorded 50,000 new Covid cases, the UK has recorded 42,000 cases, planned Christmas markets in Leeds and Glasgow have been cancelled and experts in the Netherlands are recommending a lockdown. Actually, maybe obsessively watching Christmas movies isn’t a bad survival tactic for the Yule bunker. The repetition is cosily familiar and yet, unlike a pandemic, the resolution is swift and satisfying. All the actors wear green and red chunky jumpers and striped scarves with adorable wool hats, labour under the hard lighting of a cheap daytime soap opera and carry a strong whiff of many years in the soft porn industry, regardless of the wholesome narrative they’re performing. Like the current No 1 Netflix Christmas movie Love Hard, they’re always about a city gal who visits a charming town and has to choose between two equally attractive men. Even if food shortages mean there’s no turkey on the table come the big day, as every tale from A Christmas Carol on reminds us, love is all you need. Except that in A Christmas Carol they did have a turkey. Losing my touch It’s not just the Christmas spirit that’s been warped over the last two years, it’s also our libidos. Formerly fruity souls have adjusted to enforced celibacy, once abstemious singletons yearn for a human touch, seemingly solid couples are splitting up after witnessing each other’s revolting lockdown habits, people bought pets because they wanted something sentient to cuddle and some flatmates have been doing a lot more than bubbling together. I’ve developed a series of inappropriate lockdown crushes, born from living entirely through YouTube/Netflix/Google for a fifth of a decade. I’m now like one of those feral children who was raised by wolves and hasn’t learned human norms. Sliding into a celebrity’s DMs with a cheesy excuse? Showing up at a crush’s Zoom panel about diversity in the arts and asking a question? I did it. To assess how delusional your lockdown crush is, imagine meeting them at a dinner party. Imagine twinkling in their direction, with a frank lady-look. Would they be horrified? Would their blood run cold? My latest target is the Chinese model-actor-singer Xu Weizhou, or Timmy Xu to the international market. The fact that I know that is risible. He’s 20 years younger than me. He’s so slim I could snap him like a chicken wing. I left a comment on his last Instagram post. It’s pathetic, it’s disgusting. I justified my behaviour to myself in various ways until, last week, a stranger did the same thing to me. I freaked out and then forwarded their message to all my friends and friendly colleagues. Let your pandemic desires roam free, within your own head, but don’t act on them and create interference for other people; reality and fantasy cannot coexist. Malala’s happy news For the last few years, the news has presented us with a bottomless brunch of terrible violence, abuse, injustice and inequality. Thanks to Cop26, it’s all being topped off with a garnish of actual apocalypse. So it was good to find out that Malala Yousafzai, Nobel laureate, peace activist, global resistance icon and ultimate good girl, has married her partner, Asser Malik, with the blessings of their families. Amid the horror of the Taliban retaking Afghanistan, this is a bit of lovely news. I don’t know if love always wins out, but it definitely brightens dark times. • Bidisha is a broadcaster, critic and journalist for BBC, Channel 4 and Sky NewsBorn in Sydney, Australia in 1987, singer-songwriter Courtney Barnett is known for her lo-fi take on indie rock, wistful lyrics and deadpan delivery. She studied fine art at the Tasmanian School of Art and in 2012 founded Milk! Records with then-girlfriend Jen Cloher. Her 2015 debut album, Sometimes I Sit and Think, and Sometimes I Just Sit, brought her international acclaim and nominations for a Grammy and Brit award, and in 2017 she released a collaborative album with Kurt Vile. Her third album, Things Take Time, Take Time is out now. She lives in Melbourne. 1. Festival Trans-Pecos Festival, Marfa, Texas This was one of the first shows I’ve been to in a while, so I was just enjoying the atmosphere of being back and experiencing music with people. Sleater-Kinney played, and Ben Kweller, and Cate Le Bon – it was such an incredible performance. The sun was setting and it was just this dreamy scenario. Standing in that audience you could feel everybody’s attention: you could feel how quiet everybody was and how in awe they were of what was going on on stage. I feel like everyone’s gratitude levels for live music have sky-rocketed. 2. Book Nina Simone’s Gum by Warren Ellis I’m a fan of Warren’s music and I was interested to read something he had written. You get a snapshot into his life and career through this story about Nina Simone – he saw her last London performance and took a piece of gum she had been chewing, and it became this kind of talisman for him. He carried it with him for years and then when Nick Cave was putting together an art gallery he decided to exhibit the gum. It’s a beautifully written book about the power of music and objects. I powered through it in two days. 3. Restaurant La Copine, Yucca Valley, California I’m staying out in Joshua Tree at the moment and there’s a restaurant here that’s 15 minutes away. It has really well curated music and amazing food. It’s quite a small menu, which I like, very seasonal and thoughtfully crafted. They have nice salads, meat options, vegan options. I’ve been quite obsessed with the burger: a classic burger, but like the best burger I’ve ever had. All the staff that work there are really caring and loving, and it’s constantly busy. It’s just a really special spot out here. 4. Album Collapsed in Sunbeams by Arlo Parks I’ve really been enjoying this album, which came out earlier this year and won the Mercury prize. It’s brought me a lot of joy – I’ve been sitting on the back porch, listening to it in headphones in the sun. I really like the song Eugene. Recently I saw her do a small stripped-back performance with just her singing and a guitar player, and you can hear how well-written the song is and what an amazing singer and performer she is. 5. App PictureThis I’ve been using this a lot lately – it’s a plant identifier. You take a photo of a plant or flower and it tells you what it is and how to water it or replant it and how much sun it needs and what kind of soil, or if something’s wrong – if it needs more water or if it’s got root rot. I use it for my houseplants – I’ve got friends looking after them when I’m gone. Here in California I’ve been using it to identify the different cacti, succulents and desert trees. I’m obsessed with it. 6. Podcast Create/Destroy I listen to podcasts when I’m driving, or doing housework. This one is pretty new, there’s only a few episodes so far. It’s by a musician called Anna Lunoe, and she interviews musicians or artists – it’s an hour-long chat about creativity and purpose. I listened to an episode the other day and just felt so inspired by it, listening to people talk so vulnerably about what they do. The one I listened to was with TT the Artist: I wasn’t too familiar with her, but I identified with a lot of her creative struggles.Clint Eastwood still looks good in a cowboy hat. His latest outing is a gentle road movie, which sees the actor-director happily retreading safe, reliable territory. All feels right in the world as we watch him sleeping under the stars, romancing a widowed restaurant owner and tenderly taming wild horses. Eastwood plays Mike Milo, “a real cowboy”, according to boss Howard (Dwight Yoakam, the film’s weakest link). His mission is to cross the border from Texas to Mexico and retrieve Howard’s rebellious 13-year-old son, Rafo (Eduardo Minett), from his feckless, gold-digging mother, Leta (Fernanda Urrejola). Also along for the ride is Rafo’s cockfighting rooster, Macho. Eastwood and Minett have wonderful chemistry as two lone rangers with plenty to learn from each other. “You’re angry – it’s bad for you at your age,” chides Rafo. Yet beneath Mike’s brittle, taciturn exterior is a big old softy. He’s simply the strong, silent type, his toughness tempered by good manners, family values and a fondness for animals. “This macho thing – it’s overrated,” he tells the boy. There’s something touching about seeing the 91-year-old Eastwood in such a reflective mood.Richard Ratcliffe, the husband of the detained Iranian-British dual national Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, is to end his hunger strike after 21 days. Ratcliffe said he had told his wife he would end the protest on Saturday and that he would later be visiting hospital for a full check-up. He told his supporters on the Free Nazanin Twitter account: “Today I have promised Nazanin to end the hunger strike. Gabriella needs two parents. Thank you all for your overwhelming care these past three weeks. “The last act of the hunger strike will be our patchwork event in front of the Foreign Office at 13.30, then I will be going to the hospital for a full check-up. Thank you for keeping our family in the light.” Ratcliffe told the PA news agency his job was to “keep going”, adding: “We probably hoped we’d get a breakthrough doing this. We haven’t yet. I didn’t want to go out in an ambulance. I want to walk out with my head held high.” He also criticised Boris Johnson for his “telling” absence in talking to him during the protest. His strike ended as a patchwork was due to be unveiled, made from all the patches that supporters have been sending throughout his time camped outside the Foreign Office. Ratcliffe began the demonstration outside the Foreign Office, in central London, last month and endured almost three weeks in his latest attempt to force action from the UK government to bring his wife home. He was joined at a vigil on Friday by his seven-year-old daughter, Gabriella, and supporters, who gathered in a show of solidarity. But allies had started to raise concerns for his health and expressed fears that he could permanently damage himself. Earlier on Saturday, the Labour MP Tulip Siddiq called for Johnson to visit her constituent “in solidarity”. She tweeted: “It has been three weeks since Richard Ratcliffe last ate any food. In that time, not a single government minister has visited his camp outside the Foreign Office in solidarity. “Will the prime minister take five minutes out of his day to visit my constituent today?” Speaking on Thursday, Ratcliffe said: “I think there’s a basic medical limit on how long you do a hunger strike for. I made a promise to Nazanin, I made a promise to my family, Mum in particular, and to the family doctors, that I won’t take it too far. “But yeah, I don’t think we walk away head held high feeling like it’s all been sorted.” The Middle East minister, James Cleverly, met Ratcliffe this week to discuss the current situation regarding his wife’s detention in Iran, where she has been held since 2016 – more than 2,000 days. After the meeting, Ratcliffe said he had been left feeling “deflated”, adding: “If I’m honest, it felt like, you know, perfectly nice, sincere, caring, everyone in the room was caring. But you know we’re still stuck in the same status quo. “We’re still stuck in the same problems that led us to end up on hunger strike.” Throughout his near-three-week protest, he has been calling for the British government to pay a £400m debt to Tehran, dating back to the 1970s. The British debt is acknowledged as a precondition for the release of Zaghari-Ratcliffe, as well as other detainees.Dan Hooper, the environmental activist known as Swampy, and his fellow tunneller Satchel emerged from an underground protest against the controversial HS2 project on Saturday morning after resisting eviction for 35 days. Hooper, 48, and Satchel were the last two of five environmental protesters who built and occupied a tunnel on the site of HS2 work in Wendover, Buckinghamshire. A protest camp on the site was established almost two years ago and an elaborate tunnel complex with two structures above ground – a tower and a cage – made the eviction a challenging one for the national eviction team, which finally secured the tunnel. Three other activists, Took, Flem and Log, left the tunnel four days earlier. An HS2 spokesperson said: “We can confirm that all protesters have now been safely removed from the illegal action at Small Dean. By providing a cleaner, greener way to travel, HS2 will help cut the number of cars and lorries on our roads, cut demand for domestic flights, and help the country’s push to reduce carbon emissions. “Instead of wasting their time and public money on often violent and disruptive protest, we would urge anyone who cares about the environment to support this project.” The previous anti-HS2 tunnel protest, close to Euston station in central London, lasted for 31 days. The record for a tunnel protest is 40 days but it is thought that, as with the Wendover protest, part of the eviction resistance was when protesters were above ground. Hooper and Satchel spent 35 days holding out against the national eviction team, 28 of those days completely underground. The environmental activists say they have staged the tunnel protest and many others because they believe the HS2 project is causing untold damage to the environment due to the significant carbon emissions the construction work is generating along with destruction of ancient woodland. HS2 dispute this and say the high-speed rail line will provide an environmentally friendly mode of travel. Cop26 began when the tunnellers were already below ground. On 3 November, Alok Sharma, the president of the Cop26 summit, made a speech referencing Swampy. Sharma said: “But today the Swampys of the world are all around us, in boardrooms, in government departments, in multilateral development banks and trading floors all around the world – you, my friends, are the new Swampys, so be proud.” It is not clear if Sharma was aware that Hooper was in a tunnel at the time he made the speech. The activist was deep underground and without a phone signal so was unable to respond to Sharma in real time. On Saturday, Hooper told the Guardian: “Alok Sharma’s comments are totally outrageous. These are the guys that are trashing the planet. Generally, it’s capitalism that has messed up the planet. Comments like this just bring attention to the hypocrisy of the government. While hosting Cop26 they are backing a major new road building programme and projects like HS2 which will cause a lot of damage to the planet.” Hooper challenged Sharma and the financiers he addressed in his speech to sit down with him “so we can iron out some of the factual points and talk about what we can actually do to save the planet”. A Cop26 spokesperson said: “The Cop president is currently pushing hard to conclude negotiations on a range of issues at Cop26 for a positive outcome for the planet.” Hooper said he would also like to raise concerns about how the police, crime and sentencing bill will curb the right to peaceful protest if it becomes law. He praised the professionalism of the bailiffs who evicted the activists and said he had no complaints about the way they had handled the eviction. “We had a good working relationship. They got on with their job of evicting us and we got on with our job of trying to stop them.” Much of the digging to try to delay the eviction was done by the activists at night. They dug four internal down-shafts, which slowed down the eviction. “We believe our tunnel protest stopped HS2’s piling work from taking place,” said Hooper. “We hope that the tunnel protest will give the climate emergency campaign some momentum.” The tunnellers had stored enough food to last them for two months and said they overdid the stockpiling. “We had to start passing tins of mushy peas up to the surface because we just had too many of them.” He said that much of the underground structure was chalk, which had held up well during the protest. “We didn’t encounter much wildlife down there (apart from the bailiffs) but we did have to evict a glis glis [dormouse] at the beginning of the occupation, though, because it was eating our food.” He has reunited with his partner and some of his children after emerging from the tunnel. Now that he is above ground, Hooper says he hopes to catch up on some sleep. “And I’m looking forward to a beer,” he said.Still some way to go then. A brutal second-half display by South Africa left Scotland pondering anew the realities of international rugby. A confident display against Australia six days earlier seemed much further away than that by the end of this. South Africa laid into Scotland from start to finish. It took a while to tell, but the home side steadily unwound as the second half progressed, floundering beneath a barrage of pressure and muscle. South Africa’s set piece remains supreme. They scored a couple of fine tries either side of half-time, Makazole Mapimpi as deadly as ever in claiming both, but the slower-burning virtues of his mates inside were the telling factors. Scotland’s scrum was in trouble throughout, and then their line-out imploded too. Finn Russell missed eight points’ worth of kicks, which would have been most handy had they been secured when offered, and Scotland needed every one of them if they were to make their more quicksilver game tell. They scored two characteristically brilliant tries of their own, both finished by Stuart Hogg, looking at least a match for the first hour or so, but the elemental effort required against these Boks took its toll come the last quarter. “We’re bitterly disappointed,” said captain Hogg, whose brace drew him level with Ian Smith and Tony Stanger at the top of Scotland’s historic try-scoring chart on 24, the same day he became the most capped full-back of any country. “There are boys down there absolutely devastated at the result. That second half was far from where we want to be or need to be.” The expected narrative was quick to unfold, the Springboks taking hold of the ball and carrying it with feeling into the guts of Scotland. Again and again. The first quarter of an hour was brutal. The stats said Scotland’s pack had a slight weight advantage; the reality seemed somewhat different. Eben Etzebeth looks a lot of things – lightweight is not one of them. He and his mates were relentless, but this Scotland team are as tough as carbon fibre. At that point, they did not particularly bend, although South Africa made them creak at scrum time even then. The Scots absorbed the bombardment with seeming confidence. Impressively, it was they who opened the scoring after that quarter-of-an-hour trial by bosh. Improvisation between the ever-imaginative Russell and Duhan van der Merwe had the latter streaking clear to halfway, where South Africa infringed. Russell landed the penalty. His first miss followed a few minutes later, which allowed Elton Jantjies to pull South Africa level with a penalty early in the second quarter, whereupon they finally scored the try their dominance demanded. How ironic that it came from sharp improvisation of their own, Scotland turning the ball over, which was transferred swiftly to Mapimpi. Rufus McLean had given him just an inch too much room down the left. It is all Mapimpi needs. Scotland retook the lead five minutes before half-time with an even better score. Russell played two outrageous kick-passes in the same passage to Van der Merwe in space, which were so flat they went backwards, and Scotland were away. Sam Skinner and Chris Harris joined the off-load party down the left, and Hogg scooped up the loose ball for a 10-8 lead. It was gone within minutes. A high ball by Willie le Roux broke South Africa’s way two minutes into the second half, and the Springboks showed for a second time they need not always play by muscle. Matt Scott showed Damian de Allende the outside, which he took, flipping an offload to that deadly finisher lurking out wide. Mapimpi had his second, converted by Jantjies. South Africa kept coming. Jamie Ritchie was forced to concede two penalties as the Springboks swarmed. Jantjies converted both for a 21-10 lead in seemingly no time. Scotland looked spooked all of a sudden, their offloading frantic rather than deadly. That said, they responded on the hour in some style. A penalty was sent to the corner, and Russell and Scott effected a loop, which gave Van der Merwe half a gap. His pass released Hogg to the corner. Russell missed the conversion, but the Scots were within a score again. Six points was as close as they would get. The final quarter was entirely South Africa’s, turning the screw in such a variety of painful ways, at the scrum, the line-out and the breakdown. Scotland had glimpses with three attacking line-outs. All of them were lost, the Springbok locks laying waste to the home team’s set piece. The penalties followed. Handré Pollard replaced Jantjies, and Francois Steyn came on for Le Roux. Pollard missed his first shot, but he and Steyn sent over three successful kicks in the last quarter to underline South Africa’s supremacy. Reality had tapped the Scots on the shoulder. And it really hurt.The Greek prime minister has demanded that the 2,500-year-old Parthenon marbles be returned to Athens and has repeated an offer to loan some of his country’s treasures to the British Museum in an attempt to broker a deal. Kyriakos Mitsotakis told the Daily Telegraph that the sculptures, also known as the Elgin marbles, belong in the Acropolis Museum at the foot of the Periclean masterpiece. The leader made the proposal ahead of talks in London with the British prime minister on Tuesday. Boris Johnson has previously ruled out returning them on the grounds that the antiquities were acquired legally. Mitsotakis said: “Our position is very clear. The marbles were stolen in the 19th century; they belong in the Acropolis Museum and we need to discuss this issue in earnest. “I am sure that if there was a willingness on the part of the government to move we could find an arrangement with the British Museum in terms of us sending abroad cultural treasures on loan, which have never left the country.” The marbles were removed from the Parthenon temple more than 200 years ago by Lord Elgin, then British ambassador to the Sublime Porte in Istanbul, in circumstances that have spurred one of the world’s most famous cultural rows and have long been the subject of dispute. Mitsotakis said he would raise the issue with Johnson when the pair met next week for talks that could shape future relations between the two countries. “Refusing to discuss the topic seems to me, given the context of everything that has been happening in terms of the return of cultural treasures, to be rather an anachronistic approach,” he added. “It would be a fantastic statement by what Boris calls Global Britain if they were to move on this and look at it through a completely different lens.” Tuesday’s talks will be the first face-to-face meeting between the two men in which the cultural row is formally raised. Mitsotakis, whose centre-right government assumed power in July 2019, has repeatedly described the marbles as the most important link, symbolically, between the modern Greeks and their ancestors. Late Friday, as world leaders gathered in Paris to commemorate the 75th anniversary of Unesco, the Greek prime minister used the occasion to highlight that this year also marked the 200th anniversary of Greece’s war of independence, which led to the formation of the modern Greek state. As such, he said, there was “no better time than now” to return the monumental carvings. “The UK should move to a bona fide dialogue with Greece. And I urge them to do so. After all, this year marks the 200th anniversary of Greece’s war of independence. There could be no better time than now, in which to reunite the missing section of the Parthenon sculptures – in their birthplace – in Greece,” he told the assembled heads of state. The Greek government has been encouraged by what Mitsotakis also described as a “pivotal step” this September by the UN agency’s advisory committee promoting the return of cultural property. “For the first time, it unanimously adopted a decision recognising that the ‘case has an intergovernmental character and therefore the obligation to return the Parthenon sculptures lies squarely on the UK government,’” he said. Successive British governments have argued that calls for the marbles’ return are a matter for the British Museum to decide, since the treasures have been displayed there since 1816. Greek demands for repatriation have been further fuelled by revelations of water damage in the Duveen galleries where the “exiled” frieze, metopes and pedimental sculptures that once adorned the Acropolis are exhibited. A leaky roof has meant the carvings have been off-limits to the public for almost a year, with the British Museum’s website noting that “due to regular maintenance works” its Greek rooms are “temporarily closed”. Athens had been hoping that as a classicist who visits the country where his father owns a summer villa, Johnson would take a more conciliatory approach to the contentious issue. However, the British prime minister dismissed the appeal for their return to Greece earlier this year, telling the Greek newspaper Ta Nea: “I understand the strong feelings of the Greek people – and indeed Prime Minister Mitsotakis – on the issue. “But the UK government has a firm, longstanding position on the sculptures, which is that they were legally acquired by Lord Elgin under the appropriate laws of the time and have been legally owned by the British Museum’s trustees since their acquisition.” Athens has long called for the reunification of the sculptures, displayed in museums across Europe but mostly in London, arguing that seeing the marbles in situ is integral to understanding the artworks in the context of the Acropolis.Full match report here: Gregor Townsend is here: “We have to suck this one up, it’s disappointing to not play your best but we have to take learning from this game. We couldn’t get a foothold in the second half and we gave the momentum to them. We will look at how we can improve our accuracy and we’re highly motivated to beat Japan next week, a team that beat us in the World Cup two years ago.” No thoughts offered about the changes in selection, which is interesting. Losing Captain, Stuart Hogg is reflecting on the match: “Gutted because we went in at half-time in control. We challenged to come out in second half and make it happen but we were second best. It hurts. We take a little bit of confidence from previous victories, but that’s in the past, and our performance today has let ourselves down in some vital areas.” Very honest reflection there, although I would question if Scotland were actually in control in first half. Nothing was very controlled anywhere on the field from either side in the first forty - once control was applied South Africa were better everywhere. Siya Kolisi is here offering his thoughts: “Grateful to be part of this team, and we’ve been welcomed to Edinburgh by so many people. Scotland got the edge in first half, but then we put our physicality to the fore in the second half and our kicks were on point.” Mike Pearce emails: “A tougher test than Cardiff? I really don’t think so.” Well, it certainly turned out that way, Mike, but it wasn’t an outlandish prediction to make pre-game. In the end, Scotland made twice as many tackles and conceded nearly twice and many penalties while being dominated physically. PEEP PEEEEP! Eben Etzebeth of all people chips the ball out and the game is over. 77 mins. A Bok scrum in the Scotland 22 ends in a predictable penalty for the visitors and Pollard slots it at his leisure. The end of the semi-chaos of the first half has seen South Africa dominate pretty much everywhere since. 75 mins. South Africa, who were slow to lineout before are now moving like a glacier carrying heavy shopping. When they finally arrive, their latest in their own half is won cleanly and cleared. You have to admire the top-tier gamesmanship combined with ability of this team. Speaking of ability, Cobus Reinach has been a revelation in this second half. Scotland go full bench emptying Hail Mary tactic. Jamie Hodgson, George Horne and Adam Hastings are on for Sam Skinner, Ali Price and Matt Scott 71 mins. As we head into the last ten minutes of the match the following are not working for Scotland: scrum, lineout, breakdown. You have to imagine it’s hard to come back in those circumstances. Following the latest breakdown penalty, Frans Steyn steps up and tonks it over from 48 metres. 67 mins. The Scottish lineout has descended into high farce as yet another one is stolen in a promising position. To rub it in even further, Kitshoff gets his hands on the ball to win a penalty in kickable range. Pollard, having got his loosener in last time, makes no mistake. 65 mins. A terrible contact from the usually reliable Pollard puts it wide. At this time of the match that could be a very significant miss as it keeps Scotland within one converted score. SUBS South Africa replace Elton Jantjies with Handre Pollard and Frans Steyn is on for Willie Le Roux For Scotland, Jamie Bhatti and Oli Kebble take the field for Pierre Schoeman and Zander Fagerson 62 mins. Another brilliant platform for Scotland soon after the restart is squandered by the home side as Mostert snaffles McInally’s long throw to the lineout tail on the SA five-metre line. Ewan Ashman replaces McInally for the next lineout and he overthrows this time. Scotland don’t have enough possession to treat it so poorly. 59 mins. Am is a little high in the tackle on Ali Price and Russell puts Scotland deep into the SA 22. Off first phase Russell finds Van Der Merwe in midfield off his wing, he stands up the drifting Bok defence and feeds Hogg for an arcing run-in. Russell pull the kick wide again. The good news for Scotland is that for the limited time they have the ball, the points are there. 56 mins. Jamie Ritchie gives away his third penalty of the match - his side’s tenth - and Jantjies adds yet more points. 53 mins. Chris Harris is penalised for pointlessly blocking Jesse Kriel on a kick chase. That’s nine penalties the home side have conceded and slowly, inevitably South Africa are turning the territorial and scoreboard screw Scotland go to the bench: Hamish Watson is on for Nick Haining Blair Kinghorn replaces Rufus McLean 50 mins. South Africa have a lineout in the Scotland 22 which the forwards take approximately three solar rotations to arrive at. They eventually amble up and win the ball cleanly off the top and are attacking on the 22 and Scotland put in a tombola of penalties that ref Gardiner can take his pick of. He chooses a high tackle from Jamie Ritchie. Jantjies adds three points. 46 mins. Jamie Ritchie puts in a nice chip over the top and Le Roux fails to find touch on the return. This allows Scotland to faff about around the SA ten-metre line for not much reward in terms of shape or territory. 43 mins. Van Der Merwe has the ball ripped from him arms on the right touchline and South Africa go left through the hands. Reinach puts huge width on the play with his first pass, De Allende drifts outside Matt Scott and pops to Mapimpi who finishes well for his second of the day. Jantjies slots the extras. We’re back underway and South African are immediately on the attack in the Scotland 22, but Koch is penalised again for breakdown misbehaviour. Russell will release the pressure from the boot To confirm the change just before half-time for South Africa: Malcolm Marx, Steven Kitshoff and Vincent Koch replaced Ox Nché, Bongi Mbonambi and Trevor Nyakane. In addition, Cobus Reinach has replaced Herschel Jantjies at the break Constructive feedback email. “Surely you gonna have to mention the ref...” says Tony Gomes from South Africa, “That Scotland try had a huge forward pass, and the ref is mind bogglingly poor. Those last two penalties were howlers. Some Scots have yet to touch the ball, but somehow they ahead, but you rambling on like it’s an even contest” Tony there, clearly fuming. Half time musings Scotland are ahead and it will take me longer than a half-time break to work that out, if I’m honest. PEEEP! That’s that for an intriguing and often odd opening forty minutes. 40+2 mins. The Sprinboks replace their entire front row prior to the lineout (again, confusing), Scotland win the ball and new prop Vincent Koch is penalised at the next breakdown. It’s in range but Russell pull it horribly left. A very poor miss. 39 mins. As the half dwindles to an end Chris Harris decides to throw and one-handed reverse pass in his own 22 to Rufus McLean. The winger runs it upfield and Scotland have a penalty and a lineout on the SA 22! This match is very confusing... That try was all from Russell’s vision to switch the entire point of attack left with that cross-kick. There was still plenty to do, but without his initial “sod it, let’s send it over there” decision the opportunity is nowhere. 36 mins. Ali Price manages to dig the ball out of a rapidly imploding scrum. Finn Russell chips a cross-kick left and the ball is pinballed inside and outside in a five metre channel on the left touchline between Skinner, van der Merwe, Harris and eventually Hogg who runs in. The TMO looks at about three things, including checking forward passes and if Harris was in touch before offloading, but there’s nothing to see. Try given! Russell converts. 33 mins. Good news: Scotland have an attacking platform on the Bok 22. Bad news: it’s a scrum. There’s a break in play while someone has treament and the Scotland pack presumably chat about how to not have their heads pushed into their own torsos. 30 mins. Suddenly, in the midst of the maladroit muddle, some quality breaks out as South Africa work the ball left with a series of perfectly time passes that put Mapimpi away tight to the left touchline. He has too much pace for the covering Hogg and scores. Elton Jantjies misses the extras. 28 mins. The first attacking platform for a while for Scotland is from a lineout, but the attack breaks down horribly due to some miscommunication in midfield. A scrappy period ensues from both sides in the middle third of the field. 24 mins. Jamie Ritchie is busy at the breakdown and grabs the ball as Nche is tackled. It looked a clean jackal but ref Gardiner saw all sorts wrong with it, particularly as his hands were on the floor just before he grabbed the ball. Elton Jantjies brings his side level with the boot. 22 mins. Normal service is resumed in the scrum as the Scotland pack turns to powder under the Bok shove. Another penalty on the way after the SA attack on the advantage comes to nought. SA lineout midway in Scotland half coming. 19 mins. In the next phase of possession after the restart Jamie Ritchie clamps on Jesse Kriel to win Scotland a penalty for Kriel not releasing. Russell tees it up once more, but pushes it just right. 17 mins. Russell strokes it through and amazingly, brilliantly, improbably Scotland are in front! What a turnaround. 16 mins. Scotland’s pack pick the best possible time to finally hold strong in the scrum and force Vermeulen to carry it. He loses ball at the breakdown and Russell dummies a kick IN HIS OWN IN-GOAL AREA, pops it left to van der Merwe who runs around Mbonambi and races 50 metres up the field! Jesse Kriel hauls the Scot winger down, but doesn’t release. The ref doesn’t like the Bok afters, marches them back 10 and this puts in kicking range for Finn Russell. 14 mins. Mostert claims a solid lineout ten metres out for the Scotland line. The maul is set but Schoeman manages to get his hand in, but it’s knocked on! This will simply bring another SA scrum, this time five metres out and this means either a penalty or a try you have to think. 11 mins. Since the early couple of phases, Scotland have had zero ball and can’t get themselves into the game. South Africa are taking scrums on every penalty given away by the home team. Scrums begat more penalties, penalties begat more lineouts and more Bok territorial advantage. 8 mins. Sam Skinner gets up in front of Mostert to ruin the Bok lineout and allow Russell to bludgeon the ball away with his boot. On the return punt from Le Roux, Stuart Hogg makes a poor effort of a climbing catch - the ball bouncing off his chest like a beach ball. 6 mins. Gilchrist compounds the issue be pushing early at the lineout and Elton Jantjies puts the visitors deep into the Scotland 22. The catch and drive is repelled but the Boks are working short carries left and right and are up to double-figures phases, each one softening the Scottish defence. Inevitably, the pressures tells and Gilchrist is penalised again, this time for not rolling away. South Africa put it in the corner once more. 2 mins. Scotland have their first couple of phases from the top of a lineout, with Russell doing his frequent show and go. This puts him just behind the Bok tackle line before the clatter from the covering inside defence forces him to knock-on. Zander Fagerson is penalised for collapsing the first scrum of the match. Finn Russell gets us underway A wonderful, poignant moment as Tom Smith delivers the match ball. The former Scotland and Lions prop continues his battle against cancer and is embraced by Stuart Hogg and the ovation of the crowd. A humble man with nothing to be humble about. Scotland’s decent year in comparative stats is interesting... Hamish Watson, benched today, has been chatting to Amazon Prime pre-match. In a continuation of the much shade that’s been thrown Warren Gatland’s way since the summer he said: “It’s great to have players who played on the Lions tour. We learnt how to not play South Africa.” BOOM! Good job his national team isn’t coached by the bloke who was in charge of the Lions attack, eh? Oh... Pre match reading Why is Matt Scott back in the the team, Lee? No need to ask me when you can read Gregor Townsend’s thoughts on the matter here. You can get in touch with me and share all your thoughts, dreams and anonymised case studies via email or the twitter. Gregor Townsend has reacted to a solid victory against Australia by spinning the selection wheel and making four changes. Matt Scott comes into the centre for the first time since 2017, displacing Sam Johnson whose partnership with Chris Harris is one of the best in the World presently. Scott’s inclusion suggesting Townsend wants a more physical presence in the face of Damian De Allende - the Crash Ball Thanos. D’Arcy Graham leaves the squad entirely also, replaced by the promising Rufus McLean and Hamish Watson is on the bench with Jamie Ritchis in at seven and Nick Haining on the blind-side. Stuart McInally drops in at hooker for the injured George Turner. Willie Le Roux returns to fullback for South Africa and there’s a new half-back pairing as the Jantjies Not-brothers Elton and Herschel unite. Scotland: Stuart Hogg (captain); Rufus McLean, Chris Harris, Matt Scott, Duhan van der Merwe; Finn Russell, Ali Price; Pierre Schoeman, Stuart McInally, Zander Fagerson, Sam Skinner, Grant Gilchrist, Nick Haining, Jamie Ritchie, Matt Fagerson. Replacements: Ewan Ashman, Jamie Bhatti, Oli Kebble, Jamie Hodgson, Hamish Watson, George Horne, Adam Hastings, Blair Kinghorn. South Africa: Willie le Roux; Jesse Kriel, Lukhanyo Am, Damian de Allende, Makazole Mapimpi; Elton Jantjies, Herschel Jantjies; Ox Nché, Bongi Mbonambi, Trevor Nyakane, Eben Etzebeth, Franco Mostert, Siya Kolisi (captain), Kwagga Smith, Duane Vermeulen. Replacements: Malcolm Marx, Steven Kitshoff, Vincent Koch, Lood de Jager, Jasper Wiese, Cobus Reinach, Handré Pollard, Frans Steyn. Welcome to Murrayfield everyone. Whisper it, but Scotland could be onto something if not quite big, but certainly medium-to-big this season of mists and mellow fruitfulness. Gregor Townsend’s men have two wins under their belts and a real chance of going the Autumn undefeated with two wins already in boot of their increasingly sleek and competent looking car of a squad. The rather large speedhump that may shred the bottom of their bodywork today is South Africa, a team the Scots are winless against since a Dan Parks inspired (yes, really) victory in November 2010. The Springboks know this will be a tougher test than Cardiff last week, with Scotland at largely full compliment, possessing a more developed and winning gameplan than Wales, and a distinct lack of the unwelcome murk of defeatist fatalism that has shrouded the squad in times past. Having said all that, Jacques Nienaber’s visitors are the masters of extracting victories from tight matches via a combination of nous, strength, well timed coaching interventions by physios and flashes of cold brilliance that seize the tiniest try opportunities With a very poor Japan next up, a win today makes a perfect Autumn for Scotland a certainty.The biggest crowd since Gold Cup day in March 2020 crammed into the stands here on Saturday for the Paddy Power Gold Cup, and more than 30,000 fans were gripped by every second and stride of the run up to the famous hill as Midnight Shadow, at 9-1, held-on by just three-quarters of a length from the fast-finishing favourite, Protektorat. “How did you know you were going to hold on right to the line?”, Ryan Mania, the winner’s jockey, was asked shortly afterwards. “I didn’t,” was the honest reply. As it was on Friday, when Rachael Blackmore performed a minor miracle to stay aboard Gin On Lime, the second-last fence proved to be a turning point in the race. Coole Cody, last year’s front-running winner, had produced a convincing reprise of that performance from the off and he was still going strongly when he clipped the top of the first fence in the home straight and stumbled to the ground on landing. That left Midnight Shadow in a clear lead and apparently in need only of a clean jump at the last to secure the win. He jumped it soundly enough but then slipped on landing, briefly leaving Mania with clear daylight between jockey and saddle. He did well to sit tight but his mount was suddenly in need of the line, with the most famous hill in National Hunt racing still to come. A wall of noise tumbled down from the stands as they set off to climb it, with Protektorat, the 11-2 favourite, leading a pack of rivals who were closing in with every stride. Midnight Shadow’s lead was down to three-quarters of a length as he finally made it across the line, with Protektorat in second and Lalor and Dostal Phil filling the frame. Mania and Sue Smith, Midnight Shadow’s trainer, won the Grand National with 66-1 shot Auroras Encore in 2013, and the trainer was rightly proud of her latest big-race success. “We only had one horse to bring down here and he’s paid us back today,” Smith said. “It was terrifying to watch. There aren’t many horses that could have done what he’s done at the last and I just thought ‘that’s it’, but he just picked himself up and kept going. “I’m probably a bit more emotional [than after the National] because I’m that much older. It’s special for everyone because we’re only a small yard and the northern yards don’t get to do this very often.” Mania, who retired from race-riding 18 months after his Grand National success, was celebrating his most valuable win since returning to the saddle in 2019. “He got a little bit lonely, which he can do in his races if he is in front for too long, and the lack of concentration maybe didn’t help,” Mania said. “In fairness, he was never going to get beat as he is very game. I could feel the horses coming to me but he was never going to let them past. “I’m sure it is emotional for most jockeys but it is especially emotional for me to have retired and come back and do all this for my family. I was very positive and that is how I rode him and that is how he has gone and done it. There are no plans to retire. I’ve got a good 10 years in me yet.” Dan Skelton, Protektorat’s trainer, had earlier seen his novice chaser Third Time Lucki maintain an unbeaten record over fences with an easy success in the Grade Two November Novice Chase. Third Time Lucki jumped with impressive speed and precision throughout and put in a spectacular leap at the fourth-last before being pushed out up the hill to win by nearly five lengths. “Originally, the plan was to go here and then Henry VIII [novice chase at Sandown in December],” Skelton said. “Whether that’s going to happen now, I just need to speak to Mike [Newbould, his owner]. He could go straight to Kempton [at Christmas].” The main target for Third Time Lucki, though, remains the Festival meeting in March and he remains around 10-1 for the Arkle Trophy, in a market headed by Willie Mullins’s Appreciate It at around 5-2. Sunday’s TV tips Twenty of the 47 declared runners on the final day of Cheltenham’s November meeting are due to run in the Greatwood Handicap Hurdle, which highlights the disappointing field sizes elsewhere on the card but does at least focus the punters’ attention and betting money on one of the most competitive Cheltenham handicaps this side of the Festival meeting in March. Nicky Henderson’s lightly-raced No Ordinary Joe, in the JP McManus colours, will attract plenty of support, as his trainer launched his hurdling career in a Grade Two at Ascot last year when he was around 10 lengths behind the top-class My Drogo. He went on to win small-field events at Southwell and Worcester but Sunday’s test will be very different and it could pay to look towards a runner with more experience. Glory And Fortune has registered a strong time in both of his win so far this season, but the outstanding individual piece of form in the race may be the close fourth by Jesse Evans (2.55) in theGalway Hurdle in July. Noel Meade’s gelding was forced to race a little wider than ideal but still finishing close behind the principals and may well have been trained with Sunday’s race in mind ever since. Cheltenham 1.45 This Grade Three handicap could take less winning than the one in which Go Another One finished fifth at the October meeting here. John McConnell’s gelding has plenty of form at the track and is a fair price at around 9-2 to be yet another Irish-trained winner at Cheltenham this year. Cheltenham 2.20 Just four runners for the Grade Two Schloer Chase but a competitive race all the same, with Politologue and Put The Kettle On, the last two winners of the Queen Mother Champion Chase, in the field. Slight preference, though, is for Nube Negra, who looked a little unfortunate when only a length behind Put The Kettle On at the Festival and may have more scope for improvement as this will be just his eighth start over fences. Cheltenham 3.30 Another small field but again all four runners are in with a chance. I Like To Move It is unbeaten in two starts over timber and the overnight favourite at around 11-10, but he could make the market for a bet on *Washington *at around 11-4. The form of his debut win over hurdles at Bangor is backed up by the clock and he won there with plenty in hand.Shortly after Wimbledon, during an interminable July in world sport, many top players packed their bags and headed off to Tokyo for the Olympic Games. But not everyone. Some were unable to qualify for the event, while others detested the restrictive conditions in Japan. And then there were players, such as the 22 year-old Casper Ruud, who saw an opportunity and took it with aplomb. With all eyes on Tokyo, Ruud quietly won consecutive ATP 250 titles in Bastad, Gstaad, and Kitzbühel. This was already a breakout top-20 year for him, but those results pushed him into the conversation for an ATP Finals spot, where he will compete for the first time in Turin next week. Ruud is an anomaly at the top levels of tennis. Norway’s previous highest-ranked men’s player peaked at 39th in 1995 and the country remains such a non-entity beyond him that Ruud competes in the lower divisions of the Davis Cup, even facing unranked non-professionals there. From Ruud’s perspective, tennis does not receive sufficient attention or finances, and in a winter sport country, it is difficult to change that. “It’s always easier to blame the federation for these things but it’s tough for the federation,” says Ruud. “Because they don’t receive too much money from the government to put in a lot of money, making new courts, new centres, new academies to make new players. That’s the biggest struggle in Norway. Most of the money doesn’t go to tennis.” It just so happens that the previous highest-ranked Norwegian player was his father. It was Christian Ruud who first put a racket into Casper’s hands and he has remained his son’s coach ever since. It has gone fairly well; Ruud went on to become a junior No 1 and is now ranked world No 8. He considers his father’s experience essential to his success. “Even though over the last years I’ve had more and more success and I’ve been getting better on the tour, I think I’ve lived this kind of life as an athlete for many years already,” he says. “My father has been serious with me because he wanted me to have the best opportunities to do well. I think that has been a huge benefit for me coming from a small country like Norway.” While Ruud’s junior career was actually propelled by hardcourt success, as a professional he has thrived on clay. Ruud grinds opponents down with his spin and physicality, while his vicious, heavy forehand is most lethal on the dirt. That forehand alone is underrated in its excellence, a shot that generates one of the highest spin rates and also troubles opponents by bouncing uncomfortably high. It was not always this way. Ruud laughs as he reminisces back to when he faced his friend Mikael Ymer of Sweden at the under-14 European Championship and neither player could even crack an egg with their forehands, resulting in endless moonball rallies. Now standing at 6ft, Ruud is the smallest qualifier in Turin, but has grown into a solid frame and the early influence of Rafael Nadal is far more visible in his game. “Watching Nadal, who was my favourite player growing up, I think that also made a small impact on the way I tended to play because when you’re young it’s always fun to, not imitate, but try to learn from your favourite players,” he says. Then he laughs. “Growing up, I’ve figured it was maybe not the best thing to try to copy Nadal’s style because he’s very physical.” As Ruud has risen up the rankings, he has unwittingly become part of some age-old tennis debates. The first is what some fans call “vulturing”, which is a pejorative for when quality players enter weaker tournaments and gain points by beating lower-ranked players, as in the summer when Ruud’s highest ranked opponent in his trio of titles was No 49. In truth, all he did was follow a schedule according to his strengths and benefit from his convincing performances. Similarly, players who prefer clay are often stigmatised in a way that specialism on other surfaces is not, even though no surface is more superior than the other and the prevalence of hard courts in the modern game is primarily down to cost and convenience. Ruud is well aware of how some view him, not least thanks to numerous jibes on social media from Nick Kyrgios. He admirably takes it in his stride, with some humour, and offers a diplomatic response on the subject. “It goes both ways,” he says. “You have clay players that have maybe struggled doing as well on hard courts and those will get criticised. But you also have hard court players or grass players who maybe struggle doing well on clay, and that will always be the case. You can argue whether one surface is better than the other, everyone will have their opinion and that’s fine, but in my opinion I prefer the clay both to play and to watch matches on.” While Ruud may not be as effective on other surfaces where “more competitors can hit me off the court”, he is only 22 and improving. This summer he won a ATP 250 title on hard courts in San Diego and has finished the year with a series of solid results both outdoors and indoors. He is the youngest ATP Finals qualifier this year, and his lofty success in his short career has led to him taking a seat at the top table in Turin even quicker than many anticipated. It will not be his last time there.A scrambled second-half goal from Rachel Williams looked to have earned Tottenham victory against their north London rivals after Manuela Zinsberger had failed to hold on to the forward’s initial effort, until a thumping header from Vivianne Miedema in added time denied Spurs women their first win over Arsenal. The Tottenham manager, Rehane Skinner, still managed to remain upbeat after drawing with the Women’s Super League leaders. “We still have to take a step back and realise this is part of the progress we’ve made which is massive,” she said. “To be in that situation, closer than any team has come up against them so far this season, is a massive credit to the players.” The Arsenal players, who were in control for much of the game, were furious after the referee, Amy Fearn, pulled play back for a foul on Katie McCabe just as England’s Jordan Nobbs, who was through on goal, curled the ball into the net. That was before Miedema struck three minutes into added time. “It’s one of those things when you talk about other professionals, if you don’t have any positive things to say I’d rather not comment at all,” said the Arsenal manager Jonas Eidevall. Previous derby encounters had all ended in emphatic wins for Arsenal. In the WSL, the Gunners had won all three of their encounters, with an aggregate score of 11-1. The north London clubs’ rivalry has largely transferred over to the women’s teams but the huge historic discrepancies between the two clubs has meant that up to now there had only been one outcome. Skinner said Arsenal’s centre-back Leah Williamson had said to her after the game that the progress of Spurs was making this “a proper north London derby”. “We’re all on the same page, players, managers, we all want to make the game better, make it a spectacle and something people really want to watch,” said Skinner. “Today’s game hopefully provided that.” At the Hive an impressive turnout from fans of both sides spoke to the increasing competitiveness of the rivalry. Under the former England assistant coach Skinner, Tottenham are a well-oiled machine. They took a first point from Manchester United last weekend to stay five points behind the league leaders Arsenal, two behind second-placed Chelsea and a point above Brighton, who have looked the mostly likely side to upset the established order at the top. The visitors hit the crossbar twice before the break and in the second half frustrations and tensions ran high, with Ashleigh Neville, Maéva Clemaron and Percival engaged in almost constant battle with McCabe on the left. Despite the lack of goals as the hour mark passed there was a sense one was coming as play began to open up. And, with both Arsenal and Spurs having scored five goals each in the last 10 minutes in the WSL this season – more than any other team – it felt somewhat inevitable. Arsenal were thoroughly frustrated and it was Spurs who made the breakthrough despite having 38% of possession and five shots to Arsenal’s 15. After Williams’ poached goal rattled Arsenal, Tottenham went close to doubling their lead when the full-back Neville put the ball over the bar with the goal gaping after the centre-back Shelina Zadorsky’s shot was deflected into her path. Nobbs had the ball in the back of the net for Arsenal with five minutes remaining but the referee had blown for a foul on McCabe rather than playing advantage as Nobbs took the shot. Arsenal finally got their reply in added time, as Miedema leapt above Neville and sent a powerful header past Korpela. “Great finish,” said Eidevall. “She created goalscoring opportunities through the whole game, on another day she would have scored another. You have to remember we played Sunday night, we had travel, we played on a different turf in Denmark and then we played Saturday lunchtime. Of course that’s incredibly tight when you add in travel. So we knew it was going to be incredibly difficult, these three games, and overall when you look at the performances I’m incredibly proud, but of course we can do better.”And here’s Suzanne Wrack’s report from The Hive. Tottenham manager Rehanne Skinner speaks to the BBC. It’s a massive point for us so we have to take the positives out of it. You’ve got to want to work hard and do the hard stuff to win. We work on that a lot. We showed that today and I’m really pleased with the players and proud of them. We weren’t very positive in possession in the first half and I was a bit disappointed with that. We were being too negative on the ball. We were more positive in the second half and we created some more chances. Arsenal boss Jonas Eidevall speaks to the BBC. I think the performance was stronger than the result. We should have scored more goals and that we have to be disappointed with. Even after we scored the equaliser we had one more opportunity to win the game and that I think shows real strength. There were not a lack of goalscoring opportunities. This performance reminds me of previous performances in the WSL with one difference - that we didn’t score on opportunities. Here’s the top of the WSL table. Ashleigh Neville of Tottenham speaks to the BBC. We love the games here and the crowds coming to watch. It’s a big game so we are up for a derby. It’s one I will look back at. We lost 5-1 in the cup and so to draw 1-1 shows we are going in the right direction. The tweets are in. That’s that. A memorable North London derby in which Tottenham were so close to a first ever defeat of Arsenal. Up stepped Miedema, as usual, but will a draw be enough for Arsenal? Your move, Chelsea. 90+5 min: Arsenal push on and on. Tottenham rocking on their heels. 90+4 min: Arsenal free-kick from the right, and Miedema’s volley is blocked. Then Leah Williamson nods over from a Nobbs cross. All Arsenal. Spurs clinging on. 90+3 min: So tough on Tottenham while Jonas Eidevall, the Arsenal manager, wants more. He made that gesture of pointing to the head. “You’ve got to use your heads,” as Graham Taylor used to say. The corner comes in and Miedema heads in over Ashleigh Neville. A big goal. 90+1 min: Some desperate defending taking place now. Some equally desperate attacking, too. 90 min: Foord spins into action and there is chaos, only for Little to hit the ball straight at Korpela. Five minutes are added on. 89 min: To correct earlier spellings, it’s Ashleigh Neville rather than Ashley Neville. She’s been excellent and might have scored a goal, though will she rue that miss? 87 min: Graham runs down the wing, as she has done with great success as Tottenham have pushed forward. Addison gets chance to shoot after some good work and fires wide. Arsenal’s gate is open at the back. 85 min: Two Arsenal changes. Foord and Iwabuchi on, Mead and Walti off. That’s an awful lot of attackers on the field. 84 min: Korpela takes her time over a goal-kick. We are in the final stages now and a famous win is in sight for Tottenham. They might have had another when Graham picked out Ayane, but hit the ball at the keeper. 82 min: Controversy here! The referee stops play just as Arsenal looked in. Jordan Nobbs looked through but instead the ref went back to book Ashley Neville. Beth Mead is booked for dissent. 80 min: Oh Tottenham. That was close. Simon rattles a shot wide that had Zinsberger beaten but goes wide of the post. A sub is made. That’s Simon’s last action, as it is for Clemaron. 77 min: Holdup play from Graham in Tottenham’s attack, and she goes down down holding her head. She took a whack to the chops. 75 min: Little speeds down the flank and is tackled. Arsenal corner, and very little comes of it. Little clatters into Percival and feels the pain. Spurs have not taken any prisoners. 74 min: That loud Arsenal fan is trying to rouse the away contingent. The crowd are more interested in the action in the Spurs box, where Arsenal are trying to dig out a shooting chance. 72 min: Tottenham force a corner, and Arsenal look a tad ragged. Oh my. Ashley Neville should have scored after Zadorsky’s shot is deflected into her path. Oh no! That surely would have been that. 70 min: Neville, who has worked so hard all game for Tottenham, is down, having taken something of a jolt. She will be ok, once she gets her breath back. 68 min: Arsenal subs: Nobbs on, Parris on, Catley off, Maanum off. Attacking subs made there. 66 min: Well. That was what Tottenham had planned, and Arsenal have been inviting. The back door opened and Williams the ex-plasterer was never going to pass up that chance. Arsenal behind for the first time this season. It was a scramble. Rachel Williams forces it home after her first shot is saved. 64 min: Tottenham sub: Ubogagu off, and Addison on for Spurs, to add some speed. 63 min: Spurs continue to defend well though are giving up more chances. Something must break, as Ian Curtis once said. 62 min: An absorbing game has the fans making plenty of noise, and there’s another shot from Maanum, whose shot is saved by the excellent Korpela. 60 min: Ubogagu for Tottenham cuts in from the right, and then shoots. The angle was too narrow to score from. 59 min: Maritz, stepping forward for Arsenal, hits the ball over the bar. 58 min: Another fine stop from Korpela - or was it Neville - as Miedema escapes. At the other end, Zinsberger has to come out and clear the ball. She has to stay alert. 56 min: Arsenal stepping it up. A goal seems likely to come, but for who? Little is bundled over by Clemaron, who is already on a yellow card. 54 min: Rachel Williams escapes the offside trap but her cross is cleared, setting up an Arsenal attack and Miedema shoots over the bar. 52 min: A mistake from the Tottenham goalkeeper almost lets in Miedema but Korpela makes up for that by then making an incredible save from Mead. Down and low, a Schmeichel-like starfish stops what looks a certain goal. 51 min: McCabe was not happy about that. She looked very angry. Tottenham are frustrating Arsenal. 50 min: Kym Little heads away a Tottenham corner. McCabe escapes and is then mowed down by Clemaron, who gets a yellow card. It was a Fernandinho-type tactical foul. 48 min: Tottenham have much of the ball in this first half. Perhaps the Arsenal plan is to hit on the counter but perhaps Spurs are playing better. 47 min: Tottenham have a corner, what can they find? It causes a flurry of panic before it’s cleared. And Arsenal come away with the ball. 46 min: We are back underway, and that loud Arsenal fan seems to be making noise again. He went quiet towards the end of the first half. Can his team find a goal? Mission accomplished for Tottenham. Arsenal have hit the woodwork twice and practically had all the ball, but it’s all square in the North London derby. 45+1 min: Miedema has a shot blocked. The pressure continues but so does the Tottenham defending. 45 min: Leah Williamson is called into rare action at the back as three minutes are added on at the end of the first half. 44 min: A chance for Arsenal as Miedema finds space but her pass takes McCabe wide and Tottenham can clear it again. Then Kym Little, who has been quiet, steals the ball and rockets it at Korpela, who saves at the second time of asking. 42 min: Off the woodwork again. Katie McCabe from the left wallops a shot off the crossbar. 41 min: Clemaron is back in as part of that massed Spurs defence as Arsenal push on and on. Half-time is not too far away. 39 min: A concussion protocol is carried out. Clemaron looks very dazed indeed. 37 min: Miedema in full effect, spinning and weaving, but then when she finds room for the shot it’s cleared. The followup is smashed into Clemaron’s face, and she’s down. That looks like a potential concussion. 36 min: Tottenham edging forward. Rachel Williams, the veteran, is getting through a heavy workload. 34 min: Arsenal get that Tottenham corner clear, and Zadorsky’s attempt to get the ball back in doesn’t pay off. Then Miedema is fouled in the centre of the park. Free-kick to Arsenal but Korpela does well to claim. The goalkeeper has had a fine game. 33 min: Arsenal getting frustrated? Neville was on the end of a flailing elbow there. And they concede a corner at the other end. 31 min: Miedema tries to get on the end of things but again, some excellent Spurs defending stops her. 29 min: Tottenham hanging on a bit but have defended so well so far. This has been an examination of the quality of Arsenal’s attack. 27 min: Wow! Free-kick, and Beth Mead, from the edge of the box, smashes the ball off the keeper and off the bar. It looked to have bounced in. 25 min: Great tackle by work to rob McCabe. That’s been quite a battle so far and one that the Tottenham defender is winning. 23 min: Tottenham try to push up a little, they have been under some heavy pressure for a while now. 21 min: Good save from Korpela, as Miedema hits the ball low and hard, and the Finnish keeper shows her experience. 20 min: Arsenal go close, as Maanum heads a corner wide. That’s the best chance since that early Mead effort. 18 min: Neville, the Tottenham defender, comes across to stop McCabe in her tracks. 16 min: Tottenham win a free-kick, after Ubogagu is fouled. A training ground move is attempted but fails. That doesn’t release the pressure and Graham threatens only for Arsenal to clear the danger. 15 min: Jonas Eidevall is not too impressed with what he sees. He seems like an intense chap. His team have not been too fluent so far but have begun to dominate. 13 min: Arsenal putting the pressure on now, and Tottenham having to sit back and soak it up. Mead’s cross into the middle is cleared but the ball keeps coming back at them. 12 min: Little scampers down the right, but Tottenham hold their line and Arsenal are struggling to find spaces. Can they keep this up? 10 min: A foul on McCabe gives Arsenal a free-kick chance. The singing from the fans continues to be awful. And the free-kick finds no-one in particular. 8 min: A tackle on Miedema leads to an Arsenal cross that’s hit too deep, and there’s an injury. Williams and Clemaron clash and it’s Clemaron is hurt. The commentary tells me that Rachel Williams is a former plasterer. Like Frank Sinatra and Sean Connery, no less. 6 min: Tottenham passing it around the back in the club’s finest - and most risky - traditions. After that early Mead chance the Arsenal pressure has not revealed itself as yet. 4 min: Tottenham rather more on the front foot than would be expected, pushing up on Arsenal. Typical derby stuff, you might say. 3 min: Those Gunners fans continue to be rowdy, as do their Tottenham equivalent. There’s one Arsenal fan with a foghorn of a voice. He may be a little hoarse in the morning. 1 min: After the players take the knee, away we go. Can Tottenham, two changes made since last week’s 1-1 draw with Manchester United, pull off a famous victory? The opening portents are not good. Beth Mead goes close and it takes some desperate defending to clear the ball. Before we can begin, a minute’s silence is held. Servicemen and servicewomen are on the field. Arsenal fans seem in lusty voice before it begins. Thankfully, they stay quiet after that, and then comes the Last Post. The Tottenham manager, Rehanne Skinner, speaks. It’s her birthday today. For us it’s about every game, and we want to keep performing, and we hope to keep getting points. A win on any day is a fantastic result, it’s a really special day, of the type we want to be involved in. The Arsenal manager, Jonas Eidevall, speaks after making five changes from midweek. Nothing to do with injuries, a lot to do with the playing schedule. This is the starting lineup we think fits best today. Those teams again in analogue fashion Tottenham: Tinja-Riika Korpela, Neville, Bartrip, Zadorsky, Harrop, Percival, Clemaron, Ubogagu, Graham, Simon, Williams. Subs: Morgan, Green, Ale, Addison, Ayane, Heeps Arsenal: Zinsberger, Maritz, Williamson, Wubben-Moy, Catley, Maanum, Walti, Little, Mead, Miedema, McCabe. Subs: Patten, Nobbs, Parris, Williams, Foord, Boye Sorensen, Iwabuchi, Goldie, Heath Arsenal come into this game after a huge Champions League win in midweek. Suzanne Wrack previewed this weekend’s derby. A North London derby, and one being played at the top of the WSL table with Tottenham having a fine season so far in third, and Arsenal revived and leading the league under the new management of Jonas Eidevall. Some stats: Tottenham Hotspur have lost all three of their FA WSL matches against Arsenal by an aggregate score of 11-1, while Arsenal have never conceded an away goal against Spurs in the WSL. Barnet’s The Hive is the venue - White Hart Lane could have hosted this perhaps. Tottenham’s task is a tough one, as Arsenal have a 100 percent record and are in free-scoring form but maybe Rehanne Skinner’s team can pull off one of the surprises of the season. Kick-off is at 1.30pm. Join me.For people crowding back into restaurants, stumbling out of reopened clubs, or heading again to airports, life is getting back to normal. At least that is until they pick up their phone for a taxi, or search a ride-hailing app, in vain. Where have all the cab drivers gone? “It’s horrendous,” says Steve Farrier, owner of Alpha Cars in Havant, Hampshire. “You can’t get drivers for love or money. You don’t get a break.” He turns the automated booking service off at weekends, “or we couldn’t meet the demand”. For most of 2020 and 2021, it was customers that were missing, as Covid killed the cab trade. Now firms small and large, from Alpha to Uber, lack drivers at a time when business could boom again. Many cab drivers who left – for sectors such as retail, which have staff shortages of their own – have little desire to return. Others face long waits for paperwork and tests. And those who stayed can choose the jobs they take, leaving the less lucrative pick-ups stranded. If a taxi is a luxury for some, it remains a lifeline in rural areas without public transport, for shift workers, those with disabilities, and people out late – particularly women, whose safety has again been put squarely in focus this year. “In Manchester, which has a good night-time economy, it’s a real problem,” says Derek Brocklehurst, manager of Cresta Cars, one of the city’s largest private hire firms. After more than 40 years in business, he says: “We feel embarrassed, unable to fulfil our customers’ requirements, with people having to wait one or two hours.” Some drivers only want to work days since the pandemic, he says: “They’ve taken on different jobs, their work-life has changed and they are spending more time with their families.” To apply to be a driver, with record checks and medicals, can cost nearly £600 and take months. Some authorities, such as Manchester, require geographical route tests, which catch many out and, Brocklehurst argues, are unnecessary: “Uber operate from Liverpool, Wolverhampton, rock up with satnavs and there is no issue with that. There’s a big disparity between all the councils.” Similar frustrations are felt across the industry. Claire Reynolds runs a small chauffeur service, NTD, from Leighton Buzzard, for pre-booked journeys such as airport transfers. Regardless, new drivers have to wait months to take the same Bedfordshire route test as taxis on ranks. “It’s going to be a six-month process to get a new driver, which is incredible,” Reynolds says. “People want to work, but we’re held up by bureaucracy.” Steve Wright, chair of the Licensed Private Hire Car Association (LPHCA), is scathing: “The barriers to entry are ridiculous.” As well as tardy councils, the DVLA and overstretched health services have been accused of being slow with licences and medicals. The Department for Transport says licensed vehicle numbers in England decreased 16% in the year to June, and licensed drivers by 6%. But the LPHCA says many more are not working: it estimates only 160,000 of the nearly 300,000 pre-Covid cab drivers are active. The Local Government Association says councils try to support the taxi trade by “taking a flexible and pragmatic approach, [but] need to ensure that important safeguards that protect the public are maintained”. Meanwhile, the biggest player in the market, Uber, raised its rates in London last week – base fares up 10%, airport transfers up 25% – to try to lure 20,000 more drivers. Uber admits its users have experienced ever more cancelled trips, as well as surge pricing, when too many passengers chase the few cars available. Steve McNamara, general secretary of the Licensed Taxi Drivers’ Association, representing black-cab drivers, has long argued Uber’s cheap fares were never sustainable. London taxi driver numbers have also fallen, by about 5%; but a bigger issue is the lack of actual vehicles, he says. Expensive to own and insure, and with older diesels falling foul of clean-air rules, some 5,000 black cabs were handed back, sold or scrapped as the city emptied last year, and only 13,500 remain: “You can’t rent a cab anywhere at the moment.” He points out that there is no shortage of aspiring Tube drivers – “the worst job in the world, but well paid”. Unions concur. As Nader Awaad, chair of the United Private Hire Drivers branch of the IWGB union, puts it: “There is not a driver shortage. There is a pay shortage.” The IWGB says drivers for Uber, Bolt and others are refusing jobs because costs have risen, not least fuel, and pay has been cut by fixed fares. Uber says hourly rates can be £20-£30 – but during rides, not in the time spent driving to pick up a customer. Minicab drivers who switched to fixed employment with supermarkets have seen better, McNamara says: “They get tea breaks, holidays, national insurance, someone supplying the vehicle. And they’re not grovelling to some drunk at three in the morning to get their star rating. Why come back to Uber?”There is demolition work at every turn on Teesside, from the increasingly regular explosions heard across Redcar, as the old steelworks is blasted to pieces, to the cranes taking down nearby Wilton International’s coal-fired power plant. “The site has seen better days,” said Andy Koss of Sembcorp Industries, which manages the Wilton International complex. “For the region as a whole it has been a tough time, with the gradual erosion of industry at Wilton. And then the closure of the steelworks was a massive blow.” On what is Europe’s largest brownfield site, work is gathering pace as Teesside prepares for the launch of the government’s new freeport, with hopes that the designation as a low-tax special economic zone will reboot the local economy. With 11 sites planned across the UK, offering tax breaks and streamlined customs for businesses, freeports are a pet project for Rishi Sunak; the chancellor is selling them as a key advantage of Brexit and central to the Tories’ “levelling-up” agenda. For the first of the sites to open – Teesside, Humber and Thames – tax cuts worth millions of pounds will be enabled by legislation on Friday. However, the jury is still out on whether freeports will generate the boost the chancellor promises. On Teesside, there are hopes for as many as 18,000 new jobs, alongside benefits for the economy worth £3.2bn over the coming years. At Wilton, according to Koss, the looming launch date had brought a flurry of interest. “We are getting lots of inquiries. Every plot of land we can develop here has at least one inquiry,” he said. “Some have more than one.” Sembcorp, headquartered in Singapore and a listed firm half-owned by the Singapore wealth fund, is now managing 562 acres of development land. It is available to businesses Sembcorp hopes will be lured by the tax breaks and by cheap electricity to be produced on site by four generators, amid ambitions to turn Wilton into a green industrial hub. Central to the Teesside freeport project is the Conservative mayor of the Tees Valley, Ben Houchen, a rising star of the party who has caught national media attention for his “red wall” brand of interventionist Toryism. Vast swaths of land on the freeport site are under public control, and overseen by Houchen. He intervened this year to buy the local airport and keep it open, and has a bid in for Teesport itself, amid a sale process of PD Ports, the current operator which is owned by Brookfield Asset Management. This idea of bringing the public sector and private enterprise together represents a tussle at the heart of modern Toryism, as a model both of Thatcherite low-tax dogma and of state interventionism. Singapore on Tees, with central planning. Under the freeport model, imports will be exempt from customs duties, but experts believe the more powerful incentive is a plethora of tax reliefs, that will be available on a site of up to 600 hectares in size within the special economic zone. From this week, there will be reliefs on business rates and stamp duty, and enhanced capital allowances to encourage building work and investment. There is also relief on national insurance contributions for staff employed in the zone, to spur job creation. On Teesside, the outer boundary of the freeport will stretch for 45km, encompassing Middlesbrough, Stockton-on-Tees, Hartlepool and Redcar, as well as swaths of Tees valley countryside, including Houchen’s home town of Yarm. Although readily available for photo opportunities in hard hat and high-vis when visiting Tories – including Boris Johnson – come to town, the mayor declined to be interviewed. Andy McDonald, Labour MP for Middlesbrough, worries that for all this promise, Teesside’s freeport will bring little benefit for local workers. “Hard hats and promises go a long way. Whether that translates into real meaningful employment and greater prosperity for all is another question altogether,” he said. The former shadow employment rights secretary, who resigned from Keir Starmer’s frontbench last month, said Houchen had refused to meet him to discuss how workers’ rights could be protected. Trade unions will not be represented on the boards of the freeport, and McDonald is worried about a lack of transparency and appropriate direction in the mayor’s use of public funds. “I want 18,000 new jobs, no two ways about it. But I want them to be good, well-paid, secure and unionised jobs, where people have got a say about their own future. We’re not going to get it with this. It’s ‘you will get the crumbs off our table’ stuff,” he said. Touted by the government as a Brexit benefit, freeports are in reality nothing new. Seven sites operated under the status across the UK between 1984 and 2012, including at locations picked once more by the government for its new flagship project, such as Liverpool and Southampton. More than 70 still operate in 20 EU member states – including in Barcelona, Bremerhaven and Venice. However, MEPs have recommended ending freeports within the bloc, warning of the risks of money laundering and tax evasion. Concerns that freeports will do little for the UK economy appear to be borne out by historical and international evidence. In a potential sign of their limited scope, Treasury estimates suggest the exchequer will lose just £50m a year as a result of companies taking up freeport tax breaks. The Office for Budget Responsibility, the government’s tax and spending watchdog, reckons there will be few meaningful benefits. The most likely outcome, it says, is that economic activity that would have taken place anyway is dragged from one area to another – with an added cost to taxpayers. For some freeport advocates, this is entirely the point – to drag activity to poorer parts of the country. However, Peter Holmes of the UK Trade Policy Observatory at Sussex University, said it was unlikely to come at the cost of wealthier UK cities. “If you take somewhere like Teesside, it’s obviously going to be at the expense of Tyneside,” he said. “Some of the places they’ve given freeport status to are clearly not going to be drawing away from richer areas. I came to the conclusion that they will be a complete anticlimax.” Lewis Atter of the infrastructure advisory group at KPMG, who advised on the creation of the Humber freeport, thinks the benefits will be bigger than the Treasury’s internal estimates. He believes hundreds of millions of pounds could be saved by companies, with a genuine levelling-up boost in the process. “We’re definitely seeing internationally mobile investors – not yet signed on the dotted line but close – linked to tax sites,” he said. “And people have only become interested in these since the announcement [on freeports]. It’s quite clear we are seeing genuinely additional investment.” On Teesside there are hopes the critics could be proved wrong – especially after early progress was made with General Electric announcing plans to open a new offshore wind turbine manufacturing facility within the freeport. Dedicated to the production of 107-metre blades for the Dogger Bank windfarm – about 100 miles off the North Yorkshire coast and due to be the word’s largest upon completion in 2026 – the plant could create 750 direct renewable energy jobs and close to 1,500 indirect jobs in the area. At Wilton International, Koss acknowledges that the freeport model might come with risks. However, it nonetheless stands as an opportunity in an area where the promise of a new beginning will be leapt upon. “It’s great to have a focal point around which everybody can coalesce, and everybody understands what you’re trying to do. The starting gun has been fired. It’s great to see the Treasury have approved that, and we’ve now got to get out there.” Neil O’Brien, the minister for levelling up, said: “Freeports will help to generate prosperity and spread opportunity by driving trade and innovation as we level up across the United Kingdom.” • This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to add a comment from Neil O’Brien Freeports around the UK East Midlands Airport The UK’s only inland freeport, located close to Derby and Nottingham, will include three sites with East Midlands airport at its heart. A new rail freight interchange next to the Toyota factory is planned, while the Ratcliffe-on-Soar coal-fired power station – one of three remaining in Britain, due to close in 2024 – is included as a site to be redeveloped. Felixstowe and Harwich Known as Freeport East, it includes Britain’s busiest container port and two major ferry ports. Felixstowe has been among the most jammed up ports in the world during the supply chain chaos this autumn, with severe backlogs and stacked up containers. Planners aim to create 13,500 new jobs and an economic boost worth £5.5bn over 10 years. However, the site’s new Gateway 14 industrial park has drawn swathes of objections from local residents. Humber Comprising the four ports of Hull, Goole, Immingham and Grimsby. With the area already a hub for offshore wind, the freeport will also include low-carbon energy projects, chemical works and rare earth minerals processing; key for batteries used in electric vehicles. A tax site will be located next to Siemens’ rail factory in Goole, which is currently under construction. Liverpool City Region The freeport at the UK’s main transatlantic docks will stretch inland to the port of Salford, at the end of the Manchester ship canal. The plan includes three low-tax zones: The 3MG Mersey Multimodal Gateway at Widnes - birthplace of the chemicals industry – the Wirral Waters regeneration area, and the former Parkside colliery near St Helens, where a freight hub has been planned for more than a decade. Plymouth Former Ministry of Defence docklands, used by the Royal Navy for centuries, will be redeveloped under the plan. Local planners hope to use three sites – Devonport South Yard, Langage Energy Zone and Sherford Business Park – to focus on marine and defence innovation, manufacturing and light processing, warehousing and staged imports. Solent Taking in the ports of Southampton, Portsmouth and most of the Isle of Wight, the freeport planners hope to build on the area’s advantages in proximity to international shipping lanes on the English Channel. With Southampton the busiest export port for vehicles, stronger freight links to industrial heartlands in the midlands and north are planned. Thames Although pitched as a way to boost regional growth away from London, the capital will have a freeport on the Thames. London Gateway and Tilbury ports will have tax zones, as will Ford’s Dagenham engine plant on the banks of the river. The emphasis will be on introducing electric and autonomous vehicle technology along the A13 corridor into London. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland A freeport is planned in each of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. However, progress has been slow amid disputes between Westminster and the devolved administrations. The Scottish government wants a “green port” model, including rules forcing businesses to pay the real living wage within them, but has faced difficulties with the Treasury. The Welsh government has similar plans, and faced similar issues. The Treasury said it remains committed to establishing freeports in each nation and region.My grandad started this little hotel in Scotland before I was born; my mum’s one of seven girls and five of them and their partners helped run it. It was hearty food and a lot of my nana’s recipes. I remember “desserts” was the first station I worked on when I was little: so it was pavlova, lemon meringue pie and we’d make our own ice-cream. I’m surprised I wasn’t obese because there was so much good food around. The main thing I took from the hotel was the work ethic. Also being surrounded by these wonderful inspiring women: my mum and her sisters were all very different but it was a really healthy environment to grow up in and see these women running things. When I was nine or 10, I remember having a dinner party at my mum and dad’s house. I wanted to have a Thanksgiving dinner because I’d watched so many films that had Thanksgiving in it and I thought: “Why do we not celebrate this?” So I cooked this big Thanksgiving dinner for probably 10 people and I wouldn’t let anybody help me. Doing radio breakfast shows makes you the most unhealthy person in the world. It’s like having jet lag and you just eat at really weird times. I remember the last early-morning stint I did was when they relaunched Virgin in 2016 and I had to really make an effort to address what I ate. So I’d have porridge halfway through the show instead of just going for toast or a bacon roll. I had a hangover for most of my Radio 1 career while Colin [Murray] and I did the lunchtime show. My favourite go-to option normally involved a packet of salt and vinegar crisps and a can of Irn-Bru. And those still are the key to getting sugar and salt back in your body as quick as physically possible. I went to Japan with Cat Deeley for a BBC travel series, Roadtripping, and we spent the night in a Buddhist monastery, way up in the hills. We got the bullet train and we had to get a funicular and then we had to walk, it was a proper commitment to get there. We didn’t arrive till the middle of the night and the monks had made us the most incredible vegan banquet. Tastes and flavours, shapes and colours of food, I had no idea what I was eating, but it was the most sensual experience ever. We ate it by candlelight and I’m still not totally sure it wasn’t a dream. My mum and her sisters tried every diet under the sun. I’d come back from school and they’d all be in the living room doing the Jane Fonda workout, but there would never be a long-term plan for changing the way you ate or the way you think about eating. It’s only as I get older, and I see that my body’s got a life of its own, that I want to really be in sync with it and try to teach it about what’s good for it and what’s not. There was a lot of baking during lockdown, but the main change was that we bought a proper coffee machine. And we have learned how to make kind of pretty decent coffee, I would say. I’ll even attempt some foam art – I mean, it’s very abstract. It’s like that thing where you look up at the clouds and go, “Look, it’s a unicorn!” My happy place is having a Saturday morning while everybody else is just mooching about and I’ll do a big old batch cook and have music on in the kitchen. It could be, I don’t know, LCD Soundsystem’s Sound of Silver or I’ve just been listening to Van Morrison because I saw Kenneth Branagh’s new film. But I love nothing more than a wintry, rainy Saturday morning, when the kids are watching cartoons, Tom [Smith, lead singer of Editors] is writing some music, playing piano in his studio, and I’m batch cooking, with the dog at my feet waiting for me to drop something, while I dance around the kitchen. My favourite things Food Lobster spaghetti. That encompasses the two things that I like the most: fish in food and Italian food. Drink When we moved to the country, in this rambling little corner of our garden, there were sloes. So last year I made my own sloe gin, which I bottled and Rudy my son made little labels for, and we gave them as presents for Christmas. Restaurant Up until lockdown, my husband would take me to the Delaunay in London every year for my birthday. It’s really old-school, you feel like you’re going back in time, I love it. Dish to make I do a really good crab linguine. I’ve even got my eight-year-old into it, because you don’t really realise it’s crab, if you know what I mean. Sometimes with kids you have to hide things in food. Soundtracking with Edith Bowman is available on all podcast providersGood bones in a building are essential,” says Ed Workman, “floor to ceiling height, one large room, good-sized windows, these are elements that can be difficult and expensive to change and should not be compromised.” Fortunately, the home he shares with his wife, Alice, founder of the Creative Practice Agency, and their young sons, Arthur and Pip, has good bones, and plenty of them. From the street it appears rather humble, but behind the generous front door is a light-filled hallway hung with paintings by Alice’s grandfather, 20th-century artist, Cavendish Morton. Workman, who is CEO of The Newt in Somerset, is a details man, and his four-storey Victorian townhouse is highly decorative, but, he says, “Nothing is added for the sake of it. I pay a lot of attention to the way things sit so that you don’t even notice them.” Attention to a hearth’s front trim and the way it is seamlessly mitred into the floorboards or the confluence between skirting and architrave, is for many possibly gratuitous, but for Workman is essential. With a career that has seen him run international development projects for Hauser &amp; Wirth in New York, Hong Kong, LA and the Fife Arms in Scotland, and learning the craft of design first-hand from Pentagram’s John McConnell, Ed often uses a narrative when designing. “We are all storytellers,” he explains. “This was literally a blank canvas – not even a chimney breast. I had a really particular idea for this house, to put it back to its historical roots. I imagined this building as a wealthy merchant’s home, who had pretensions of having much higher status than he did. He chose things because he liked them, but made it up as he went along.” Thus, the fabled merchant has a splendid sitting room, with mossy green, hand-blocked, William Morris wallpaper, a hand-sewn sculpture by Des Hughes above the fireplace and Edmund de Waal ceramics on the mantel. Teals, pinks and yellows were plucked from the wallpaper to inspire the furniture and curtains. The sitting room is devoted to entertaining and was conceived to feel “rich and lively, playing on the contrast of historic and contemporary art”, explains Ed. He adds: “I am very influenced by what I am doing and I was working on the Fife Arms at the time, which was created to reflect a Victorian pleasure palace.” From their own pleasure palace, a double doorway invites you into the study, which is bathed in Farrow &amp; Ball’s Book Room Red, and boasts a pair of original 1948 Paul Cadovius bookshelves, each elegantly lined with a definitive array of art and design volumes. An Ercol coffee table and painting by Roy Oxlade complete this serene working space. Since the 19th century, the house has been through various incarnations including a stint as a butcher’s, a vet’s and part of the local school. These manifestations ensured that, over the years, the original Victorian features have long since been ripped out. The couple replaced some of the character, including the cornicing, which is inspired by Victorian moulds and was reproduced by local craftsman Jim Andrews. New fireplaces, picture rails and a chimney breast in the sitting room have all reignited the building’s historical roots. However, a contemporary element has been introduced so that the house can function as a 21st-century family home. Downstairs, the small kitchen windows were taken out and replaced with wooden doors that open out and provide more light; a bathroom and pantry were added, and the space now includes an open-plan room with sitting and dining area. This space was designed, says Ed, to be “clean, modern and calm” as the family spend most of their time there. The doors, painted in Farrow &amp; Ball Picture Gallery Red, lead out into their garden, where a walled garden is filled with trailing roses, lavender and hollyhocks. Art is something of an addiction for both Alice and Ed – they met while working at Roche Court sculpture park, and admit their working life has spilled over into their home life. Inspired by Le Corbusier’s book of architectural colours, upstairs each room is decorated using distinct tones together with modern wallpapers. Artworks seamlessly thread Ed and Alice’s own narrative together towards the final floor. Once the servant’s quarters, the top floor has a sparser feel, although the master bathroom is painted a rich Indian yellow. As Ed says: “Colour is so much more interesting when you are prepared to be bold with it.”“Interior design is a fine line between art and architecture, there is a problem-solving nature to it, that draws me to it. McConnell taught me to start with the problem, whatever you do from that point is to answer the problem, anything else is just design for design’s sake.”Recently there has been a small avalanche of live albums recorded in 2019, handy to fill the silent gap that was 2020. There were plenty to choose from, but I have a soft spot for Houston Person and couldn’t resist this. The American’s tenor saxophone style is straightforward but light on its feet, enabling him to negotiate neatly the tricky ground between jazz and R&amp;B. His accompanying band of Hammond organ (Ben Paterson), guitar (Peter Bernstein) and drums (Willie Jones III) completes a classic format not often heard these days. Half a minute into the opening number, a blues by Johnny Griffin called Sweet Sucker, and it’s clear that this is the authentic stuff. Following it comes a ballad, a bossa nova, a jazz standard, an R&amp;B classic (Bobby Hebb’s Sunny) and so on. All four are excellent soloists, and all have moments when they shine, but it’s the easy brilliance with which they combine to create that unmistakable sound that’s most impressive. This, I think, was the last form of jazz to be truly popular, in the Saturday-night-out sense, and it certainly gets this Parisian audience happily warmed up.The most interesting development of the week had nothing to do with Facebook or even Google losing its appeal against a €2.4bn fine from the European commission for abusing its monopoly of search to the detriment of competitors to its shopping service. The bigger deal was that DeepMind, a London-based offshoot of Google (or, to be precise, its holding company, Alphabet) was moving into the pharmaceutical business via a new company called Isomorphic Labs, the goal of which is grandly described as “reimagining the entire drug discovery process from first principles with an AI-first approach”. Since they’re interested in first principles, let us first clarify that reference to AI. What it means in this context is not anything that is artificially intelligent, but simply machine learning, a technology of which DeepMind is an acknowledged master. AI has become a classic example of Orwellian newspeak adopted by the tech industry to sanitise a data-gobbling, energy-intensive technology that, like most things digital, has both socially useful and dystopian applications. That said, this new venture by DeepMind seems more on the socially useful side of the equation. This is because its researchers have discovered that its technology might play an important role in solving a central problem in biology, that of protein folding. Proteins are large, complex molecules that do most of the heavy lifting in living organisms. Almost every bodily function – contracting muscles, sensing light, digesting food, running the immune system, you name it – relies on proteins. And what a given protein can do depends on its three-dimensional structure. The problem is that although we can now read the genetic sequence for a protein, that doesn’t tell us how it will fold into the 3D shape that determines its function. And predicting structure from the sequence is a very hard problem indeed. Way back in 1969, the American molecular biologist Cyrus Levinthal estimated that the number of possible foldings of a fairly typical protein could be 10 to the power of 300, which, if one were to go through each of the possibilities, would take longer than the current age of the universe to unravel! Every two years, the research community focused on the folding problem holds a competition for computational prediction of protein structure. In 2018, DeepMind’s Alphafold machine-learning software entered the fray and – unexpectedly – came out ahead of other teams. Last November, even the normally sober Nature described it as coming “head and shoulders” above the 100 research teams participating in the 2020 competition. So it easy to see why DeepMind thought it was on to something. On the one hand, being able to determine protein structure quickly could be a real boon for medical diagnosis and care. (Protein misfolding is believed to play an important role in Parkinson’s disease, for example.) On the other hand, vast though the tech industry is, healthcare is a lot bigger and if Alphabet is thinking about what to do now that it has solved search, then Isomorphic Labs might turn out to be a shrewd investment. (It might also ease the misgivings of some DeepMind geeks about working for a surveillance capitalism empire.) For machine-learning evangelists, DeepMind’s latest foray into molecular biology will be hailed as further evidence that conventional ways of doing science – formulating hypotheses, devising ways of testing them, collecting data or doing experiments, peer review, etc – are obsolescent. If that’s what some enthusiasts think, then they haven’t understood either machine learning or science. What DeepMind has brilliantly demonstrated is that the combination of smart algorithms and brute-force computing is good at some rather specialised tasks, such as games, where there are known rules and clear criteria for success. Or, more to the point, predicting protein structures. Whether the combination is as effective in less structured domains remains to be seen. That doesn’t mean that the technology isn’t useful in lots of scientific domains. What it’s particularly good at is extracting patterns from colossal troves of data, which is why, for example, astrophysicists and particle physicists love it. This is why many observers see it as a useful tool for discovery. Machine learning provides a way of finding correlations – sometimes strange and unexpected ones – in mountains of data, as, for example, when Walmart discovered that American customers stocking up before hurricane warnings tended to buy pop tarts as well as the usual precautionary supplies. Correlations like that might be useful to a supermarket retailer, but correlation, as every GCSE maths student knows, is not the same thing as causation. Divorce rates in Maine are closely correlated with per capita consumption of margarine in that delightful state. Likewise, the number of people drowned by falling into swimming pools closely tracks the number of films in which the actor Nicolas Cage has appeared. Correlations such as these may be amusing or striking but they contribute nothing to our understanding. For that we need to know how an effect is caused by something else. We need ye olde scientific method, not a fancy neural network. What I’ve been reading Ad overload The Singularity Is Here is an eloquent essay by Ayad Akhtar in the Atlantic on what surveillance capitalism is doing to us. Streetwise Memory Lanes: Google’s Map of Our Lives is a charming feature by Sirin Kale in the Observer magazine about memories triggered by seeing people from one’s past when browsing Google Streetview. Ready for take-off Mario Vargas Llosa: How I Lost My Fear of Flying is a fascinating essay on the FSG Work in Progress website.If the British media are still looking for the new Jeremy Paxman, she’s been hiding in plain sight under our noses for four years now: a Jewish grandma with sciatica who won’t retire from her social work job, who won’t let hairdressers touch her hair “because they don’t make it big enough”, and who every single week has a celebrity round to her house, gets them drunk and then they tell all about their life, and she records it for the world to hear. Yes, it’s Lennie Ware, the 70-year-old star of Table Manners, the food podcast she co-hosts with her daughter, Jessie Ware. Although she hates saying her age out loud, “because it’s so horrendous. I was never going to have a 70th birthday party. I wanted to have a soixante-neuf party, which sounded much more exciting. But now I’m soixante-dix.” I’m talking to them both over Zoom, but I have also spent time with them in person, and they’re exactly as they seem on the much-loved show. Bickering, shrewd, droll, over-involved in each other’s lives, barging in and out, utterly alive. Jessie’s third child, born this year, is asleep in a sling around her neck while we talk, and another, a couple of years older, is pottering around. The firstborn is at school. If you’re one of the diehard devotees of Table Manners, and there are legions, as it’s been going and growing for four years, you will know that Lennie’s life has become unexpectedly dominated by her flourishing media career. And that everybody absolutely adores her – something Jessie knew would happen, which is why she set the podcast up in the first place. Now they’re taking the double act to the stage, not only doing a live tour around the UK but a residency in Los Angeles, too. But why do they want to take their family show on the road? “Yes why are we going on tour, darling?” Lennie asks. “So that the fans can meet you, Mum,” Jessie replies. “People want to feel and smell the presence of Lennie.” “I don’t smell, darling,” says Lennie. If you’re wondering why I compared Lennie to Paxman, it’s not because she drills questions at people as he did so mercilessly on Newsnight, but because she gets just as big revelations by being charming and extremely direct. It’s Jessie who trained as a journalist before going into music, and Jessie who was in the world of the famous first, getting guests by inviting on mates of hers, like fellow popstars Sam Smith and Ed Sheeran. But it’s Lennie who actually gets all the scoops. She once asked Sadiq Khan if he would stand again for London mayor and he said yes, then realised that he hadn’t actually announced that yet. She asked Olympic diver Tom Daley if his Speedos had ever come down in the pool, not a question that would have ever occurred to me, but suddenly one we all desperately wanted the answer to. (It was a yes.) Stanley Tucci came on in October, and only then did people find out quite how ill he has been with throat cancer, because of his special dietary requirements, which Lennie wasn’t expecting from such a gourmand. She always checks what sort of food people like to eat before they arrive, “and he had to explain that he can’t eat anything too spicy because it kind of sets off the spot where he had radiation, and it’s excruciatingly painful,” says Lennie. “Although he certainly liked to drink. We had a lot of wine, Stanley and I.” Speaking of the champagne they offer to their guests with their dinner, Lennie also got Ed Miliband so unexpectedly drunk that he left her a cheeky note asking her to go skinny dipping in the Hampstead Heath ponds. “Ed was a revelation,” Lennie says. “He was the most gorgeous… I don’t think he drinks very much, he’s quite abstemious normally.” “But when he comes down to Lennie’s,” Jessie says, in an American showtime accent. “Well!” “He was so handsome,” Lennie continues. “Very, very charming – and so flirty! “Not with me, Mum. Just with you.” I wonder how much the drink helps. “Lots of people don’t drink – purposely,” Lennie says. “They don’t want to fall into the traps we’ve laid,” Jessie says. “Sandi Toksvig didn’t drink did she? Do you remember? She said, ‘I won’t drink till later, till the end.’” “I felt quite complimented by that, like she was taking us seriously,” says Jessie. “She was the candidate for the Women’s Equality Party, darling!” Of her mum, Jessie says, “She gets the sexy headline, she is the sexy headliner. It’s so funny. Our generation, we kind of meander around a question because we don’t want to offend. But at Mum’s age, season by season, she gets more audacious. Someone will say something and I’ll think, ‘OK, that’s it, over.’ But then Mum goes, ‘But why?’ And actually they’re not offended at all, and then a whole new conversation unfolds. And then the Daily Mail seems to think every episode is slightly newsworthy.” It’s true. I’ve no sooner listened to their latest episode, with Jade Thirlwall from Little Mix, than there’s a Daily Mail story about something she said about not yet having visited her bandmate Perrie’s new baby. The Table Manners podcast gets real traction; they get newslines, in journalism terms. But what they also get, not picked up in the Mail, is that same Little Mix star talking about her Arab heritage and how she grew up in South Shields eating mince and dumplings like a local but also her Yemeni grandad’s chicken soup and khobz bread, and how he had arrived there with the merchant navy, and that their freezer is still stuffed with his cooking since he died. I ask if anyone has ever been reduced to tears on the podcast, because the conversations can get quite personal, or if they follow Graham Norton’s maxim that tears have to be cut out from the edit – this is entertainment only. “I nearly cried when Liam Payne didn’t take all his clothes off,” Lennie says. I think she’s joking, but she continues: “He’d been exercising to do this advert where he wore nothing. When he came on, we said ‘We always do a selfie at the end, Liam.’ I said, ‘Could you just take your clothes off?’ He said, ‘What?’” It was also funny when Lennie apologised to Paul McCartney for having raised her daughter so badly that Jessie didn’t know that there was a kind of food called scouse. Then Lennie and Jessie had a big row while recording at his house, the microwave broke, the bickering went on and on, and Macca took over the microphone and said, “Ladies and gentleman, we apologise for this interruption in broadcasting, these ladies are out of control.” “Tell me about that row,” I say. “Oh God,” sighs Jessie. “We never usually do this for other people, go to their place, but it was Sir Paul McCartney, with his daughter Mary, who was so enthusiastic for us to be doing it. I was like, ‘We’ve got one hour with him,’ and then Mum and Mary started nattering in the background, and that’s how the row started. Don’t get me wrong, I was mortified – but I thought, the listeners are gonna absolutely love this Lennie moment. It’s an iconic Lennie moment.” Aha! They do know what they’re doing. And they play it up a bit, this sweary relationship, in which Jessie will happily tell her mum to fuck off, then both carry on as if nothing has happened. It’s banter, a grumpy comedy double act, which is why it will work on tour. They still can’t get everyone they want to agree to come on, though. Lennie dreams of convincing Jenni Murray, ex-Woman’s Hour presenter, but they have also tried and tried to get their hero Marcus Rashford and his mum. “I would lie on the floor and he could walk across me to get into the house,” Lennie sighs. Jessie, meanwhile, has tried to get Meghan and Harry. “That’s quite” – she pauses symbolically – “difficult. I used to be mates with Meghan. Well, mates… I mean we used to email each other and speak to each other. She changed her bloody email – I definitely tried! She came to a show of mine in Canada when she was filming Suits, a mutual friend said we would get on really well and we did. And we kept in touch. And then she became a duchess.” Another pause. “But no, she’s amazing!” There are truly tender moments, too. Lennie, when not probing his sub-aquatic nudity, also asked Daley about coming out as gay, and he revealed that some of his relatives responded pretty badly. With that wound clearly still raw, he was very interested when Lennie, who is probably the same generation as his relatives, revealed she hadn’t been entirely OK when her own son came out either. (She has three children: Jessie; her son Alex, a doctor; and daughter Hannah, an actor. The other siblings have asked their mum and sister not to mention them so often on air, and Jessie also declines to name her children in public.) As the Wares are both keen to stress: “It isn’t an interview, it’s a conversation.” Though Lennie’s knowledge of celebrity culture is pretty impressive, there are limits. She says doing it “is like Blind Date really”, because the first time she meets the guests is when they turn up at her front door in south London. While she works hard on researching them – reading their memoirs, watching their shows, often filling Jessie in on the details – their lives are sometimes a world apart from hers. “I definitely don’t have a connection with Emily Ratajkowski,” she says, musing on their meeting with the very sexy model turned writer. “I’m not being rude – I’m talking about physically.” “Mum thought she was Russian,” says Jessie. “I didn’t know she was American!” She’s the daughter of an American academic, isn’t she? “A teacher,” corrects Lennie. “Mum! You’re such a snob!” Lockdown provided an unlikely boon to the show: on the one hand, they hated doing it over Zoom, because they couldn’t feed the guests and share a meal and a drink. On the other, “we got huge A-Listers we’d never have got before: John Legend, Dolly Parton. People who wouldn’t have wanted to come to Clapham for two hours. And I decided we had to keep it going anyway, because I was worried about Mum’s mental health at that point. She was so terrified of Covid. We’d gone from all living together to completely abandoning her because we were scared of her getting sick.” I wonder if they were always like this, the most frank and sweary and funny family. They both decide it came after Lennie’s divorce from her children’s father, a Panorama journalist. Jessie adds that she and her mum are fiercely loyal to each other. “However, we’re also stuck to each other, and that can be problematic with us having boundaries. I feel like Mum’s always treated us… Maybe it was that sense of togetherness, having to be a team from quite a young age, us kids mucking in. There wasn’t that – not hierarchy, but – maybe there wasn’t that level of respect that we should be giving our mother.” “I think after their dad left, which was awful, the house was still fun,” says Lennie, who was the sort of person to pick up everyone else’s kids, let them stay, and keep enough food to feed everyone. “It wasn’t a miserable home.” “I think once Dad had left we had even more energy and life,” says Jessie, who took on a leadership role in the family and refused to speak to their father for years, though they were eventually reconciled. His affair left a long shadow. But the Ware family had been through a huge run of losses – not just the divorce, but the deaths of Lennie’s sister and then brother. “It was quite a lot to have all that happen in our teenage years,” remembers Jessie, “but I think it must have pushed us even closer to each other. Also, trying to find the lightness in really shitty situations. I feel like the times we laughed the most was in that cathartic togetherness after a horrendous event. We found the joy. Do you know what I mean, Mum? We’ve always been able to laugh at ourselves, that’s how we’ve got through everything.” “That, and you learning to carry your own suitcases,” Lennie says. “Getting wheelie suitcases for all the children when they were very young, now that was what changed my life.” Table Manners, the debut live UK tour, starts in April 2022. Tickets are available to buy at tablemannerspodcast.comMatt Hancock has been “approached” about writing a book about his experience as health secretary during the coronavirus pandemic, his spokesperson has confirmed, provoking anger from campaigners and the Labour party. The former minister, who stepped down in June after it was revealed he had broken Covid restrictions, had been contacted but no deal had been made, his spokesperson said. Reports that Hancock was considering a lucrative book deal ahead of next year’s inquiry drew harsh condemnation from the opposition. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said the former health secretary was attempting to “put his spin on the government’s failures”. She tweeted: “This is disgusting and an insult to each and every bereaved family. Boris Johnson needs to step in and block Matt Hancock from getting a bumper payday to put his spin on the government’s failures before we get the truth in a public inquiry.” In a separate statement, a Labour spokesperson said: “The Cabinet Office should block the publication of this tasteless cashing in on tragedy.” The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice UK group also condemned Hancock as trying to cash in on the pandemic, which has resulted in more than 142,000 deaths in the UK, according to government figures. “The fact that Matt Hancock thinks it’s appropriate for bereaved families to have to listen to his spin on their loved ones’ deaths, before the truth has come out via the inquiry, says it all about the attitude of the man who oversaw the worst UK public health failure ever,” the group, which has led the calls for an inquiry into the government’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic, wrote on Twitter. The inquiry is likely to examine whether the government was quick enough to apply restrictions to protect the public from the virus and look at whether care homes were properly protected. Hancock spoke about throwing a “protective ring” around care homes during the early stages of the pandemic in England but the country went on to record tens of thousands of care home deaths. The Daily Mail first reported that the former minister was in talks with HarperCollins about writing an insider account of the government’s pandemic response, claiming the publisher could hand him an advance of £100,000. Hancock confirmed reports that he had been approached, telling the newspaper that “no decisions have been made”. His spokesperson similarly underlined on Saturday that, while an approach had been made, no deal had been signed: “Matt has been approached to write a book about his experiences in the pandemic, but no decisions have been made. There is no deal.” And publisher HarperCollins said on Saturday evening it was not in talks with Hancock and had “no knowledge” of any book about his pandemic experience. “We have no knowledge of such a book and are not in talks,” it said in a tweet. The Daily Mail reported that Hancock was “set to write a ‘How I Won the Covid War’ book on his ‘heroic’ role in the UK vaccine campaign”. But responding to the claim, Hancock’s spokesperson said: “The people who were heroic during the pandemic were the NHS staff who worked round the clock to save lives.” While the official government figures on Friday put the UK’s death toll at 142,678, separate statistics show that there have been 165,534 deaths where Covid is mentioned on the death certificate.Undocumented migrants reveal they have been forced to avoid the Covid vaccine, dodge medical help when ill, give up jobs and take up more cramped accommodation during the pandemic, in a study that suggests the virus exacerbated the “deadly effects” of the government’s “hostile environment” immigration policies. Almost half of the group said explicitly that they were afraid of trying to obtain the vaccine because of their immigration status, or were hesitant because they did not have enough information about it. Several said that they had to buy their own PPE to ensure they could keep working. One was eating just one proper meal per day to save money after losing work, while another volunteered for a charity in exchange for hot meals. The study, published by Kanlungan Filipino Consortium – a charity working to empower Filipino, east- and south-east Asian migrants – and backed by the British Academy, followed a group of 14 Filipino migrants, many of whom worked in care and domestic work. They were interviewed in spring 2020 and again this year to record how their immigration status was affecting their ability to cope during the pandemic. One said that he had been asked for his passport to register with a GP – not a legal requirement. His wife, also an irregular migrant who works as a carer, had flu-like symptoms, but took paracetamol and orange juice instead of seeking professional help. Another migrant described shaking every time her phone rang after she tested positive for Covid-19, as she was afraid of giving her address to NHS authorities. “Definitely we’re scared,” she said. “Every move that we do, we’re scared.” Others were wary of coming forward for the vaccine. “I’m afraid to go to the vaccine because they’re going to get my details,” said one. “It could be a trap: if they have our details, they can catch us. I’m not going to do the vaccine.” Another said: “Because of being undocumented, I don’t know if they will consider us for the vaccine. This is what I’m worried about.” Another was afraid to use the NHS test and trace app because of his status and the fear of being deported. While the UK government has said that diagnosis and treatment for Covid-19 is free and available to all regardless of immigration status, treatment for “secondary or subsequent illnesses”, including complications arising from the coronavirus infection and long Covid, are not included. “Hostile environment” refers to a series of measures aimed at making life harder for people to get services and remain in the UK if they cannot prove they have the right to be in the country. It was renamed the “compliant environment” by Sajid Javid while he was home secretary, but its various policies make it harder to take up employment, rent property, open bank accounts, get driving licences, and access welfare and public services. In spring 2020, two-thirds of interviewees had lost all their work and income, and only one out of 15 reported that their income had not changed due to the pandemic. Ten months later, three were entirely without work. Several were on the brink of destitution and struggling to pay rent and meet basic needs. More than half said they were relying on borrowed money. “Bry”, a domestic worker, lost her job when she got Covid-19. She had worked for her elderly employer for five years, but was dismissed without notice. “She always said I was part of the family,” she said of her employer. “I expected more motherly care – I was insulted, in a way. I’m just crying all the time.” Another who was sharing a five-bedroom flat with 14 people in 2020 had moved to a two-bedroom flat with three other people by 2021, but was planning to recruit two more housemates to sleep in the living room to spread the cost of rent. Another reported that she had lived in four or five different places over a year. The Home Office said: “The Government recognises the unprecedented impact of Covid-19 and that is why we acted decisively to ensure we support everyone through this pandemic. Many of the wide-ranging Covid-19 measures we put in place were available to migrants with no recourse to public funds, including the coronavirus job retention scheme, self-employed income support scheme, and protections for renters from evictions. “The UK has a proud history of welcoming those in need. Our new nationality and borders bill will create an immigration system that is fair but firm, welcoming those in genuine need but cracking down on those who come to the UK illegally.”The government is to allow people to have their Covid booster jab after five months, a month sooner than under the current policy, in an effort to help stop the NHS becoming overwhelmed this winter. This major change to the vaccination programme could see ministers flouting the advice of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, which recommends that people wait until six months after their second dose before having their top-up in order to maximise protection. It is unclear whether the policy would apply only in England or across the four home nations. It means millions of Britons will be able to have their booster sooner than expected to reduce the risk of hospitals failing to cope with large numbers of people becoming seriously ill with Covid during the winter months, when they always come under intense pressure. Anyone across the UK in cohorts one to nine – the priority groups that include frontline health and social care workers, millions with underlying health problems and all adults over 50 – will be able to book their extra vaccine once the change is formally announced. Fears that waning immunity from the impact of second doses wearing off could fuel a surge in Covid hospital admissions in the coming months have prompted ministers to act. Almost 12m booster doses have already been given. But there has been persistent criticism that the delivery of what ministers, doctors and scientists say are vital top-up shots has gone too slowly. Key personnel across the NHS who are centrally involved in the vaccine programme have been told that Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has already approved shortening the gap. One source said that he last week authorised an amendment to the national protocol, the legal framework governing the programme, in order to implement the change. Jeremy Hunt, the former health secretary who chairs the Commons health select committee, last month challenged the JCVI’s stance and urged the government to cut the delay between second and third shots. Hunt said: “This decision that’s been made that you can’t have your booster jab until six months after you had your second jab – how hard and fast should that rule be? “Does it really matter, when it’s only nine weeks till the Christmas holidays, if someone has a booster jab after five months?” One source with knowledge of the switch in approach said: “Yes, the JCVI’s policy hasn’t changed. They recommend six months. But that’s guidance. We don’t have to follow that. “The thing is, we need to get people vaccinated, so sometimes clinical decisions need to be taken. This is a practical decision to get people in to get them vaccinated before the winter, when all the respiratory viruses, including Covid, increase. “The aim is to ensure that there is as high a level of immunity as possible going into the winter. The primary thing is to protect the population. Giving it at five months means that someone’s immune response from it is just as strong as if they’d got it at six months.” Evidence from the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) shows that protection against someone getting symptomatic Covid falls from 65% in the first three months after the second dose down to 45% after six months for the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, and from 90% to 65% for the Pfizer/BioNTech jab. The JCVI originally approved a booster programme on 14 September, which began soon after. Vaccinators should use the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine as far as possible for third shots, because that “provides a strong booster response”, it said. However, it was adamant that “the booster vaccine is offered no earlier than six months after completion of the [two-dose] primary vaccine course”. Ministers have followed that advice until now. The JCVI relaxed the six-month rule a little last month when it said that some groups at the highest risk of becoming very unwell if they caught Covid, including care home residents and those undergoing immunosuppressive treatment, could have their top-up jab a month sooner. Paul Hunter, a professor of medicine at the university of East Anglia, said switching to a five-month gap could help limit Covid’s damage. “I am not aware of any evidence that has compared the effectiveness of five-month versus six-month booster jabs. I would guess that there wouldn’t be that much difference. “So there could indeed be benefits in reducing the incidence of severe disease and death that bit more rapidly this winter by bringing this to all people being offered a booster,” he said. But Hunter added that the government’s greater priority should be improving the uptake of booster jabs among at-risk groups, who have already been offered their top-up. “The most important thing is to get the booster into more people in the most vulnerable groups, [those] who should already have been offered the booster but [have] not yet taken it up. “In England there are still over a fifth of people over 70 who had their second dose more than six months ago [but] who have not yet had their booster, though that is improving each day.” The Department of Health and Social Care denied that any changes to the booster rules were imminent. A spokesperson said: “We continue to follow the advice from the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) who, after a rigorous review of the latest evidence, advised all eligible people should get their booster dose six months after their second dose.” “There are currently no plans to reduce the interval. We urge everyone eligible to get their boosters as soon as they can to maintain their vital protection from the virus over the winter months.”“I don’t reckon many people gave us a chance leading into this tournament, apart from probably the players,” Marcus Stoinis said, “so it’s definitely going to mean a bloody lot to us and we’ll be super proud when we bring that home for Australia.” Note the choice of conjunction. That when is written in loud, blinking neon, and illuminates the confidence coursing through a team that was not expected to get anywhere near the T20 World Cup trophy. “Everyone had written us off but we had a real lot of confidence in the way we were preparing and the way our strategy was coming together,” Aaron Finch said. “We haven’t defied expectations, we came here with .a really clear plan to win the tournament and we feel we’ve got the squad to do that.” New Zealand will feel they have the squad to stop them, and there is nothing in the two teams’ routes to the final to suggest either should feel superior. This is mainly because they have been practically identical: four wins out of five in the Super 12s, second in their groups, underdogs in their semi-finals, winning that crucial toss, choosing – inevitably – to bat second, losing an opener to the third ball of their innings, having to accelerate rapidly in the final overs – New Zealand needed 60 off the last 30 balls, Australia 62 – and getting there with precisely six balls to spare. What is different is their approach, not just tactically (though for the record Australia, like New Zealand’s semi-final opponents, have a batting-heavy strategy; New Zealand, like Australia’s semi-final opponents, go big on bowlers), but something much deeper than that. Both captains have set out how they want their teams to play the game, and their answers revealed one to be a tub thumper and the other more of a wallflower. “It’s just about staying really aggressive,” Finch said. “In this format your opponents don’t always allow you big opportunities to get into the game, and whether it’s with bat or ball you have to find a small edge at some point and try to drive that advantage home.” Kane Williamson said he wants his team to “enjoy the occasion and take it on in our style” and when asked to define that style managed this: “Something we’ve been trying to do and play throughout this competition is looking to go out and make those adjustments and certainly have the courage to do so and play smart cricket and buy into, you know, concepts that for us as a team are what we try and wholeheartedly do.” Whatever that means, and it is not very clear, “stay really aggressive” it ain’t. Meanwhile on being seen as underdogs, a suggestion that got Finch talking about having always planned to win the tournament, Williamson said that “it sort of doesn’t have a lot to do with us really” and that “the different tags and whatnot, that’s not really something we control”. Over six years of unparalleled success across all formats these the Kiwis have truly soared, but there is something of the nervous flightless bird about them still. Tim Southee spoke recently about a time before Brendon McCullum and then Williamson captained the team, when “we played a style that didn’t really sit well with us as Kiwis”, and the subsequent change of approach to one “it feels natural for us to go out and play in”. The idea that a team’s approach is almost forced on them by the nature of their nation is fascinating (and it is intriguing that the same nation is also represented by teams that preface games with aggressive pre-match ceremonial war dances, not something you can imagine Williamson convincingly attempting). But certainly the evidence of this tournament is that for all the batting fireworks that carried them to victory in the semi-finals this is a side that is not only itself calm, but that has found success by becalming others. In essence their tactic is to bowl so well that their opponents cannot score more runs than their own shallow pool of batters, further weakened for the final by the absence of the injured Devon Conway, can get in reply. Australia’s Adam Zampa, who other than a blip against England has been outstanding across the tournament, has the best economy rates of any bowler on show on Sunday night but Pat Cummins, Josh Hazlewood and Mitchell Starc have all been more expensive than the most expensive of New Zealand’s five frontline bowlers. Against Australia’s barrage of batting aggression they will all have to excel. If there is little to divide the teams that have reached the final, about half an hour before the start one will suddenly emerge as heavy favourites. Every game played under lights in Dubai at this World Cup has been won by the side batting second, and both finalists have a 100% toss-to-match win conversion rate (Australia have won a statistically unlikely five out of six tosses, New Zealand only the most important two, against India in the Super 12s and England in the semi-finals). The ideal end to a tournament about to get a different winner would be someone finding a different way of winning.I found out about the existence of Singles’ Day in the most apt way possible: a shopping alert. “It’s Singles’ Day!”, announced my phone on 11 November, with a notification alert that sounded like a small bird’s hiccup. Here, have a treat on us! And by “on us”, I mean a 10% discount to give you the excuse to buy the Alexander McQueen heels you’ve had on your wishlist for eight months and that haunt your Google ads. “Excuse me! Excuse me,” I yelled at my phone, which had since moved on to giving me alerts about environmental collapse and that someone I don’t know and have never heard of is now on Instagram. I am no longer single! I found someone to love me and treasure me and give me access to health insurance, so I am afraid I cannot partake in your shopping holiday, please save your discounts for the singles of the world who need them. But what is Singles’ Day? I wondered. We have already carved the unfortunate-in-every-way Galentine’s Day on to our schedules on 13 February. That “ladies celebrating ladies” holiday crawled horrifyingly through the television screen thanks to a 2010 episode of the hit NBC sitcom Parks and Recreation. What was once just the product of the imagination of a bored and mediocre writers’ room came to life in the real world once companies like Sprinkles Cupcakes and Target started offering discounts and freebies on that day every year. Now it’s not enough to hit the town with your significant other to partake in an overpriced and mediocre prix fixe meal that will inevitably end with a molten lava chocolate cake despite it clearly no longer being 2002. Now you have to go out to Chili’s for pre-mixed frozen cocktails the night before, too. Singles’ Day was similarly legitimized through commerce. It’s not just a holiday in China, where the idea originated and was originally known as Bachelors’ Day; it is a “shopping season”. It was meant to give occasion for people who were single to get together and socialize, held every year on 11/11. Get it: all of those ones, hanging out together? But it really took off once super Chinese online retailer Alibaba started hyping it as a day of deep discounts and treating yourself, growing the day into their biggest shopping day of the year. So of course the true meaning of Singles’ Day is shopping online. Isn’t that what being single primarily is about? Trying to fill the vast expanse of emptiness and loneliness while also evading your parents’ persistent and vocal judgment about your inability to find lasting love in a dying world by sifting through the material goods available to be shipped to your doorstep in one to three business days while wondering which will ultimately keep your dread at bay, a V-neck midi dress or a cowl-necked mini? Oh look, the external manifestation of your fear of dying alone comes in polka dots, how cute! But no, of course not, this is not a cowl-necked mini of sadness, this is a cowl-necked mini of empowerment! We’re not supposed to really admit that we long for companionship and understanding, we are strong and independent now. This contradiction will ultimately find the firm establishment of Singles’ Day on American shores, since right in the middle between “I am the most perfect embodiment of goodness and beauty” and “I am fundamentally unlovable” is the sweet spot where our most mindless consumerism happens. And the gap between how many people want to get married and how many people are actually getting married (and how many people want to have children and how many people are having children) keeps getting wider as marriage and procreation rates drop. A TikTok video recently went viral after a woman confessed how alone she felt, having not received romantic attention for most of her life. The responses of commiseration poured in, but for every yes I am alone, I am very lonely, I don’t believe this will ever happen for me there was another respondent proudly declaring I am enough for myself, I am going to work on me, who needs the tender touch of another person anyway. There is a huge market for these feelings of romantic ambivalence to be exploited and converted into credit card debt. As I read more about this holiday, I started to think about the group of Japanese men calling themselves the Revolutionary Alliance of Men whom Women Find Unattractive who a couple years back staged a protest against the “blood-soaked conspiracy of Valentine’s Day”. How are they doing?, I wondered. Well, their Wikipedia page describes them as “misanthropic, Marxist, and opposed to romance”, so I’m guessing middling at best. But their fight against the commercialization of love and romance, the way marriage is a class issue because a man’s perceived attractiveness increases as his salary goes up, and the pressure to achieve on the corporate marketplace before entering the romantic marketplace seems prescient. Where’s their holiday?, I wondered. But of course, it’ll never catch on, if only because ROMANTIC CAPITALIST OPPRESSION makes a terrible discount code. Jessa Crispin is a Guardian US columnist.This week, Los Angeles embraced one of the strictest vaccine rules in the United States, requiring residents to show proof of full vaccination before entering restaurants, movie theaters, gyms and other public spaces. The latest rules are expected to boost vaccination rates in the US’ second most populous city. But they also prompted backlash. On Monday, demonstrators including municipal workers, police officers, dock workers, parents, and teachers protested in front of city hall, carrying signs reading “Freedom Not Force!” and “My body, my choice.” “The upside of mandates, they definitely work,” said Annette Regan, an expert in vaccine epidemiology at the University of California, Los Angeles. “The downside of the mandates is they can definitely polarize individuals.” This winter is expected to be a precarious time for Los Angeles, which was pummeled by Covid-19 last winter. At one point last December, one person was dying of Covid every 20 minutes. The county’s public health director, Barbara Ferrer, broke down in tears at a briefing, over the “incalculable loss” of lives. The region has been pushing strict Covid-19 prevention measures since then, and the new rules – combined with local, state, and federal rules requiring city employees, healthcare staff, and public schoolchildren to get vaccinated – means it will have some of the most stringent vaccine mandates in the nation. Regan said that across the US, including north of LA in San Francisco, mandates have proven effective at pushing many who were unsure about the vaccine to get inoculated, and she expects that the mandates in LA, too, will help boost immunization rates. By 12 November, 73% of residents in LA county, which includes the city and surrounding areas, were fully vaccinated and 80% were partially vaccinated. But the mandates won’t catch everyone. The LA police union and a group of 500 local firefighters have already filed lawsuits over a mandate to be fully vaccinated by mid-December or submit to regular testing. So have aggrieved employees of the LA unified school district who oppose the requirement to get vaccinated by 15 November. And all the while, the city has been fielding for religious exemptions to the vaccine mandates, with residents pushing the already blurry lines that define “sincerely held” objections to the vaccine. The LA police department has so far received 2,233 religious exemption requests . Police chief Michel Moore has vowed to crack down on those refusing vaccinations, but also said “to honor every exemption request, every request for accommodation possible”. “I think in California, we’re not the wild west, but those are the origins of the state,” said Shira Shafir, an infectious disease epidemiologist at UCLA. “There is a little bit of this fierce individualistic streak and autonomy above all.” In LA, and in many other cities across the US, that streak is running up against the realities of the pandemic, and a genuine desire to end it. The opposition to the mandates is rearing as the region is bracing for what could be another winter surge. After low transmission rates throughout the summer, the number of infections has crept up again. Although hospitalization rates remain relatively low and flat, LA county has a case rate of about 98 per 100,000 residents, which the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) characterizes as a “substantial” level of community transmission. For the vaccine-hesitant, powerful agents of disinformation and misinformation have prevailed over the reality of the horrors the region lived through last winter, said Shafir. Until the Covid-19 pandemic hit, many epidemiologists hypothesized that the effectiveness of vaccines was precisely what fueled vaccine hesitancy. In the cases of measles, chickenpox or polio, “we no longer see the disease, just the risks of the vaccines” Shafir said. “So the risk-benefit calculation in people’s minds is skewed.” But that wasn’t the case for Covid-19’s impact in Los Angeles, she said. During the worst of the winter surge in January, the city brought in refrigerator trucks to hold dead bodies as morgues and funeral homes were overwhelmed. “People have seen what the infection looks like and how devastating it can be,” she said. Still, significant parts of the population are turning to religion and philosophy to shield themselves and their children from the requirements they distrust. “This is certainly a misuse of the religious exemptions,” said Dorit Reiss, a law professor at the University of California Hastings. “The religious exemption was not designed to give cover to people who are scared of vaccines. It was designed to protect people from real discrimination.” The new requirements for patrons of local shops, restaurants and other businesses include a religious exemption as well, though the city stipulates that it will be up to individual businesses to decide whether to honor such exemptions – turning restaurant servers, yoga instructors and bartenders into de-facto bouncers. “And that’s an issue because your local barista has been trained to make an outstanding cappuccino, but they have not been trained to verify vaccine compliance.” LA, like many cities across the US, has seen its share of angry customers violently opposing mask mandates. Workers at restaurants, bars, shops and theaters are also the ones most at risk for contracting the virus and passing it onto their families, said Lorena Garcia, an associate professor of epidemiology at the UC Davis School of Medicine. “Mandates like this are really about protecting these workers and their communities,” because one unvaccinated customer bringing the disease to a bartender would be all it took to not only infect that worker, but also their immunocompromised grandmother, their pregnant spouse or their young child. “Workers are shouldering a heavy burden,” she said. City officials are holding off enforcement until the end of November, at which point businesses could be fined thousands of dollars for not complying. On Friday, the city council voted to soften the original mandate, removing malls and shopping centers from the vaccine directive, and requiring proof of vaccination only for those 12 and over.Transport for London (TfL) has been urged to ban adverts for unregulated financial products after it ran a three-week poster campaign for a crypto token funded by an anonymous group. Posters for Floki, a so-called meme coin named after a dog owned by Elon Musk, appeared on buses and in Underground stations across London last month. Since the invention of bitcoin in 2009, the software used to make crypto coins has become widely available, leading to hundreds of new digital tokens, with many based on jokes and internet memes, such as Dogecoin. But digital tokens remain unregulated in the UK and many other countries, and some have been used as scams. Siân Berry, the Green party London Assembly member, has tabled a question to Sadiq Khan, the London mayor, about the poster campaign. She said: “This should have raised a red flag and someone at TfL should have looked at this before it was approved. We have guidelines on junk food and on advertising.” She said TfL had accepted three ads for crypto products, including Floki Inu, in recent weeks. “Where the advert says ‘this is completely unregulated, you may lose all your money’, they ought to have had second thoughts. I don’t think cryptocurrency ads should be on the network. They’re unethical.” There is no evidence that the entities behind Floki Inu are scammers, but digital tokens can be used in “pump and dump” scams, where a small number of investors pump attention towards a coin, sometimes using internet influencers, then rake in large profits by dumping their assets after the price rises. At the end of October a token based on the Netflix show Squid Game gained worldwide publicity, prompting a 310,000% rise in value to $2,856 in a single day. But the value collapsed within hours and the anonymous developers behind the Squid token have disappeared, apparently with a profit of at least $2m. In September the chair of the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), Charles Randell, called for ministers to give it powers to regulate cryptoassets after Kim Kardashian West was paid to advertise Ethereum Max, a token that had been created a month earlier by unknown developers. TfL admitted to the Observer that it did not know the identity of the people or organisation funding the posters, which read: “Missed $Doge? Get $Floki.” The website promoting Floki Inu coins gives no names of anyone involved, nor contact address, and the RealFlokiInu Twitter account did not respond to the Observer’s request for information about the entity or individuals behind Floki Inu. Similar inquiries by the FT last month were also unanswered, but it quoted someone called Sabre, describing themselves as the group’s head of marketing, saying that the campaign was intended to “legitimise” the coin and that “You get a lot of scam artists in this game.” Jamie Bartlett, presenter of the BBC podcast The Missing Cryptoqueen, said that he had been surprised to see the adverts for Floki: “This is real wild west territory – it’s very hard to know which ones are serious projects and which pump and dump schemes. “Some people think all cryptocurrencies are a scam, but there are other ones designed by really technical people who were quite pioneering in their understanding of encryption, and how these coins might be used as a sort of banking settlement system.” The new meme coins were a reaction to that seriousness, he said. “They use funny internet memes – Dogecoin is based on a famous 4chan dog meme that was funny, although no one could really explain why. The meme coins are going back to that playful internet sub-culture. “For people to now be advertising these absurd joke coins seems to be another step, another level of risk. People lose a lot of money on these speculative crypto investments. Ethically, I think TfL should consider whether it’s wise to have these types of ads on their buses.” Chris Reader, head of commercial media at TfL, said: “Since 2018, we have asked our advertising partners to refer all cryptocurrency advertising to us for review prior to it running on our estate. When reviewing copy now from cryptocurrency brands who wish to advertise on our estate, we ensure that campaigns contain sufficient information to comply with both our policy and the ASA [Advertising Standards Authority] ruling.” The Treasury consulted last year on whether cryptoassets should be covered by financial promotions rules. An FCA spokesperson said: “The FCA does not currently have the power to oversee how unregulated cryptoassets, like Floki Inu, are advertised to consumers. We continue to work with HM Treasury on their proposals to extend financial promotion rules to unregulated cryptoassets. “The FCA has continually warned of the risks of cryptoassets. If people invest in these types of product, they should be prepared to lose all their money and they are unlikely to have access to any redress or compensation schemes.”What started with the undeniable festive charm of All I Want For Christmas has morphed into Mariah Carey becoming a central part of the festive season. At this rate, in a couple of years, Father Christmas will have handed her full control of his sleigh; it is so fabulously, utterly Mariah of her to make Christmas all about her on a semi-global scale. This year’s celebrations include teaming up with a fast-food chain in the US to promote a sort of advent calendar of free snacks. “All I want for Christmas is ...” she says, camping it up in the ad, “for you to try the Mariah menu.” And goodwill to all men! Meanwhile, in other celebrity-corporate news, an international coffee chain has stoked rumours it has teamed up with Taylor Swift, after several tweets that quoted her lyrics and pledged allegiance to the new version of her old album Red. Over on Instagram, Jennifer Aniston took a break from starring in my favourite TV hot mess The Morning Show to post a clip of herself putting collagen powder in her coffee, only to have her followers point out that her nails had changed colour between pouring it and drinking it: an “influencer fail”, they said. Whenever I see a really famous person, I always wonder why they’re doing tie-ins or campaigns or promotions like this (though maybe Aniston just loves collagen coffee). Surely they don’t need the money or exposure? I think about Bill Murray’s character in Lost in Translation, sheepishly going to Japan to make whisky adverts. I don’t remember megastar celebrities ever doing ads with such gusto or frequency, apart from the odd pop star/Pepsi tie-in and George Clooney’s enthusiasm for coffee pods. But social media has shifted perceptions here, as everywhere. It seems less about money than it is about status, though the money is not inconsiderable. In 2020, Kim Kardashian, who has promoted appetite suppressant lollipops and electric toothbrushes, among other products, said she could make more from one socials post than from an entire season of her reality show. “I don’t follow a lot of people and I have unfollowed people who have promoted too much,” she also said, in 2015, though that world that might as well be decades ago. In 2018, an Atlantic reported on influencers faking sponsored content to give them more prestige. Far from putting followers off, ads and tie-ins are mutually, gruesomely beneficial, a marker of what looks like “success”. Paul Rudd shows why funny is sexy The US celebrity mag People has released a Sexiest Man Alive! cover since 1985, beginning with then-youthful Mel Gibson, who was 29 when he was given the accolade, and remains its youngest recipient. This year’s sexiest man alive is 52-year-old Paul Rudd, Marvel star, Clueless star, Friends star and all-round funny guy who seems to have been the same age for 30 years. “I’m getting business cards made,” he told People. “But all of my friends will destroy me and I expect them to.” (Incidentally, what happens to the status of the previous incumbent once a newcomer takes the crown? Are they demoted to second-sexiest man alive and so on?) As someone who grew up in that British 90s lad mag era, with the Phwoar! Top 100 Hottest Babes types everywhere, these covers are a quaint tradition, sort of sweetly sexless, despite Rudd flashing a provocative bicep. All the sexiest men since Gibson have been over 30 and many are funny and self-deprecating; the grunting beefcakes or preening vain boys do not appear to be welcome. There is no Sexiest Woman cover (there was one, Kate Upton, in 2014, but it didn’t stick). Instead, famous women appear on the cover of the Beautiful Issue, usually looking windswept and outdoorsy or holding children. The story is an old one: men are sexy when they’re older and funny; women are beautiful when they cradle babies. As objectification goes, these are gentle whispers of admiration and they barely dare to break into lust. Stanley Tucci brings a magic touch to cocktails In the US, cocktails should come with a warning. The nation’s free-pouring approach to mixing drinks has surprised this particular lightweight on more than one occasion and a memorable evening involving old fashioneds basically put me off cocktails for life. In the UK, measured carefully though they may be, cocktails are experiencing an explosion in popularity. Wetherspoons has reported a huge increase in cocktail sales during the past 15 weeks, up 45% on the same period last year. That might be because we were doing lockdown hokey-cokey at the time, but the chain also reported that sales of ales were down, which indicates a changing demographic: younger drinkers are going out, while older drinkers are still staying away. That cocktails are now huge in Britain should not be news to anyone who has seen a night out in recent times; while the fruitiest drink I grew up with was a cider and black (or a lager and lime, for variety), today picture-perfect drinks that pack a punch dominate. Maybe that’s younger people, or maybe it’s Instagram, or maybe, just maybe, there’s a more obvious reason: Stanley Tucci, whose early-lockdown negroni lesson made cocktails great again. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistGunshots echo through the forest as Belarusian soldiers fire warning shots to drive back terrified asylum-seekers from Iraq and Syria seeking aid. Along the border, Polish and Belarusian troops eye each other warily through razor wire fence. At night, Polish guards say they’ve been blinded by Belarusians wielding strobe lights and lasers as migrants sneak across. Asylum seekers have described hellish conditions in the forests and at improvised campsites, where they chop branches for firewood and ration water to survive. The body of a young Syrian man was found in the forest in Poland on Friday, at least the ninth person to have died this year. Others have been beaten by attackers and thieves waiting in the forest. This is the chaos on Europe’s eastern border in 2021. In the past year, Alexander Lukashenko, the autocratic leader of Belarus, has gone from nuisance, to international pariah, to nemesis. His greatest gambit yet has been to engineer a new migrant crisis on the borders of the EU, utilising the desperation of thousands of people to take revenge on Brussels for sanctions against his regime. He believes that by escalating this crisis to the point of a humanitarian catastrophe, he can force the EU to the table. In his most bombastic comments, he has even threatened that his ally Russia could be drawn into a border conflict with Europe. “He is not afraid of deaths at the border,” said a panel of experts from the European Council on Foreign Relations last week. “For him, this is about vengeance and is a matter of regime survival – meaning that he is ready to escalate further, and to seek Russia’s backing in the process.” Lukashenko’s top backer seems to have balked at his most aggressive threats. On Saturday, Vladimir Putin said that Lukashenko was speaking out of turn when he threatened to cut Russian gas deliveries to Europe. “I’m hearing about this for the first time … he didn’t even suggest it to me,” Putin said in his first public remarks on the crisis since a column of more than 1,000 migrants, many Iraqi Kurds, descended on the border last week. “He could do this in theory but there’s nothing good about it.” Putin also distanced Russia from the crisis, possibly with an eye on EU sanctions that are set to target Belarus and airlines ferrying migrants from the Middle East this week. “I want everyone to know we have nothing to do with it,” Putin said in an interview for Moscow. Kremlin. Putin, a show mostly about him. “Everyone is trying to reshuffle some responsibility on to us in any case or without a case at all. But none of our airlines transport those people.” Europeans, particularly Ukrainians, have heard these kinds of denials before. Since 2014, Russia has repeatedly claimed it has nothing to do with the conflict in south-east Ukraine, despite ample evidence that Russian troops have fought and died there, and that Russia sends money, men and materiel to arm its proxies. Now, as Belarus’s main backer in a conflict with the EU, Moscow is pursuing a similar strategy: trying to initiate talks between Minsk and European countries, in particular Germany, while playing the role of disinterested party. Few buy this. “It’s the same way that they had ‘nothing to do with’ green men in Crimea,” said Linas Linkevicius, a former foreign and defence minister of Lithuania, in response to Putin’s comments. Angela Merkel, the outgoing German chancellor, called Putin last week to tell him to influence the regime in Minsk. The prime minister of Poland, who has authorised extreme, controversial measures to push back migrants from its borders, has accused Putin of “masterminding” the migrant crisis. The signals from Russia are not encouraging. In the past week, US officials have warned of a new Russian buildup, with tanks, artillery, even short-range ballistic missiles moving in to border regions with Ukraine and Belarus. If it doesn’t point to an imminent invasion, the unusual military activity means Russia can mobilise quickly if it decides to send a large force across the border. “Our concern is that Russia may make a serious mistake of attempting to rehash what it undertook back in 2014, when it amassed forces along the border, crossed into sovereign Ukrainian territory and did so claiming falsely that it was provoked,” US secretary of state Antony Blinken said on Wednesday. Meanwhile, Russia has deployed paratroopers and nuclear-capable bombers to Belarus for training exercises this week in a sign of its continuing support for Minsk. On Friday, Russia sent two bombers over the North Sea, where the RAF had to scramble fighters to intercept them. “The military-political situation in Europe is deteriorating. The Nato military buildup near Russian borders is continuing,” said a deputy to Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu during talks in Paris this week. Putin has also complained about recent Nato drills in the Black Sea and Ukraine’s use of Turkish drones in east Ukraine. The rising tension between east and west suits Lukashenko, who has pinned his hopes on Russia’s backing. He said last week: “We know that if, God forbid, we make some mistake, if we stumble, it will immediately draw Russia into this whirlpool and this is the largest nuclear power.” But in turning himself into one of Europe’s greatest threats, the former Belarus farming boss is playing a dangerous game. New European sanctions, which could target airlines or even the Minsk airport, are expected to drive Belarus further into isolation. And even stalwart opponents of Lukashenko question whether his Kremlin backing is unconditional. Franak Viačorka, an advisor to opposition leader Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya, said of Lukashenko’s threats to cut off gas to Europe: “Predictably, he didn’t consult the Kremlin. He is again trying to hide behind [Russia]. The crisis on the border will be solved by dismantling dictatorship in Minsk.”Things Fell Apart (BBC Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Doomsday Watch With Arthur Snell (Podmasters) | apple.com Breakfast (BBC 5 live) | BBC Sounds A couple of new series to make you feel clever. First up, the inimitable author and broadcaster Jon Ronson is back on Radio 4 (and BBC Sounds) with Things Fell Apart, in which he considers today’s culture wars. As hinted at by the title, which refers to WB Yeats’s poem The Second Coming (“things fall apart; the centre cannot hold”), Ronson is looking at extremes of argument. Actually, he’s searching for the source of those arguments: the event or idea that eventually resulted in the horribly polarised disputes that now rage across social media. QAnon, trans rights, cancel culture… you get the idea. Political dog whistles. Dinner party bombs. Family-splitters. Ronson’s approach is non-confrontational – he’s a non-confrontational man – and very similar to the one he used in his excellent The Butterfly Effect podcast. Essentially he looks at how a small act can have unforeseen ripple effects. In The Butterfly Effect, it was when a chap called Fabian decided to offer free online porn. Ronson traced that effect across the world, meeting people whose lives were utterly wrecked by the unexpected consequences. In Things Fell Apart, his vision is more focused, covering a different topic in each of its eight episodes. The first concentrates on the argument between US pro-life anti-abortionists and those who favour women having easily accessible, legal abortion services. Ah, Roe v Wade, I hear you say. But the story is more unexpected than that. Ronson manages to pinpoint the start of the anti-abortion movement among American evangelicals… to, of all places, 1960s Switzerland and a vaguely hippy young man, Frank Schaeffer, who wanted to become a film director. Without giving too much away, the programme traces a direct line from Schaeffer’s youthful filmic hopes right through to an abortion doctor in the US being shot and killed in his home. Ronson interviews Schaeffer, who thoroughly regrets everything that has happened since. It’s quite astonishing. In the next episode, Ronson talks to Alice Moore, a US pastor’s wife who manoeuvred herself on to a local schools board in the 1970s because she wasn’t happy about the text books on the curriculum. Somehow this leads to a Roger McGough poem, which Moore misinterpreted as being more permissive than it is (Ronson talks to McGough). Her campaign also led to important black writers being excluded from the school libraries. All in the name of protecting children. So, great research. But Ronson is also a brilliant interviewer, asking the toughest of questions in an amiable, amused way, disarming his interviewees and allowing them to put their own point of view. Because Things Fell Apart is a radio show, there are time restrictions, and each episode is cut and polished to perfection; carved and crafted, like a teeny Japanese netsuke sculpture. Every element matters, and this is a thoroughly satisfying listen. Doomsday Watch enlightens as it scares the living doo-dah out of you. From indie company Podmasters, this has former diplomat and counter-terrorism operative Arthur Snell talking to experts about which of today’s rocky world situations might trigger the apocalypse. Yay! First up: civil war in America. Or: Trump supporters go fully tonto. No time restrictions on this show, so each expert is allowed to speak freely, which is great. But they’re so erudite that I found I needed an occasional breather from their relentless brilliance and logic. Also, casually delivered sentences such as “there are more guns than people in America” and “Trump’s Republican party has decided to ignore any election result that doesn’t suit them” do have an effect. Excuse me while I breathe into a paper bag. The next two episodes consider China and Putin and are equally fascinating. Interestingly, each involves a powerful man wanting to return his country to what seems like better times: “Make America/China/Russia Great Again”. All that potential devastation because middle-aged men tend to believe that life was better when they were young and virile. On 5 live, Rick Edwards has started his new breakfast gig, presenting alongside veteran Rachel Burden. He’s doing very well, actually: holding his own, whether chatting to listeners or grilling sporting greats. Weirdly, ex-host Nicky Campbell has been popping up on Breakfast every day, in order to promote his new phone-in show, which now runs from 9-11am. Campbell can never resist a little alpha-male-ing, saying on Monday that he was answering Burden as though he was still hosting alongside her. Edwards is up to the challenge though. On Tuesday, he made a quip about “fake bonhomie”, and Campbell was reduced to “God, he’s good, isn’t he?” Campbell shouldn’t worry about leaving Breakfast: his phone-in show is as excellent as you’d imagine, and 5 live seems to have managed this important transition very smoothly indeed.As usual, I was procrastinating, putting off the moment when I settled down to write, by browsing property porn – and that’s when I found it: my dream barn. Oh, it was everything I ever wanted. In just the right part of the Yorkshire Dales, and with uninterrupted views to the Lake District, some deft person had made it over with utmost care. I liked the bedrooms, and the bathroom; I adored the garden, with its cast iron water butt at the back door. But most of all I loved the kitchen, which consisted only of a huge stove and a couple of waist-high cabinets on casters, to move as and when the fancy takes. Is the fitted kitchen on its way out at last? I’m beginning to think that it might be. As the rental market swells, space inside coming at an ever greater premium, and we grow more concerned both about waste and the politics of owning stuff more generally, the fashion for massed ranks of gleaming cupboards is rapidly diminishing – one symptom of which is a similar reduction in our hunger to own kitchen kit. Companies that rent out slow cookers and bread-makers, pasta machines and food processors, report rising numbers of clients, and no wonder. According to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, a charity that campaigns to cut waste by keeping products in use, 80% of household items are used less than once a month. The cost of lockdown “regret purchases” is said to stand at £6bn. My own kitchen, which I may have described here before, is very small indeed – completely out of proportion to the size of the house – and for this reason, some of its cupboards are fitted; it’s the only way to make the space work. But I have open shelves rather than wall cupboards – I hate wall cupboards; they’re overbearing – and in fact, the spot where I cook is only an adjunct to the main event, which is the room where not only the dining table stands, but two armchairs and lamps for reading. It’s nice, if you’re stirring a pot, for someone to be able to sit close by and chat with you. But still, I fantasise about having something at once bigger and even more pared down – those cupboards on wheels, I guess – and it seems I’m not the only one. The future, yet again, is beginning to look more like the past. I’ve been listening to an interesting series about kitchens, presented by Lucy Dearlove of the food podcast Lecker, and thanks to this I now know that when the majority of 20th-century houses had just two rooms downstairs – well into the 1930s, most homes were still being constructed without a purpose-built kitchen – people made do with what was known as a kitchen cabinet: a piece of furniture that, according to Prof Deborah Sugg Ryan, a design historian, had its origins in the American Hoosier cabinet (so-called because most of them were made by the Hoosier Manufacturing Company of New Castle, Indiana). Like a free-standing dresser, but without the open shelves, such cabinets typically came with a meat safe, a pull-out work surface, and a flour hopper (a funnel-shaped thing that dispensed the self-raising Be-Ro straight into a mixing bowl). I’m not being facetious when I say that I think meat safes may one day make a comeback; I often put a joint in our coal hole – no, we don’t use coal! No, we don’t eat a lot of meat! – when there’s no room in the fridge. I think, too, that the time may be approaching when a freestanding cabinet (or three) seems not only ample for most people’s needs, but a useful brake on our tendency to buy too much (we need to shop little, and often). In all sorts of small ways, our kitchen lives are changing, and I’m glad, though as much for aesthetic reasons as for green ones. Fitted kitchens have always seemed to me to be so unfriendly: a row of unsmiling faces whose eyes are all permanently closed. What? You want to know about the barn? Well, obviously I could never have afforded it in a month of Sundays, and anyway, it went under offer immediately. But I’ll always think of it: that kitchen, with its whizzy mobile cupboards and their myriad possibilities.On the rugged northern edge of Dartmoor, a small army of workers in high-vis vests is readying Okehampton station to welcome the first regular passenger train since 1972. The canopies and picket fences are being repainted in the original dark greens and warm yellows of the long-departed Southern Railway. It’s a historic moment for local campaigners, who have been fighting for decades to reconnect the Devon town to the national network and open up this lesser-visited part of the national park. “It’s quite extraordinary – almost unbelievable,” says Tom Baxter, 68, the secretary of the Dartmoor Railway Association, watching the painting from a gleaming green bench on the platform. “I used to travel on the line when it was British Rail and I was here when it closed in the 1970s. Local railways were seen as a bit of a nuisance at the time – they wanted to get rid of them.” The Exeter to Okehampton line – known as the Dartmoor Line – is the first reopening under the government’s £500m Restoring Your Railway programme, which aims to reinstate some of the services that were lost in the aftermath of the 1963 Beeching report commissioned by the Conservative government of the time, resulting in the closure of a third of the country’s track network and more than half of all stations. There are also plans to reopen the Northumberland line, which closed to passengers in 1964 as part of the Beeching era, when the automobile industry and roadbuilding lobby had the ear of successive governments. And there is a feasibility study on reinstating the Fleetwood-Poulton line in Lancashire. Overall, 38 schemes around the country have been given up to £50,000 to develop businesses cases, with further funding available if they are approved. On the other side of the track, Stuart Calvert, who has overseen the Dartmoor Line restoration for Network Rail, is checking the station before its reopening this week. “This is a real community project – and people are genuinely excited and delighted. It is opening up a part of the country that has not been well served: north Dartmoor rather than south Dartmoor,” he says. “For leisure or business travellers or school or college students, it creates a world of possibilities.” The £40m project, which has taken nine months, has involved the laying of 29,000 tonnes of ballast and 24,000 sleepers as well as the installation of five new radio masts and the clearing of miles of vegetation from the track. Although regular passenger services ended in the 1970s, freight trains continued to move stone from a quarry until 2011. Some passengers were able to travel on a limited Sunday service from the late 1990s. Many in the town centre are eager to use the new service. The reopening is the talk of local schools as it means trips to Exeter and Bristol and further afield are suddenly much easier. “When you can’t drive, it limits your independence,” says Lyra Harrison, 17. “There’s a lot of excitement in the sixth form.” Helen Howard, 60, says it will give Okehampton a new lease of life. “It will open up this town, which has been stagnant for quite a long time,” she says. “It will give people an opportunity to get into Exeter without sitting in queues of traffic. People will be able to use it as a commuter service. It’s all-around positive.” The government’s plans to reopen stations are backed by public transport experts but there are reservations about the scale of the funding. Norman Baker, a former junior transport minister, who now advises the Campaign for Better Transport, points out that the sums involved are dwarfed by the £27bn for road building. “It is good news, and the government does seem to be serious about reopening lines. But the £500m government has allocated [for the programme] won’t go very far,” he says. “The government should use some of the enormous sum allocated to the roadbuilding programme to reopen railway lines. That would be much more sensible.” Increasing passenger numbers on public transport is one of the fastest ways to reduce the country’s transport emissions, which account for more greenhouse gasses than any other sector. “We can make progress tomorrow by getting people on buses and trains,” says Baker. “And part of that is the cost of travelling by train and bus, which is going up way above inflation, whereas we’ve seen air passenger duty cut and the cost of fuel duty frozen for 12 years.” Back in Okehampton, Baxter is in the station’s tiny museum, which he helped establish. On the nearly 150-year-old wall is a thick, woollen British Rail coat worn by the last station manager and a closure notice promising residents five buses a day. He is glad that a new chapter is being written in the town’s history. “It became a bypassed town after the line closed,” he says. “Now Okehampton will become the railhead for the whole of west Devon and north Cornwall.”Skim Philipp Dettmer’s CV and you’d have to say he was an improbable candidate to become one of the world’s foremost science communicators. The 35-year-old from Munich dropped out of high school in Germany aged 15. He eventually did a history degree, and only became involved in science through his interest in infographics. This led, in 2013, to him creating Kurzgesagt (AKA “In a nutshell”), one of the most popular science channels on YouTube. The platform’s irreverent, kaleidoscopic videos – stripped-back guides to everything from black holes to Covid – have more than 15 million subscribers and have clocked up almost 1.5bn views. Dettmer has now written a book about the human immune system, which has intrigued him for more than a decade. Everyone has an opinion on theirs – whether it’s good or not up to much; how best to “boost” it – but it can be a struggle to understand how it works. In Immune: A Journey into the Mysterious System That Keeps You Alive, Dettmer uses eye-catching graphics and simple language to untangle the strange, compelling, sometimes grisly methods our bodies use to defend us from disease. Would you agree that you’re an unlikely science communicator? Yeah, totally. It’s all fine and good now, but I was really, really bad at school. I was utterly uninterested and I didn’t know anything. I was just doing drugs and playing video games – that was my thing. What changed? My poor parents sent me to a school outside the system, where people like me are put by worried parents to get any sort of degree. And there I had one teacher, an older lady, probably in her 60s, and my God I was afraid of her. I was 17 and ready to be a disturbance to everybody, and her method of teaching was basically to scream at you. She was teaching history, but she made stuff so interesting! And I distinctly remember sitting in her class being screamed at by her, and it hitting me: “Wow, this is so cool!” And how did that lead to Kurzgesagt? It was like: “Hey, if you present stuff differently, it becomes fascinating!” And I hope with Kurzgesagt that I can create these moments for as many people as possible, this spark moment. So to answer your original question: I’m a very unlikely science communicator. I have no business doing that at all. You reach millions of people on the YouTube channel. Why write a book? Books have lots of downsides: they are big and long, and you need time to focus on them. But a big misunderstanding some people have is that you learn on the YouTube channel. If you’re watching science videos, maybe you learn an aspect or you understand the concept better, but you will never fully understand a subject from watching videos. A book does something different to your brain. If you read the book, you hopefully will have a different concept about yourself and your body, and what being sick means. And I don’t think our videos can do quite the same for you. Do you have topics on Kurzgesagt that you know will be surefire hits? For sure. Black hole videos will always work. Nuclear weapon videos always work. We certainly make a lot of stupid videos, but there needs to be a balance between stupid videos and the less stupid ones. You note that only the brain is more complex than the immune system. How much of a challenge was it to make the subject accessible? I’ve researched many different topics, and none is even close to being as hard as immunology. A few months ago, I had to read an immunology paper for a video, and it hit me again: I can read this now, but I’m reading at the speed of a first-grader. And I’ve written a book on this topic! You had cancer at 32. How did that inform your interest in immunology? It definitely strengthened it, because cancer is an immune-system failure, in a sense. It’s weird to say, but it was genuinely one of the most interesting experiences of my life. So, for example, the chemotherapy was working too well at some point and I basically didn’t have an immune system at all. Then I got some special drugs and my immune system bounced back so hard that I could have got cancer again. It was genuinely super-interesting. You note early on in the book that during the short time we’ve been reading, our immune system will probably have identified and destroyed a cancer cell in our body. It’s an extraordinary aspect of our biology, isn’t it? Yeah, and what’s so fascinating about it is that it’s doing its job constantly. And when it fails, you notice fairly quickly. It’s not an external entity doing something for you. It is you! All your little macrophages running around your body have your DNA, they are literally you, but it’s this weird relationship. Ahhh, I think it’s the most interesting topic in the world. And I’m super-curious to learn what we will know in 20 years’ time. It’s a very dynamic field, so much stuff is happening. You are damning about the idea that you can boost your immune system. Why? In our society, self-improvement is a thing; it sells a lot of stuff, but it is a flawed idea that you want a “boosted” immune system. People imagine that they can get like a rugby-player immune system that can smash faces and stuff. but what you want is a balanced immune system, one that knows exactly where to step and where to kick, and how hard. Like Covid: many people are dying of Covid because it can cause an overreaction of the immune system [called a cytokine storm]. So even if you could “boost” your immune system with stuff you buy in the supermarket – which you can’t, thank God – you wouldn’t want to do that without speaking to a doctor. Will we emerge from the Covid era with a greater understanding of how our bodies fight disease and infections? I’m pessimistic, to be honest. Interest in it has heightened but all sorts of anti-vaccine conspiracy theorists are having the time of their lives. Once you learn what vaccines are and how they really work, it’s very hard to think that they’re a bad idea. Has the popularity of the anti-vaccine movement surprised you? It’s just tragic. I don’t even want to kick down on anti-vaccine people, because it’s also affecting smart people. This is not a movement of idiots. Science and immunology gave us these life-changing wonders and some people can’t trust them. It’s sad, really. What’s next for you and Kurzgesagt? We’ve many exciting projects starting next year that I can’t talk about yet: streaming stuff, bigger projects. But honestly, my favourite thing to do is the YouTube channel. I think I’m good at it, and it’s very fun. Then I might write another book. I have a few ideas, but writing this one was a horrible process. I hated it. Never write a book, Tim. • Immune by Philipp Dettmer is published by Hodder &amp; Stoughton (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyMajor Texas school districts are resisting a Republican state representative’s request that they divulge information on books kept in classrooms and libraries, as part of attempts to remove titles targeted by conservative parents and politicians. The Austin and Dallas independent school districts, two of the largest in the state, said they would not respond to a request to go through a list of about 850 books, noting how many copies schools have and how much the books cost, the Houston Chronicle reported. Houston independent school district, the largest in Texas, did not say what it would do. Across the US, Republican officials and activists are increasingly focusing on education as an effective political tool. In the most prominent case, in Virginia, Republicans this month won back the governor’s mansion in a campaign focused on the supposed dangers of critical race theory in state schools. Critical race theory, an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society, is not taught in public schools in Virginia. Regardless, the Republican candidate for governor, Glenn Youngkin, promised to ban it. In Texas, Matt Krause, chair of the state committee on general investigating and a Republican candidate for attorney general, wrote to schools, saying “students, parents and taxpayers” had asked to have certain books removed. Schools were asked to note any books that could “make students feel discomfort, guilt, anguish, or any other form of psychological distress because of their race or sex”, or “convey that a student, by virtue of their race or sex, is inherently racist, sexist, or oppressive”. Many books on the list deal with race, sex or LGBTQ+ issues, with the majority concerning LGBTQ+ topics, the Chronicle reported. Krause also asked districts to identify additional books on subjects including sexually transmitted diseases, sexually explicit images and graphic presentations of sexual behavior. Last Wednesday, the Texas governor, Greg Abbott, directed the state education agency to investigate criminal activity related to “the availability of pornography” in schools. Referring to two memoirs with LGBTQ+ characters and scenes of sexual activity, Abbott has also asked state education officials to develop statewide standards to prevent “pornography” and “other obscene content in Texas public schools”. Such moves have sparked anger and confusion. Ovidia Molina, president of the Texas State Teachers Association, criticized “disturbing and political overreach into the classroom”. “This is an obvious attack on diversity and an attempt to score political points at the expense of our children’s education,” she said. Some Democrats and lawyers encouraged school districts not to respond to the letter from Krause, as it does not have the legal force of a subpoena. “The letter is an unofficial request, and as such we are not going to respond to it,” Robyn L Harris, a spokeswoman for the Dallas school district, told the Chronicle. “After doing more legal research, we’ve decided that a response is not necessary, especially since anyone can search our library catalogs on this website,” said an Austin school districts spokesman, Jason Stanford.Police arrested Extinction Rebellion protesters who blocked the lord mayor’s show in central London on Saturday. Footage shared on social media showed officers dragging demonstrators out of the road after they disrupted the procession. Environmental activists could be seen blocking the route in the City of London, while forcing riders on horseback and the new lord mayor’s golden state coach to stop. A City of London police spokesperson said: “We are aware of a group of protesters in the City today. City of London police officers are engaging with the group to minimise disruption. A number of arrests have been made.” After police removed the protesters, the parade was able to continue and Vincent Keaveny was sworn in at the royal courts of justice as the 693rd person to hold the office. Extinction Rebellion said it was trying to deliver “the children’s charter” to the lord mayor, which read: “We stand here the day after Cop26, which has failed to bring about the action necessary to tackle the climate and ecological emergency, to call on you to prioritise the next seven generations above the short-term greed that focuses on wealth accumulation right here in the City of London.” It added that the action was in response to the “failure” of Cop26. Some protesters wore giant heads depicting Boris Johnson and the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, while others locked themselves together in the roads. Miranda Duncombe, a mother and member of the XR Families group, told PA Media: “Cop has failed to deliver the transformative changes needed to keep us at 1.5C of warming, a complete betrayal of our children. “If the City of London was a country, it would be the ninth largest emitter in the world. The City’s banks and asset managers provide loans and investments for the projects and companies that are killing us. “I am here for my children’s future. Our government has failed to act to protect them. I’m calling for the City of London to divest from fossil fuels immediately for the children everywhere who are dying due to the climate crisis and those who will die in the future.” The lord mayor’s show has been held since the 13th century, with the newly elected lord mayor serving as the elected head of the City of London Corporation. Their terms last one year.Two MPs have admitted to using their Commons offices for a paid non-parliamentary meeting amid a deepening controversy about MPs taking on additional employment. Liberal Democrat Layla Moran and Conservative Crispin Blunt attended a panel discussing political prisoners in Saudi Arabia remotely from their offices, despite Commons rules stipulating that MPs must not use the parliamentary facilities for non-parliamentary work. The event, which took place last November, was organised by law firm Bindmans LLP, and saw Moran receive £3,000 and Blunt receive £6,000, according to the register of MPs’ financial interests. Moran, who represents Oxford West and Abingdon, apologised for using her Commons office in Portcullis House and said she “deeply regretted” it. The Liberal Democrats’ foreign affairs spokesperson said in a statement: “With MPs from other parties, I worked on the detention of political prisoners in Saudi Arabia with Bindmans. “I deeply regret that I ‘Zoomed’ in for one meeting from my office in parliament when Covid restrictions were in place. I take full responsibility for this and it will not happen again.” The two MPs had been participating in a “fact-finding panel” on the conditions in Saudi Arabia of the former crown prince Muhammad bin Nayef and prince Ahmed bin Abdulaziz, who were detained last year. Blunt told BBC News he did not consider that there would be an issue with using his office for the meeting at no cost to the taxpayer, but that he would accept the conclusion of any investigation by the parliamentary standards commissioner if a complaint was made. The Conservative MP told the broadcaster that he thought the media were subjecting MPs to an “absurd feeding frenzy” over the issue of second jobs – a topic that has dominated the news cycle since Conservative MP Owen Paterson, who has since resigned, broke lobbying rules when working as a consultant. It also comes after the Times newspaper revealed that the former attorney-general Sir Geoffrey Cox, who was moonlighting as a lawyer for the British Virgin Islands (BVI), participated in a court hearing in the BVI virtually from parliament. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, called for an investigation into Cox, describing it as a “brazen breach of the rules”. The former attorney-general denies breaking the rules by using the Commons for his legal work. Cox earned at least £6m from his second job since he entered parliament, a Guardian analysis revealed this week, while records show that he skipped 12 recent votes on days when he was doing paid legal work.Timothy Snyder is a professor of history at Yale University and the author of books about the 20th-century history of central Europe, including Bloodlands, which examined the devastating consequence of Hitler and Stalin’s simultaneous reign of terror over civilian populations, and won the 2013 Hannah Arendt prize for political thought. In 2016, after the election of Donald Trump, Snyder wrote a short book, On Tyranny, which provided 20 brief lessons – “Defend Institutions”, “Remember Professional Ethics”, “Read Books” – from the 20th century that might help readers protect democracy against dictatorship. It topped the New York Times bestseller list for nonfiction in 2017. A new edition of the book, with illustrations by the German-American Nora Krug, whose graphic memoir Belonging confronted Germany’s Nazi past, has just been published. What prompted you to want to make this graphic version of On Tyranny? It came out originally in this extremely simple, accessible form. I always had the idea that it could take a different form, but that only became concrete once I read Nora Krug’s Belonging. I cold-called her and said: “Could you please do this?” Part of it was also to renew it. I changed the text a little bit, removed some of the stuff that was specific to 2016 and added some lines that recall what happened in 2020. You wrote the original in the immediate aftermath of Donald Trump’s inauguration. Was it intended as a call to arms for yourself as well as to others? Yes, it was like something snapped in me where I thought we should all do the things that we can. In writing the book I was putting myself out there, so it was something I had to live by. I’m glad I did that. As a writer, you have to make yourself vulnerable sometimes. Looking back, it seemed important to say that being outraged on social media about Trump probably wasn’t going to be enough? Exactly. I think the lesson that maybe people reacted to the most is number 12: “make eye contact and talk to people” in the corporeal world. And then number 13, which was to actively get involved in politics, to get our physical bodies into unfamiliar situations. The book is a frontal attack on that idea that it is never enough to accept the world as it is and just comment on it. One of the things that the book is alarmed by is a lack of historical literacy. The fact that terms such as “America first” or, in the UK, “enemies of the people” could be employed with so few alarm bells ringing among people about their history in fascism. Do you still see that kind of illiteracy even in some of your students? History has been seriously devalued in the US, I would say, since 1989 and that very unfortunate idea [“the end of history”] that history was now over. “America first” and “enemies of the people” are words that are consciously applied by people who wish to destroy democracy. If people don’t know how those words have been applied in the past, then that is dangerous. Part of the backwash of the Trump coup attempt is all of these laws in various states are designed to make history uncontroversial – which, let’s be clear, means: uncontroversial for white people. At the time you wrote the book, people were being criticised for making comparisons with what was happening in 2016 and the 1930s. Did you feel any trepidation about doing that? I don’t remember having that feeling. When people refuse to make comparisons with events that have happened before, what they are really saying is: “I don’t want to look at either the past or the present.” You grew up in Dayton, Ohio. How much did that firsthand knowledge of the midwest and those declining industrial heartlands inform your understanding of the forces that produced Trump? It certainly affected it. In 2016, I spent some time going door to door there and talking to people about the forthcoming presidential election. That helped me to see how important social media was. I asked one guy a question and he went back and checked Facebook before answering. Where my parents are from and still live had become entirely Trumpland. The demise of local news is not mentioned often enough in these kind of conversations… I think a lack of local news may be the single greatest source of the problem. Most American counties are now news deserts; they have no reporters covering local politicians at all. People have no way of being active citizens; they go on reading but the stuff they read drives them upwards to national politics, into obsession and conspiracy. They bring the trust they had for local news to Facebook. One of your antidotes to that is “read books”; who have been the writers that you’ve turned to most in the past five years? I always go back to Roger Penrose, the physicist. He is important to me because he has a view about unpredictability in quantum mechanics, which has implications for politics. And then some of the people who confronted these questions in the last century in different ways: Hannah Arendt, Václav Havel, Victor Klemperer. In addition to that, it’s really important to me to read novels, because they prepare you for scenes in the real world you haven’t yet confronted. I’ve just started rereading Les Liaisons Dangerouses. But I also get excited when I hear Julian Barnes has a new novel out. It seems to me that the opposite of tyranny is not freedom, but something more active: creativity, engagement. Do you think artists and writers have lately stepped up to that challenge? I think it’s true that freedom cannot be the opposite of anything. But I’m not going to criticise artists and writers – the main problem is often the way that their work has trouble getting viewed. One of our big problems at the moment is that we find it hard to imagine a viable future. Art and literature enable us to flex those imaginative muscles. Where do you place your optimism? I prefer hope to optimism. One thing is, it turns out that people really like democracy. It has been heartening to see that so many people care enough about democracy to take personal risks to defend it. • On Tyranny Graphic Edition by Timothy Snyder, illustrated by Nora Krug, is published by Vintage (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThere’s a seemingly offhand quality which is central to the appeal of Will Smith: an innate magnetism and loose-limbed, casual coolness. But the career path from teenage rap artist to TV actor to superstar status was anything but effortless; it was the result of a self-described “psychotic” work ethic and meticulous, perhaps even obsessive, planning. For a while, at least, he was one of the most bankable film actors on the planet – a planet that he saved on a regular basis in summer blockbusters. But while that kind of success rate is hard to sustain, Smith has shown himself to be extremely adaptable compared to his contemporaries. From film actor/musician, he has evolved into a multimedia phenomenon. He has adopted a very marketable openness and accessibility, and embraced personal failures as teachable moments. Having already rebranded himself as a social media superstar, he cruised through lockdown with a hugely successful streamed show in which he sprawled in sweatpants while riffing with celebrity buddies on Zoom. Now he’s back in more traditional movie star territory, with the double-pronged assault of a candid new memoir and one of his finest and most awards-friendly performances in years, as Richard Williams, father and coach of Venus and Serena, in Reinaldo Marcus Green’s King Richard. The Hollywood Reporter described him as “outstanding”, and Vanity Fair lauded “a sterling reminder of Smith’s singular charge, seizing upon a mighty challenge with thrilling recommitment”. The book, meanwhile, is entitled Will and is sold as “an epic tale of inner transformation and outer triumph” which digs into the life events which fine-tuned Smith’s weapons-grade charisma and steely determination. He was born Willard Carroll Smith Jr in 1968 in Philadelphia. Nicknamed “Prince” at school for his formidable charm, he tasted success early on. As the Fresh Prince, alongside his childhood friend Jeffrey “DJ Jazzy Jeff” Townes, he had released a single before he had finished high school; they were the first hip-hop artists to win a Grammy, and he was a millionaire by the age of 18. Smith was raised a Baptist: the PG-rated rhymes derided in some quarters of the rap community were a result of an intervention by his God-fearing granny. Rather than profanity, Smith learned to harness quick-witted humour, a skill he deftly transferred from music to acting. It was not all plain sailing. Smith’s money management skills left something to be desired, and the IRS came knocking with a substantial bill and a repossession order for most of his liquid assets. Bruised by the experience, Smith left Philadelphia for LA and, in 1990, signed as the lead in the NBC television series The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, having been strong-armed by Quincy Jones into an off-the-cuff audition at Jones’s house. Thanks to the IRS, Smith’s move to Hollywood was not liberally bankrolled, but he did arrive with a plan: to be the biggest movie star in the world. To this end, he studied the then 10 most successful films of all time to identify patterns. He scrutinised Tom Cruise’s promotional techniques and sought advice from heavyweights like Arnold Schwarzenegger (“Think of yourself as a politician running for Biggest Movie Star in the World,” was Arnie’s response.) Smith’s elevation to movie star status was so swift and decisive, it’s easy to forget that he straddled two hitherto significant barriers. First, he overcame the film industry’s resistance to the idea of a television personality making the leap to the big screen – the division between the two was considerably less permeable then than now. Second, and more significantly, was the issue of race. In a movie landscape which harboured no shortage of unconscious bias and a fair amount of outright systemic racism, Smith was the first black star to be routinely cast in roles not specifically written as black. A case in point was the 1995 buddy cop movie Bad Boys, which had been intended for Saturday Night Live comedians Jon Lovitz and Dana Carvey. Director Michael Bay, who was vocal in his dissatisfaction with the screenplay, cast Smith and Martin Lawrence in the two central roles and encouraged them to improvise rather than to stick to the lines on the page. Bay was also instrumental in the rebranding of Smith as a big-screen star, encouraging him to take his shirt off for one shot. Smith dismissed the idea as corny, but Bay persisted and they compromised with an open shirt. Bay later recalled “I was like… ‘Look at this! You look like a movie star!’ And he’s like: ‘Shit, I do!’” It was a revealing moment in more ways than one for Smith, who later said: “That was where I learned how important single images are. That single image took me from a comedic television actor to a potential movie star. The scripts that I started to get offered changed dramatically.” The ripped physique certainly didn’t hurt Smith’s prospects but there has never been a shortage of sculpted torsos in Hollywood. What set Smith apart was an inherent likability. Tommy Lee Jones, Smith’s co-star in Men in Black, said: “Will is more generous than anyone, and he spreads joy. He walks into a studio, walks on to a set, and makes certain that everybody’s happy. He can’t help himself.” That’s high praise from the famously curmudgeonly Jones, who took a visceral dislike of another co-star, Jim Carrey, because he “couldn’t sanction [Carrey’s] buffoonery”. Smith liked to attribute his drive to getting two-timed by a girlfriend when he was 16. “In my mind, she cheated because I wasn’t good enough. I remember making the decision that I will never not be good enough again.” It’s a typical Will Smith statement, self-deprecating but with a wink of boastfulness tagged on for good measure. But, according to his new book, the need to please comes from a darker episode. At 12, he witnessed his father assault his mother and was paralysed by fear into inaction. Smith’s urge to entertain was, he suggests, partly a response to what he perceived as his own cowardice, a distraction technique to avoid further conflict. “Comedy defuses all negativity,” he writes. Wherever the motivation lay, it worked. Smith holds several box-office records, including that of the most consecutive $100m-plus hits at the US: eight, starting with Men in Black 2 and ending with Hancock. He has been Oscar-nominated twice, for lead actor performances in Ali and The Pursuit Of Happyness; another nod is on the cards, and early buzz suggests that the third time might be the charm. Perhaps more revealing than the career triumphs are his reactions to the inevitable bumps in the road. Smith, as the tone of his book suggests, is into personal growth and self-actualisation. And he has no qualms about being public about his journey. Talking to British GQ recently, director Michael Mann, who worked with him on Ali, said: “He’s got a lot of balls artistically, and as a man. He’s materially, wonderfully successful – and conscious of that – but he asks himself the most serious and profound questions that every single one of us encounters in our lives.” Thus the critical drubbing of films like After Earth prompted candid reappraisals of his career and values; in his book, Smith further confronts the painful fallout from the film: his son Jaden, who co-starred and was targeted for particularly vitriolic criticism, considered applying for legal emancipation at the age of 15, a pointed no-confidence vote in his father’s guidance. A rocky patch in Smith’s marriage to Jada Pinkett Smith was explored in a well-meaning and only slightly cringey discussion on Pinkett Smith’s web series, Red Table Talk. And in May this year he posted a snapshot displaying a lockdown paunch, with the rueful claim that he was in the “worst shape of his life”. It was a relatable moment, but, one suspects, a calculated one. After all, you can’t make a career of saving the planet if you don’t remind people you’re human once in a while.Judges appointed by Donald Trump and Ronald Reagan declined on Friday to lift a stay on the Biden administration’s Covid-19 vaccine requirement for businesses with 100 or more workers. One law professor said the move showed the court was “radical and anti-science”. Under the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Osha) requirement, such workers must be vaccinated by 4 January or use masks and weekly tests. The measure is softer than those implemented by many private businesses and state or local governments, and the Biden administration has expressed confidence in its legality. Nonetheless, the fifth US circuit court of appeals, based in New Orleans and one of the most conservative federal panels, granted an emergency stay last Saturday. Justice and labor department lawyers filed a response on Monday in which they said stopping the requirement would prolong the Covid-19 pandemic and “cost dozens or even hundreds of lives per day”. On Friday, a three-judge panel rejected that argument. In his ruling, Judge Kurt D Engelhardt wrote that the stay was “firmly in the public interest” and referred to the Osha requirement as a “Mandate”, with a capital “m”. More than 762,000 people have died from Covid-19 in the US, from a caseload of nearly 47m. Nonetheless, vaccine mandates, rules and requirements and other public health measures are the focus of concentrated opposition among Republican voters and politicians, including many jockeying for the presidential nomination in 2024. More than 434m doses of vaccines have been administered and more than 194 million Americans, or 58.5% of the population, are fully vaccinated. Resistance to vaccine mandates has produced protests and fears of staff shortages. At the same time, the Biden administration has heralded strong jobs numbers and what it says is an economy rebounding from its Covid battering. Engelhardt said “the mere specter of the Mandate” had stoked “workplace strife” and “contributed to untold economic upheaval in recent months”. “Rather than a delicately handled scalpel, the Mandate is a one-size fits-all sledgehammer that makes hardly any attempt to account for differences in workplaces (and workers) that have more than a little bearing on workers’ varying degrees of susceptibility to the supposedly ‘grave danger’ the Mandate purports to address.” Experts say Covid remains a grave danger. Writing for the Guardian, Eric Topol, a professor of molecular medicine and executive vice-president of Scripps Research, said the US was “sitting in the zone of denial”. “We are already seeing signs that the US is destined to succumb to more Covid spread,” Topol said, “with more than three weeks sitting at a plateau of ~75,000 new cases per day, now there’s been a 10% rise in the past week. “We are miles from any semblance of Covid containment, facing winter and the increased reliance of being indoors with inadequate ventilation and air filtration, along with the imminent holiday gatherings. “Now is the time for the US to … pull out all the stops. Promote primary vaccination and boosters like there’s no tomorrow. Aggressively counter the pervasive misinformation and disinformation. Accelerate and expand the vaccine mandates that unfortunately became necessary and have been proven effective, and mass distribute medical quality masks and rapid home testing kits at no cost.” Judge Engelhardt said the Biden business requirement potentially violated the commerce clause of the US constitution. “The Mandate imposes a financial burden upon [businesses] by deputising their participation in Osha’s regulatory scheme,” he wrote, “exposes them to severe financial risk if they refuse or fail to comply, and threatens to decimate their workforces (and business prospects) by forcing unwilling employees to take their shots, take their tests, or hit the road.” Federal judges routinely claim to be above politics. But the system for nominating and appointing them runs through the Senate, where Republicans are aggressive in seeking to tilt the bench their way. Engelhardt was nominated by Trump and confirmed in 2018, as was Stephen Kyle Duncan, who joined Engelhardt’s opinion on Friday. So did Edith H Jones, a Reagan appointee in 1985. All three have links to the Federalist Society, a conservative group which has worked with Republicans in Congress to install judges including Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett, supreme court justices nominated by Trump. At least 27 states have filed challenges to the Osha vaccine rule in federal appeals courts. The federal government said in court filings the cases should be consolidated and one circuit court should be chosen at random on 16 November to hear it. Administration lawyers also say there is no reason to keep the requirement on hold while the court where the cases ultimately land remains undetermined. In an email, Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia, said the fifth circuit was “acting politically”. “But it also seems to be attempting to dictate the terms of the debate and to be violating the intent of Congress … to have an orderly system to resolve appeals when there are multiple challenges to an agency’s action and to prevent litigants from ‘forum shopping’ by racing to the courthouse to secure a decision from the court that it believes most favors the litigant’s position. “The appeals court which ‘wins’ the lottery and receives all of the challenges is free to ignore what the fifth circuit did or other courts may do.” On Twitter, Rick Hasen, a law professor at the University of California, Irvine, said: “One factor federal courts must consider in granting or denying emergency motions is the ‘public interest’. [It is] ASTONISHING that the fifth circuit does not even MENTION prevention of death/disease from Covid as a public interest to justify the vaccine mandate”. He also said he did not “even think conservative is the right word” to describe the fifth circuit court. “It’s pretty radical and anti-science,” he said.Sudanese security forces killed at least five people on Saturday and injured dozens more when they used teargas and live bullets to break up a protest in Khartoum against a military takeover of the government. Protesters defied a military shutdown of the city to call for a return to civilian rule, as plain-clothed snipers reappeared on the streets on Saturday. On Friday, coup leader Abdel Fattah al-Burhan cemented his hold on power by swearing in a new ruling council that excluded the main civilian coalition. Nationwide, hundreds of thousands of people turned out in most of Sudan’s important cities and towns, chanting in support of civilian rule, and denouncing Burhan. Slogans on banners included “stop the killing – enough is enough”. “We reject the coup. We want the army to be held accountable for all the killing,” said protester Abdul-Rahman Sharaf-Eldeen, a 31-year-old agricultural engineer. “I believe that the army should not be part of any future government.” The Central Committee of Sudanese Doctors said five people were killed in Saturday’s protests, four by bullets and one as a result of teargas exposure. The toll is likely to rise, with many more in hospital from serious gunshot wounds, and at least one journalist among those injured. At least 14 other people have been killed in previous protests against the military since it seized control late last month. Burhan imprisoned more than 100 key political leaders and activists, including most of the cabinet, and put prime minister Abdalla Hamdok under house arrest. The coup provoked mass demonstrations inside Sudan, and criticism from the international community, but the military has ignored these as it consolidates its grip. The country had been in a fragile transitional period after a 2019 pro-democracy uprising led to the removal from power of the autocrat Omar al-Bashir. The military then signed a power-sharing deal with the pro-democracy forces, setting up an 11-member sovereign council, but that was dissolved last month. It has now been replaced by a new council dominated by military loyalists, sworn in on Friday morning. It included powerful paramilitary leader Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, who was also made vice-president. “I am here to reject the latest decisions of Burhan to form a sovereign council. We don’t him to be back. We want a civilian government,” said Asjad Ahmed, 20, a student at al-Zaim al-Azhari University, protesting near the military headquarters. In a bid to stem the protests, the government closed down the bridges leading to Khartoum city, where the military HQ and the presidential palace are located, but protesters defied the threats of violence to turn out in large numbers. “They are trying to terrorise us by sending all those soldiers, but we don’t care, we will march,” said Ashraf el-Haj, 43, a member of a Resistance Committee in Omdurman, across the Nile from Khartoum. “We are fed up with the dictatorship and the silencing of our people.” When the shooting began, security forces barred ambulances from collecting the injured, eyewitnesses said, forcing them to seek treatment in rickshaws. They also beat up doctors and arrested them at the Eastern Nile hospital in north Khartoum. “Our colleagues have been beaten and one was arrested, so we are too busy at the moment, we have been overwhelmed with a lot of casualties,” said a doctor at another centre, who asked not to be named. Information minister Hamza Baloul, who was among those detained at the time of the coup but has since been released, joined the protesters and urged them not to give up in a video posted online. “The Sudanese people have decided to create a civilian nation and there is no will stronger than that of the Sudanese people’s,” he said. There are also demonstrations in solidarity around the world, with hundreds of people turning up outside Sudanese embassies, including Paris and Berlin.A paranoid fantasy began the crisis that is ripping through the Conservative party. In what from a rightwing viewpoint must be the most disastrous column in the history of the Tory press, Charles Moore, a friend and Telegraph colleague of Boris Johnson, used a phantom conspiracy to rally the right to Owen Paterson. Writing on 26 October, Moore could not bring himself to mention the £110,000 Patterson’s corporate backers directed into his bank account annually. In 2009, the Telegraph revealed the MPs’ expenses scandal. Now its boy is in power, the tight, little world of the right’s media-political complex finds the vulgar subject of money beneath it. Instead of explaining why the parliamentary authorities concluded that Paterson had brought “significant damage to the reputation and integrity of the House of Commons”, Moore turned on Kathryn Stone, the commissioner for standards. Without producing a shred of evidence, he asserted that Stone was letting Labour MPs off lightly, while treating Conservative MPs – “especially pro-Brexit Conservatives such as Mr Paterson and Boris Johnson himself – much more harshly”. With that cue, Johnson, his cabinet and a section of his party knew what to say: Paterson was a victim of the elite. The real elite, that is, not the Conservative party, which just happens to have been in power these past 11 years, but the true lords of the realm: the civil servants, the broadcasters, the judges, the Electoral Commission and the activist lawyers; the dainty grandees who criticise Conservatives from a position of “pure leftwing snobbery”, in the words of Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary; the unelected “cultural Marxists”, as the attorney-general, Suella Braverman, calls them, who benefited from the 1968 generation’s long march through the institutions so completely they now have the sheer bloody nerve to act as “judge and jury”, as Moore said of Stone, not just of Paterson but of “Boris Johnson himself”. Stone was neither judge nor jury, but Moore and Johnson were the undoubted executioners of Paterson’s career. They provoked the backlash that destroyed him by pushing persecution mania to its limits. I don’t know whether their supporters or opponents were more shocked by the debacle that followed. Since 2016, paranoid politics has enjoyed continuous success. It allowed the Conservative right to paint opponents of Brexit first as agents of the EU, and then as saboteurs and fifth columnists who wanted to overthrow democracy itself. Above all its other advantages, conspiracy theory enabled Johnson to turn cops into criminals. The Johnson administration can never permit the thought to grow that regulators are public servants following the law. It must paint them as malign enemies with secret agendas. On the paranoid account, Stone cannot be an honest enforcer of the rules. Only political malice can explain her criticisms of a rightwing politician. The maligned Stone is not a one-off. The Conservatives have tried to taint every judicial or regulatory action that stops them doing as they please. Track the denunciations and you see that, despite his cheeky chappy poses, Johnson has a Nixonian determination to crush all who limit his power. To stay only with the judiciary, he promised to “root out the leftist culture of so much of the criminal justice establishment”. His anonymous briefers warned that Downing Street wanted to “get the judges sorted”. Assorted ministers have paid court to their master by saying judges “want to frustrate Brexit” (Kwasi Karteng) and were in an unholy alliance to “thwart the wishes of the British people” (Dominic Raab). As a method of bringing Georgian jobbery to the 21st century, paranoid politics cannot be bettered. If every impartial institution is corrupt, if objectivity is a sham and independence is just a cover for conducting “politics by other means” (as the 2019 Conservative manifesto described judicial review of its abuses of power), then the Tory state must lever the most rightwing candidates imaginable into public sector jobs to “redress the balance”. Paranoia has driven Conservatives, who went into politics believing state power must be limited, to endorse autocratic government. They have developed an almost Marxist belief in the impossibility of professional integrity. Because they are fanatics who can never imagine behaving impartially themselves, they believe that everyone else must be as fanatical as they are. They cannot understand how people can leave their opinions at the workplace door because they have never left them there. As much as their indifference to the punishments Brexit is bringing to businesses, their belief in a liberal-left deep state shows how removed the Conservatives have become from the world of work. Nearly every worker in every industry knows that they cannot allow political beliefs to interfere with the services they provide. The exceptions are the arts and academia, where cancel culture undoubtedly exists, and politics and political journalism. Johnson is a dangerous prime minister because he is both a politician and pundit. He is from the tiny minority of the population where your politics are your work. If the right was giving us new Red Wall voices with Geordie and Brummie accents, I might be more forgiving of its chicanery. But Johnsonianism in practice is just the prime minister recycling his old mates. Moore, Paul Dacre, Robbie Gibb. The same faces going round and round, year after year, decade after decade. Until the Paterson scandal, Johnson’s power grab looked likely to succeed. Since 2005, the liberal-left in the UK has lost every election and referendum because it has underestimated the appeal of rightwing ideas. From Richard Nixon on, the US right has enjoyed enormous success as standing as the champion of the “silent majority” against a liberal elite that was soft on crime, drugs and immigrants. There appeared to be no reason why Johnson could not imitate US conservatives and convince voters he needed authoritarian controls to protect them against a rigged and biased system. In these circumstances, the revolt of public opinion and significant sections of the Conservative party against his attempts to whitewash corruption is immensely heartening. Donald Trump was telling the truth for once when he said of his supporters: “I could stand in the middle of Fifth Avenue and shoot somebody and I wouldn’t lose voters.” One of the few cheering pieces of news from the UK this year is that Boris Johnson cannot say the same. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistIf New Zealanders had a choice of opponent in Sunday’s T20 World Cup final, the average preference would surely be anyone but Australia. This isn’t about the power dynamics of relative size, because New Zealand’s defining characteristic as a cricket team has become the ability to match up against opponents with even more economic and population disparity than there is between the bookends of the Tasman Sea. But for other less tangible reasons, whether or not they involve the regional friendship and rivalry between the countries, Australia are indisputably New Zealand’s bogey side, the team that beats the Black Caps no matter how well either side is going. The past doesn’t always define the future, and there is of course no reason why this New Zealand team couldn’t be the one to break the pattern. A similar hold ended at this same tournament, when Pakistan ignored decades of World Cup losses to India with a powerful 10-wicket pasting. But the historical record includes very recent history, and it remains another obstacle to overcome. The bogey dynamic was never more potent than in the 50-over World Cup in 2015. After rampaging through the tournament with a devastating scoring rate and equally furious spells of bowling, New Zealand crashed in the final when the other team wore green and gold. At the end of that same year, after decades of Test losses in Australia, New Zealand had been on a roll in Test cricket, dominating at home and winning tough series overseas. Yet they were flattened in Brisbane, lost in Adelaide, and went on to lose in Wellington and Christchurch, for a pair of 2-0 losses home and away. It was the same story in 2019-20, playing brilliantly against all other comers around the world but folding 3-0 when visiting Australia. Different year, different format, different tournament. But that New Zealand have played so well so far, the way they thumped India, the energy of their semi-final triumph over favourites England, and that Australia have been less convincing through the group stage, all go out the window when the two teams face off. One thing that won’t be so different is the players involved. New Zealand’s big four - Kane Williamson, Martin Guptill, Tim Southee and Trent Boult - all played in the losing 2015 50-over final. Seven members of Australia’s inevitable XI played against New Zealand in that campaign, and six in the final. Australia’s push will rely heavily on their pace-bowling trio. None of Mitchell Starc, Josh Hazlewood, or Pat Cummins has ever played New Zealand in 20-over cricket, but each has a dominant record against them across 50 overs. Aaron Finch and David Warner have made plenty of runs against the Kiwis batting at the top. Warner is back in top gear after his flying start in the semi-final win over Pakistan. Matthew Wade and Marcus Stoinis will be brimming with confidence after sealing that win as batting finishers. And Glenn Maxwell has barely been called upon, left not out without facing a ball in two of Australia’s group games. Outside the big names, so much will rely on Adam Zampa. The leg-spinner has dominated the middle overs with smart bowling and confidence, and is the leading wicket-taker since the main stage of the tournament began with 12 in his six matches. He first proved his worth to national selectors by dominating one-day matches in New Zealand in 2016, and had the last meaningful pre-pandemic act in cricket in March 2020 when he bowled Williamson with a perfect wrong ’un before the New Zealanders abandoned their tour of Australia to beat a closing border back home. He will fear no one come Sunday. For New Zealand, their spin duo of Mitchell Santner and Ish Sodhi will be equally important. Australian teams have consistently been undone by spin through the middle overs, when the scoring rate is clamped down and wickets follow. They may play a bigger part than the celebrated opening pace partnership of Boult and Southee, given just how familiar Australia’s players - especially those who have faced Boult repeatedly in the IPL - will be with how those two operate. Then there comes the damaging blow for New Zealand of missing Devon Conway, who dealt himself a wound by punching his bat when he was dismissed in the semi-final, breaking a small bone in his hand when his strike missed the padding of his glove. It is a self-inflicted injury that his team could ill afford, given his importance to the middle order, and his importance in the World Test Championship win earlier this year that broke New Zealand’s trophy drought. Ultimately, the Kiwis will have to remember the versatility they have showed in becoming a team bigger than the sum of its parts, to get past the fact that one vital part is missing. Daryl Mitchell has done a brilliant job as a pinch-hitting opener. Jimmy Neesham won the semi-final for them with firepower down the order. Whoever is called upon to do a job must do it. If this team can hold its nerve to end the sequence of underperformance against Australia, the match-up that they would be most concerned about could also yield the sweetest victory.It was revealed last week that a retired lecturer named Darrell Meekcom had been arrested for indecent exposure and dangerous driving after he mooned a speed camera. It sounds as though he’d managed to perform a contortionist manoeuvre at the wheel but in fact he stopped the car and got out while his wife went to buy some bread. The key detail, though, is that Meekcom is terminally ill, having been diagnosed with multiple system atrophy. The act of baring his bottom to a traffic enforcement camera, Meekcom told the police, was an item on his “bucket list”. “Have you never wanted to moon a speed camera?” he asked one of the arresting officers. There are endless lists of bucket lists available online, so named because they are a compilation of experiences that one should undergo before kicking the bucket. Typically they involve flying to far-off places or high-adrenaline pastimes like skydiving. There is even the Bucket List travel company. Helen Damon, a counselling psychologist who specialises in dying and bereavement, notes that there is something “godlike and enthralling to have knowledge of one’s death”, which in turn can lead to acts of transgression. “There can be a sense that if you’re going to die, the worst is about to happen, you’re untouchable,” she says. Except, of course, three police cars turned up at Meekcom’s house to arrest him. Apparently, he told the officers of his precarious grasp on life, but they were undeterred. They could have argued, presumably, that transgression would lose its meaning if they went easy on people with terminal illness. But that may be a little bit more existentialist than the West Mercia force care to get on three-squad-car assignments. Damon believes bucket lists – with their familiar tropes of swimming with dolphins – are more often about conformity than transgression, creating an expectation of how we ought to live life large. “I wonder if it hasn’t become like diamond rings for engagements or the sudden rise in gender-reveal parties. People often say in situations of dying or bereavement that they wish there were manuals to guide them on how they should be feeling. Perhaps the bucket list performs a normative role on what to do.” An appointment with death, which after all is the one certainty we all have to confront, does tend to focus the mind on what it means to be alive. Earlier this year, the journalist and self-improvement writer Oliver Burkeman published a book entitled Four Thousand Weeks, which is roughly the life-expectancy for the average westerner. Burkeman reconfigured our allotted time in weeks, rather than about 80 years, because it centres attention on life’s shocking brevity. As he writes: “It’s only by accepting our finitude that we can step into a truly authentic relationship with life.” While Burkeman wants us to appreciate the meaning of time, he has little time for the bucket-list approach, which he sees as just another form of stressful escapism. “Once you truly understand that you’re guaranteed to miss out on almost every experience the world has to offer,” he writes, “the fact that there are so many you still haven’t experienced stops feeling like a problem.” That’s easier said than done in a world in which billions of individual experiences are shared for instant posterity on social media platforms like Instagram. And where the exotic and extreme are industrially commodified and consumed like any other product. At the same time as the world has shrunk, our experiential ambitions have radically expanded. A hundred years ago, only the most intrepid of travellers would have even considered visiting the Himalayas. Nowadays, you have to queue to get to Mount Everest’s summit. It’s in the context of that availability of previously unimaginable adventures that people set their wish-lists. On a public message put out on Facebook, I asked what kind of things people planned to do before they died, and the answers ranged from a surf trip along the Baja peninsula, seeing icebergs and the Northern Lights, shooting one’s age in a round of golf, to returning to a far-off birthplace. For Simon Mahomo, a 60-year-old former options trader who cashed-in and now “pursues an alternative quest for meaning”, the question is whether it’s more meaningful to witness extraordinary scenes or to leave a more permanent trace. He plans to ride a dirt bike to South Africa, and asks rhetorically if that is “just egotism or is there meaning in it? I believe there is meaning.” He cites, by way of illustration, the famous speech given by a dying android played by Rutger Hauer in the sci-fi film Blade Runner. “I’ve seen things you people wouldn’t believe. Attack ships on fire off the shoulder of Orion. I watched C-beams glitter in the dark near the Tannhäuser Gate. All those moments will be lost in time, like… tears in rain. Time to die.” It’s a speech that captures both the grandeur of paying witness to spectacular events and the ephemeral nature of life. If it romanticises big experiences, it also pays bleak testament to the ever-present shadow that lends them meaning: death. And staying in the realm of cinema, what seems certain is that on no one’s bucket list is the wish to see the Jack Nicholson and Morgan Freeman film The Bucket List, in which the pair of terminally ill patients travel around the world, visiting the Taj Mahal and riding motorcycles along the Great Wall of China. The story is filled with so many sentimental cliches that it could make even the most placid viewer want to moon the screen, if not a speed camera. In the end, the truth is that no event or scene is so large that it transcends death. Which may be why it’s wise to heed Burkeman’s advice to “seek novelty in the mundane”. There are unlikely to be any dolphins but nor will the police be turning up at your door. • This article was amended on 14 November 2021 because in an earlier version a picture caption gave the actor Morgan Freeman’s surname as Nicholson.The town of Inverell in the New England region of New South Wales is renowned for rural commodities and its sapphires. But for the past decade it has held a quietly ignominious place in the state’s police records due to the grisly death of a resident in 1989. Not much is known about Russell Payne, the 33-year-old whose body was found by his landlord in February 1989 in a scene that presented a conundrum to police. Semi-naked, lying on his back in his ground-floor unit, Payne’s body was bruised and his genitals shockingly swollen. Under closer examination, the broken end of a TV aerial was discovered inside his penis. The local media headlined a murder, despite police suggesting foul play was “a remote chance”. The coronial notes described “bizarre sexual practices” yet made no comment about Payne’s sexual orientation, which remains unknown. Septicemia was listed as the cause of death. After his burial in an unadorned grave, the story disappeared from Inverell’s conversations. Yet two decades later, researchers picked Payne’s case out of a pile of various rulings of misadventure and suicide. Aggregated using various hate-crime hallmarks, including genital mutilation, a list of 88 suspected gay-hate murders surfaced, dating from the 1970s. The vast majority of these took place in Sydney suburbs where gay men were routinely bashed and sometimes killed. Payne’s case was one of two in rural areas, and the only one west of the Great Dividing Range. This week’s announcement by the Perrottet government of a judicial inquiry into historical gay and transgender hate crimes comes after multiple internal NSW Police investigations, parliamentary inquiries and arrests of suspects. But cases like Payne’s raise an unavoidable question: will the police take another look at the deaths of almost ninety men, and the circumstances that led to many more attacks never being reported? Or are the historical cases destined to remain in the filing cabinets while the homophobic attacks continue? High-profile metropolitan investigations into the deaths of Scott Johnson and Raymond Keam have led to charges being laid; but for rural cases, the first step still seems to be accepting a hate crime may have taken place. Kept out of the records Sue Thompson is a former police gay and lesbian client consultant who previously worked as a case assessor for the NSW Victims of Crime Compensation Tribunal. She has contributed to gay-hate crime research and investigation for more than three decades, including the list of 88 suspected gay-hate crimes. “In 1987, I got a regional case on my desk that had been through court, and the court had found self-defence,” she says. The case involved two friends, one of whom had killed the other after allegedly awaking to find his friend groping him. “Now that, to me, is not self-defence; but it’s the sort of thing that in a country area can be really hard to get some information on, because it can easily be intentionally or unintentionally overlooked, or kept out of the records.” Shayne Mallard MLC was chair of the NSW Parliamentary Inquiry into Gay and Transgender Hate Crimes 1970-2010, which reported to government earlier this year. He believes the secrecy around sex between men in country towns has long affected the number of gay-hate reports in rural regions. “I know in one major regional town that men met down at the river. This is where you get the situation with beats, which is where these murders often occurred,” he says. “You’ve got men who were identifying as straight but who went to a park or a toilet block and met other men for sex. “Rural and regional police are strongly networked into their community, and whilst I do respect the police, particularly contemporary police, nonetheless you’re taking a risk if you’re, say, a schoolteacher and you go down to the local bridge and then you get bashed up because you’re looking for sex, and then you go to the police.” Mallard is one of many anticipating the terms of reference of the judicial inquiry. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter “If there’d been twenty nurses chucked off cliffs and murdered, there’d be a royal commission,” he said. “The fact is that we know there was in some circumstances a lack of police thoroughness in the investigations, they were often quickly dismissed as a suicide or misadventure, evidence was destroyed. “It’s unacceptable that our society hasn’t pursued all avenues of inquiry to close this down.” Retired assistant commissioner of NSW Police, John Ure, gave a live submission to the inquiry, describing the “gravitas” it would bring to the issue. “The police have established the cold-case unit, and they have got a huge amount of work to trawl through with limited resources,” he said. Rewriting history Resources that helped overturn the coronial suicide ruling of Scott Johnson’s death and identified it as a potential homicide – family advocacy, private investigation, and a huge reward for information leading to an arrest – have never been attached to a case like Russell Payne’s. For the NSW Police, it’s about the burden of proof. In 2018, Operation Parrabell, an internal state police investigation, examined 88 deaths between 1976 and 2000 previously identified by academics as potentially involving gay-hate motivations. The report found possible anti-gay bias in 27 cases. As someone who analysed crimes for gay hatred in the era they occurred, Sue Thompson felt this was “absolutely outrageous” and “rewriting history”. “If you want to do a report to parliament that’s just going on the cases we can prove, that’s one thing; but if you’re actually wanting to deal with things on the ground, on a day-to-day basis, to intervene in matters before they go from abuse to violence to murder, then you’ve got to actually leave the criteria wide and open,” she said. “If you’re going to sweep possible gay-hate crimes under the carpet and ignore them because there’s not enough proof, then the police are not going to do anything about it, and you’re putting many of those young, emerging LGBTIQA+ people in country areas at great risk.” Rural LGBTQ+ people have become more visible with the increase in regional events that celebrate diversity. In 2018, the western Riverina town of Hay held its inaugural Rainbow on the Plains festival, while the Broken Heel festival in Broken Hill has been celebrating drag culture since 2015. But the risks posed by homophobic attitudes remain. According to the final report of the parliamentary inquiry, 79 LGBTQ+ hate crimes were reported in NSW in 2020. The latest “Private Lives” report on the health and wellbeing of LGBTQ+ Australians (with a quarter of its respondents outside cities) indicated a spike in reported homophobic verbal abuse from 25.5% to 34.6%, and a jump from 1.8% to 3.9% in reports of physical violence, since the prior study in 2011. This period covers the federal government’s plebiscite on marriage equality in 2017. Pressure points In John Ure’s experience, homophobia in rural communities was rarely overt. Having spent a few years policing in the New England district in the early 1980s, long before the advent of gay and lesbian liaison officers (GLLO), he recalled how gay men in the region lived quietly due to the risk of a prison sentence. Ure reckons it would have been “a brave government” that ignored the need for a judicial inquiry into historical gay and transgender hate crimes, but says the terms of reference must examine police responses and community attitudes to LGBTQ+. Hate crime doesn’t get much more personal for openly gay Shayne Mallard, who endured a “small breakdown” during the early days of the parliamentary inquiry, when hearing evidence led to understanding how an attack against him on Oxford Street as a younger man was likely targeted homophobia. “When the parliament gets a response to government, I’ll move a motion so that parliament will be debating it again. We’re part of a line of pressure points on this issue,” he said. “The sand is running through the hourglass very fast.” Michael Burge is a freelance writer based in Glen Innes. His debut novel Tank Water (MidnightSun Publishing) explores the subject of gay-hate crimes in rural Australia. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communitySenior lawyers have questioned whether the alleged abductor of Cleo Smith can have a fair trial by jury after after blanket media coverage that included the accused, Terence Kelly, being shown barefoot and shackled while being transported to prison. Kelly, a 36-year-old from Carnarvon in Western Australia, was photographed two days after his arrest in leg irons and handcuffs, with no shoes on, being ferried to a plane by police for a flight to Perth. Legal experts say the images showing the shackles were “entirely prejudicial” and human rights advocates say the use of leg shackles as a routine part of transporting an accused person, particularly an Aboriginal man, should be challenged. Kelly has been charged with various offences including forcibly taking a child under 16. A court is obliged to determine guilt or innocence regardless of how the accused is portrayed in the media. The use of leg shackles does not indicate guilt, which is for a court to decide. The WA Department of Justice said the use of shackles was a “routine” practice to ensure “the safe and secure movement of prisoners”. But even without the publication of pictures of him, the extent of the media coverage on the case has made Kelly effectively “untriable”, said Perth barrister Tom Percy QC. “The amount of hatred and enmity generated toward him already in the public domain would make trial by jury almost an impossibility,” he said. The photographs of Kelly on the tarmac were widely published in Australia and shown on local TV bulletins. The Australian newspaper used the image captured by its photographer on the front page. The Daily Mail used several images with editorialised captions, including a suggestion that Kelly was winking at the cameras, when it appears he was just squinting from the sun. The Guardian also published one of the images distributed by Getty, in which the handcuffs and chain were obscured. Percy, the criminal law spokesman from the Australian Lawyers Alliance, said the publication of photos showing an accused person in shackles was “entirely prejudicial and unnecessary and did nothing whatsoever to inspire one’s confidence that there could be a fair trial, at least in front of a jury”. “Of course in WA we have the option of a trial without a jury,” he added. A judge-only trial can be held in WA if the court is convinced that it is necessary in the interests of justice. Percy says he expects that, if the matter goes to trial, lawyers representing Kelly would apply for a judge-only trial, but the application can also be made by the prosecution. Anthony Elliott, the president of the Criminal Lawyers Association of Western Australia, said the photographs were “entirely prejudicial”. Photos showing shackles have been used create “an insinuation in the community that he is a dangerous person who needs to be restrained”. Police would not comment when asked why Kelly was placed in leg shackles, referring questions to the Department of Justice, which carries responsibility for people once they have been remanded in custody. Earlier, police briefed some media outlets that the shackles had been used because Kelly was at risk of self-harm. The police custody transport manual states that when transporting prisoners by plane, “violent prisoners should be ankle shackled if deemed appropriate in the circumstances”. The position of the justice department on leg shackles is more opaque. A 2020 review by the Office of the Inspector of Custodial Services found there was “no specific department policy dealing with routine restraint” and that the use of routine restraint was rarely recorded. The review found the department had adopted the routine use of restraints to prevent escapes but without consideration of the actual risk of escape, including using leg restraints such as those on the ankle on people who are unconscious or very unwell in hospital. A Department of Justice spokesperson told Guardian Australia that corrective services officers are “authorised to use a range of approved restraint equipment, including leg restraints, during escorts for the safe and secure movement of prisoners”. They said such use “does not meet the criteria to be classified as a use of force”, which means there is no requirement to record their use. Amnesty International Australia says that every use of a restraint, including zip ties and handcuffs, should be regarded as a use of force and monitored as such. Maggie Munn, a Gunggari woman and associate campaigner for Indigenous rights at Amnesty International, said the organisation had raised concerns previously about leg restraints and leg cuffs being used inappropriately and contrary to international protocols. The Greens senator for Victoria, Lidia Thorpe, said the use of shackles or leg cuffs in any situation was “barbaric”. For First Nations people, it is also a symbol of colonial violence. “Every time I go to a funeral there’s at least one or two young blackfellas chained up, shackled up, shuffling through on that big shiny floor,” the Gunnai, Gunditjmara and Djab Wurrung woman said. “That’s intergenerational trauma. The trauma that we are experiencing burying a loved one then seeing one of our kids shuffle in in shackles. That is a deep, deep shame that we will never forget. “And when you look at our old people that are chained up just the same way, that’s burned, ingrained, into our soul and our hearts and our identity as blak people in this country. You can’t forget that.” Thorpe says she has received racist messages since Kelly’s arrest and is concerned at how the portrayal of the case in the media could affect the Aboriginal community. Kelly is awaiting his next court hearing in December. His guilt or innocence has not been determined.So few of Australia’s regent honeyeaters remain, its distinctive mating song is slowly being lost to its dwindling population. Its staccato burst of pips and squeaks, a “funny sort of call”, was passed down to young males from “uncles” when honeyeaters, a nomadic species, still travelled in flocks. “It’s a very sad thing to think the species can become so endangered they don’t have those adult teachers around,” BirdLife Australia project officer Kristy Peters said. “Lone males often can’t find females to breed … [so] when the young leave the nest, they would come across other regent honeyeaters and learn songs from other adult males. “But with far fewer birds around to learn from, they’re mimicking the calls of other species they’re co-existing with, like red wattlebirds and noisy friarbirds. The female birds don’t respond well to these calls which leads to lower nest success … and the birds aren’t being taught to leave the nest and join the world.” Fewer than 350 of the critically endangered species remain despite its high distribution, spanning from south-east Queensland down to Victoria. But a project to plant mistletoe to regenerate one of their key New South Wales nesting sites, may prevent the species from dying out in the coming decade. Working with the Mindaribba Local Aboriginal Land Council and local landcare groups, BirdLife Australia is aiming to plant at least 1,000 long-flowered mistletoe seeds, a key breeding source for the species, into host trees in the Kurri Kurri and Cessnock woodlands, in the hope regent honeyeaters will return in larger numbers to breed and flock once more. The honeyeater has been battered by historical and ongoing habitat destruction and fragmentation, as well as the loss of their “love song” leading to a drop in reproduction rates. The project builds on a similar trial which took place in the City of Melbourne, that planted 800 mistletoe seeds into urban plane trees to bring food and shelter for fruit and nectar eating birds and possums. “We thought, how can we do that to bring back regent honeyeaters where their native resources have been lost?” Peters said. “So we did an initial trial in 2019 and had some success with germination. At the time it was a novel procedure – it wasn’t something widely done in bush regeneration. “But we got in there and planted as much mistletoe as we could to the habitat that had been lost through bushfires.” There are almost 100 species of mistletoe in Australia, all native, with leaves resembling eucalyptus. Its plants, once attached to host trees, bring nectar, fruit and a dense network of branches for birds and animals to nest in. “Mistletoe often provides blossoming resources right across the landscape, because it’s basically a parasite,” Peters said. “It can get nutrients and water by attaching to the host, and flower throughout the year if it isn’t subject to drought.” This summer, a team of conservationists, traditional owners from the Mindaribba Local Aboriginal Land Council and arborists will return to the Hunter Valley, one of the most “important contemporary breeding areas” for the species, to pick and plant the food and nesting source. The valley has been subject to severe wildfires since 2015, which have “knocked off” a lot of the already seasonal and cyclical resources – the eucalypts, for instance, won’t flower every year. “Consistent fire damage has impacted the site and after the Black Summer bushfires having burnt other contemporary breeding sites … there is a very urgent need to restore … the woodlands,” Peters said. “There are only three other key breeding sites in New South Wales: Capertee, Widden and Burragorang Valley, rich in white box, yellow box and iron bark woodlands. “We’re trying to kickstart the process because the piece of bush is really special – regent honeyeaters come back every three or four years when the right conditions hit, and the ironbark and mistletoe and eucalypts is flowering.” The natural processes for mistletoe to return to the forests, spread by birds like the mistletoe bird, would take too long to allow the honeyeater to repopulate. But by blitz planting the seeds, mistletoe could function as a habitat within three to four years. The program, which secured $50,000 in funding from Landcare Led Bushfire Recovery Grants, is training volunteers to source fruit from mistletoe clumps and prepare for arborists to plant them into the burnt areas. In the next phase, to kick off next month when the mistletoe fruits, arborists will climb up into the trees to feed the canopies, which will eventually grow to produce their own flowers and fruit. “Volunteers will help us plant the seeds low down as we walk around the forest, which will eventually attract mistletoe birds back to the area, but that wouldn’t help our regent honeyeaters as they only use mistletoe clumps that are high in the trees,” Peters said. “So, to get the seeds up into the canopy, we employ professional arborists to hoist the seeds up high to places where the birds will use them.” Next March, traditional owners will hold a two-way knowledge sharing workshop with local landholders, government staff and environmental volunteers, building on their collective knowledge of country, ecology, bush regeneration and land management. “The birds don’t eat fruit, but they love the blossom and nectar from the tubular flowers with their honeyeater bill … native mistletoe is really abundant, but, when it fruits, it doesn’t have a long shelf life and needs to be planted soon afterwards,” Peters said. “I’m hoping the process will teach other people how to handle the fruit so they can do it themselves, wipe the seeds on the underside of a branch and learn the tricks involved … the native mistletoe species is important to a whole range of birds and animals. “A gardener at home can, in the right circumstances, work out what host trees they can plant it into and create a super sharing ecosystem, producing fruit and flowers in a shorter time to tree planting.” Last month, Peters and her team released an initial 58 honeyeaters into the Kurri Kurri and Cessnock woodlands as the first of the mistletoe began to flower. Using radio transmitters, the team have been able to watch the birds pair up, build nests and teach honeyeaters the wild calls played to them in aviaries. “Hopefully chicks will be born knowing the area, and in another few years we’ll have a lot more habitat restored, and we’ll see them come back when the right conditions are there,” Peters said. “I’m so excited and thrilled they’re doing what they’re supposed to.”“One thing I will never forget is the line of ambulances coming in and coming out,” Spiros Vasilakis says as he recalls standing outside St Basil’s Home for the Aged in July last year, where his mother contracted Covid-19. “My mum had died at that point,” he recalls. “And to stand outside a place that was not giving family any answers, seeing residents taken away one after another in ambulances, about to die or already dead … I just remember feeling overwhelmed by sadness.” By that point, the facility in Fawkner was being overwhelmed by a second wave of the virus spreading throughout Victoria, particularly in aged care homes. St Basil’s would become the site of the state’s deadliest Covid outbreak and Vasilakis’s mother, Maria, 81, was among the victims. Throughout July and August, staff at St Basil’s were furloughed, either sick with the virus or quarantining after being exposed to it. Infection control protocols broke down, or weren’t implemented at all. An external agency, Aspen Medical, whose staff who did not know the residents or the unique care they each required, was called in to assist. They got infected, too. It took four days for the federal government to be alerted to the first case in St Basil’s – a non-profit residence run by the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia – in a staff member infected in early July. By then, it had taken hold. Throughout July and August, 94 residents and 94 staff members were infected. While 45 residents died from Covid-19, a further five died from neglect during the same period as the workforce succumbed to the virus and gaps were revealed in infection management. Vasilakis’s sadness turned to anger, an emotion that is still raw one-and-a-half years later. While there were 655 pandemic-related aged care deaths in Victoria in 2020, it is St Basil’s that will be the subject of a coronial inquest starting Monday before the coroner’s court of Victoria. It will run for four weeks, and Vasilakis will be among the 64 witnesses to give evidence. “St Basil’s was very unprepared and definitely not as proactive as some other aged care homes,” he says. “Staff weren’t wearing PPE until days after the first infection, and testing of the residents occurred seven days later. Apart from being unprepared, the management were also uncooperative when Aspen replaced the staff, which impacted on Aspen’s ability to care for the residents.” A test result came through on 17 July showing Maria was positive with the virus. Her family were told she was taken to the Royal Melbourne hospital, which was later corrected to being The Alfred. However, the hospital wanted to send her home because Maria’s symptoms were not severe and beds were sorely needed. “We asked the hospital to keep her there because we knew it might take several days for her to develop more symptoms,” Vasilakis says. “They insisted that she go back to St Basil’s and that she would get the same care there as she would at the hospital, which was absolutely, totally untrue. And my sister and I know this because we witnessed it. “There was no hospital equipment at the home, no equivalent care. Once, when we went to visit, my mum’s door was fully open despite her room being contaminated with Covid-19. And there was an old lady outside in the corridor walking up and down confused … There were no staff to help her or to stop her wandering into Covid areas. “At the same time, our mother was lying in her bed, completely unresponsive.” His mother died on 23 July. Two days later, a staff member called him and his sister to say their mother was alive and well at the facility. “We had to stop them in their tracks and say: ‘Hey, we know where our mum is. She’s not in your facility. She’s dead’.” During an August hearing held ahead of the inquest, the court heard the St Basil’s facility manager, Vicky Kos, and chairman, Kon Kontis, had declined to take part in investigations into the tragedy. They will be called to give evidence during the inquest’s final week. A Guardian Australia analysis of the 10 aged care homes worst affected by coronavirus in Victoria, conducted in September 2020, found that three were controlled by two large companies, which between them received more than $1.45bn in government funding over the past two years and paid out dividends to their shareholders totalling $77m. As the outbreak spread throughout dozens of aged care homes, pressure mounted on the aged care sector and federal government to reveal how some $13bn in taxpayer funding, along with millions in new funding for Covid-19, was being spent to benefit residents. The coroner will examine how St Basil’s management and staff prepared for Covid, their response when it hit, the timeliness of information provided to staff, residents and families, whether the state and federal governments coordinated their response to the outbreak appropriately, and the adequacy of the replacement workforce deployed to St Basil’s, among other issues. “Myself and the other families affected, we are still finding out things that we weren’t aware of and it makes us angry,” Vasilakis says. “The full truth has been hidden from us.” In 2012, a Victorian coroner recommended all aged-care homes appoint a designated infection control manager, develop a document outlining what must be done in the event of an infectious diseases outbreak, and alert the federal government of outbreaks immediately, following a gastroenteritis outbreak in a home that led to the deaths of four residents. Dr Sarah Russell, an aged care public health researcher who pushed for more transparency around the number of deaths occurring in aged care throughout the pandemic, says: “In my opinion, the horror story that unfolded at St Basil’s and elsewhere in aged care homes in Victoria could have been prevented if the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, and aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, had acted on those former coroner recommendations. “If governments would actually act on the some 21 inquiries and reports we have had into the sector, we wouldn’t be in this mess. My concern is after this most recent heartache, recommendations still won’t be acted upon. “People who lost loved ones during the second wave in aged care are suffering from post-traumatic stress and anger that comes from not having answers, on top of their grief. I just hope this inquest helps them to grieve and heal, and that some good will come out of it.”Cam Smith, an Australian researcher who monitors online far-right activity, had first noticed mention of QAnon in the local communities he watched as early as 2018. At the time, it looked like just a few “tiny meetup groups on Facebook” of around 20 people, he told me. “They were talking about, ‘Oh, we’ll meet up at like some pub in Oakleigh, and we’ll talk about this QAnon thing.’ And I didn’t think it was going to be that important.” Smith’s interest in the local movement was sparked again during the periods of heavy coronavirus public health restrictions in Melbourne, in 2020. To contain an outbreak of the virus within Melbourne’s public housing high-rise towers, local authorities had moved quickly – and controversially – to unilaterally lock down the residential communities in the buildings. In defiance of the restrictions, a group of QAnon believers drove nearly 2,000km from Queensland to protest against the events, filming themselves – and expounding their theories – as they went. Smith was curious, found a way into their Facebook groups and started tracking their conversations. What he noticed was that Facebook’s algorithm was assisting the spread of disturbing content. Smith found that even engagements with Australian Facebook groups that represented softer political positions – like a small anti-vaccine community – quickly pushed him towards extremist content. “The Facebook algorithm was like, ‘I know some other stuff you would be interested in!’” Smith says, and it drove users within Australia’s shallow Facebook pool towards political content that was much more hardcore. As had happened in Germany, QAnon seeded its Australian iteration through the networks of the wellness community. It was a bourgeois place in which those fearful of “precarity” came to seek comfort. Community values here lay in promoting opportunities for personal healing through “clean eating” and radical diets, alternative medicine, meditation, yoga and new age beliefs. It was also a place where anti-vax conspiracy theories had lurked for some time, and, as the pandemic progressed, became a ripe channel – online and off – for QAnon influence. A personal friend described to me how her first encounter with QAnon belief in Australia resulted from a “rabbit hole” opening for her on Facebook while she searched recommendations of organic food for her dog. Guardian columnist Brigid Delaney – whose 2017 book, Wellmania, charted her adventures through the wellness industry – wrote about the emerging alliance she saw between the wellness and conspiracist communities in a 2020 piece. Here she revisited a concept first explained in the 1990s by Michael Kelly in the New Yorker. Kelly had called it “fusion paranoia”, and described it as the process of strengthening and bonding that takes place between unalike movements when they recognise they share a core belief. During coronavirus lockdowns, wrote Delaney, this shared core belief was the idea that the virus was “a cover for a plot of totalitarian proportions, designed to stifle freedom of movement, assembly, speech and – to the horror of some in the wellness industry – enforce a program of mass vaccinations”. By 2021, those wanting to believe that QAnonism had mostly spared isolated Australia had an increasing amount of evidence to ignore. Australia’s experience of the coronavirus pandemic between 2020 and 2021 was dominated by a series of rolling lockdowns that trapped Australians at home with a lot of frustration – and the internet – for months at a time. The preponderance of anecdotal accounts detailing encounters with QAnon online could be written off as unrepresentative of what may have been going on in the broader community. Accumulating statistics, however, were a far harder boulder to shift. A 2020 paper released by the British-based thinktank the Institute for Strategic Dialogue revealed that, after the US, Britain and Canada, Australia was the fourth-largest producer of QAnon content worldwide. Australia created more QAnon content than Russia. Shockingly, this had been so even before the pandemic, with Australians sharing more than 105,000 QAnon tweets in the first nine months of the theory’s existence between October 2017 and June 2018. QAnon researcher Marc-André Argentino was monitoring QAnon activity on 8kun and recorded the presence of six Australian QAnon research boards there in January 2020, hosting 4,000 posts. By the start of 2021, the number of research boards had grown to 11. In a February 2021 feature journalist Michael McGowan noted that QAnon’s unique ability to cross-pollinate with other conspiracy theories had created fusion paranoia in Australia, not only with anti-vax communities but also anti-lockdown protesters and anti-migration and antisemitic tropes as well as the community of anti-5G mobile phone tower activists. This was not an inconsiderable number of Australians to influence. Polling from Essential Media revealed a shocking 12% of Australians believed 5G towers were being used to spread coronavirus. What lay behind all of these statistics of tweets and cross-pollination and web centipedes and influence were the sad true stories of Australians mourning the loss of loved ones to “the Qult” in places like Reddit’s r/QAnonCasualities community. Statistics could measure the size of QAnon’s transmission into Australia, but the unquantifiable anecdotes recorded its cost. QAnon cultism was not a phenomenon that just affected abstracted, faraway people on the internet. It was getting into families, and communities. It was hurting workplaces and friendship groups. Including mine. Meshelle and the cults My friend Meshelle – not her real name – had already had a negative encounter with another cult, many years before QAnon inserted itself in her life. She’d met her partner, Dave, straight out of high school in Brisbane. Married more than 20 years, they had two teenage kids and long-term jobs when Meshelle started to suffer depression. She mentioned to her hairdresser she’d begun seeing a therapist, and the hairdresser recommended a weekend hypnotherapy course that she swore had helped her stop smoking. Meshelle went on a weekend away with the course, and it was a transformative and positive experience. Paying for more and more courses with the same provider, she was swept into a new community that encouraged her to make changes in her life. She quit her job, left her marriage, moved into a place of her own and started her own hypnotherapy business with a guy from the course who lived interstate, with whom she’d begun a relationship while in the process of leaving Dave. Any doubts that nagged about her choices were suppressed, and her new community was eager to help her do so. Then, one day, she received a phone call from another woman interstate who had also started a hypnotherapy business with Meshelle’s new partner, with whom she was also in a relationship. The woman had stumbled upon an intimate email the man was in the process of sending to Meshelle. Between the two horrified women, they eventually discovered that the partner they shared was sharing himself with no less than 21 other women at the same time. The dam of Meshelle’s suppressed doubts burst. She was a smart, capable woman but she had been vulnerable to a need for positivity and encouragement, and she realised she’d been sucked into a cult. She abandoned the parallel reality she’d joined, reunited with Dave, and moved back into the family home. Her self-remonstrations were intense. Together again, Meshelle and Dave joined a community yoga class, and it was here she had her second experience with a cult. When the couple who ran the classes split up, the yogi husband was left behind and, during the pandemic, went “full QAnon”. Meshelle, Dave and the other students found themselves on the end of an increasing barrage of Facebook posts and other communications insisting that rejecting the conspiracy theory was rejecting yoga itself. People in the class who knew a little of Meshelle’s background came to her for advice. “They couldn’t believe somebody that they respected had gone off the planet,” she says. “They were really worried, and people were coming to me distraught; he was tearing strips off them.” Meshelle stood up to the yogi on Facebook and tried to reach out to him privately. He repeated QAnon stories to her about paedophiles, kids in tunnels under New York City, and how “Hillary Clinton is actually in jail and that’s a body double that’s walking around”. She realised there was no bringing him back when he started on the “fucking lizard people”. The experience for Meshelle was triggering, she says, not only because of the depth and extremity of the yogi’s new beliefs. It was the women from the yoga class she watched fall in behind him, agreeing about Hillary Clinton and believing in the “lizard people”. The insecurity in these women she recognised too well. A feeling of precarity. A need to find community and to connect. She and Dave had left the class, but in their small suburban community Meshelle realised she was being frozen out by the class members who remained behind. They dropped their eyes and went silent when she entered the cafe that they gathered at. “I’ve lost friends, definitely,” Meshelle says. She had been shunned. This is an edited extract from QAnon and On: A Short and Shocking History of Internet Conspiracy Cults by Van Badham, published by Hardie Grant on Wednesday 17 November.As high school students around the nation began their exams this week, I found in a box the exam papers that I kept from when I did year 12 in 1988. In an act that some thought akin to violence, I posted scans of them on social media, forcing people to confront the horrors of their time sweating over questions that seemed to decide their fate. The pink question sheets now mostly serve as evidence that as a 16-year-old, I didn’t have a bloody clue about what I was doing. The English exam, which was how I spent a pleasant five hours on Monday 7 November 1988, involved choosing a question relating to two core texts that were set. Our class at Mannum High always did Thomas Hardy, and while I lobbied for a change to Charles Dickens, we ended up reading The Mayor of Casterbridge and Tess of the D’Urbervilles. I know this because in my exam booklet I have underlined the two novels as though I needed to make sure I didn’t accidentally write about George Eliot instead. And in what must have involved some fancy exam technique, I also circled what I thought were key phrases in the question about power and dignity (apparently, I thought “seem to you” was important). Alas, I spent so much time doing this I ignored the question below where you had to imagine yourself a character from the novels – something which much better suited my skill set. At least I was on sturdier ground in the afternoon’s session involving creative writing. One topic was to write a personal narrative looking back at a life-changing moment. I recall thinking that the poor examiners would be so bored reading about the dull lives of year 12 students that I would instead make up a new life and write from the perspective of the West German ambassador to the UN looking back at the moment he fled East Berlin through a tunnel. The Berlin Wall was on my mind a bit because I also studied German. My German was, as they say, nicht sehr gut. If I am honest, I peaked in year 8 when the class translated 99 Luftballons. But as a politics nut I was completely obsessed with the cold war and post-second world war Germany. So of course when one of the questions in the paper asked to give the main reasons for the building of the Berlin Wall, I ignored it and answered another. This was a bit of a pattern of mine. In legal studies that year another student and I researched the history of the Australian constitution and the creation of our governmental system. We went as deep into it as you could, writing much more than was needed. So, when confronted with the question to “discuss the establishment and operation of the three institutions of government under the Commonwealth Constitution” I of course answered another question on judge-made law that I knew barely anything about. At least this was not an issue for my physics exam. Such was my knowledge of the subject that it made no difference which questions I answered – I knew nothing about any of them. I chose physics because the dirty secret was the year 12 exam each year used a series of rotating questions, and so it was an easy one to prepare for. And then in 1988 they used new questions and I was well and truly stuffed. “Write an essay about the wave nature of matter”? I could well have answered, “what does it matter if nature likes to wave”, such was my grasp of the subject. My economics exam is lost to time, as we had to hand in the questions sheet as well. But I did keep my notes and it seems Keynes was involved in some way. My year 12 exams were not the worst I ever experienced – try an honours microeconomics exam for pure terror – but given they were worth 50% they did feel incredibly important to my life. In the end I bombed out – fortunately Flinders University had just established a bachelor of economics with a weirdly low entry score and I snuck in. By the time I completed my honours year, my year 12 score would not have been good enough to get me into the degree. So did it all matter in the end? As for most of us, not really. And yet, that is little solace for those in the midst of the stressful rite of passage that is exam week. To those students I can only say that tougher tests will come your way, and you too might be able one day to look back and realise that you still have no idea what the heck all that gibberish in the physics exam was about. Your results will most likely deliver neither lifetime glory nor destruction.It’s fair to say the people in the northern rivers of New South Wales generally do not like being told what to do by the government. In a region with a free-thinking, anti-authoritarian reputation, and a long history of anti-vaccination sentiment, the requirement to get the Covid jab for work or leisure purposes was never going to find a warm welcome. “I’ve never been vaccinated in my life but I decided I needed to do it because I’m a film-maker and I need to travel a lot,” Jahvis Loveday says. “I just feel it sucks that we have to be forced to do it, but it’s a different world.” There is simmering anger and a sense of weary resignation as people submit to the vaccination. The issue continues to divide families and strain friendships. Finding locals willing to openly declare they have been vaccinated is a challenge. Yet despite the antipathy, the drive to get the population vaccinated is gathering momentum. As of 7 November, 85.5% of Byron shire residents had received their first dose and 75% their second. The numbers are similar in the Tweed shire where first-dose vaccination stands at 89.8% and second dose at 80.1%. Dr Robyn O’Grady, who has been working as a GP in Byron Bay and Suffolk Park since 2017, hopes people are thinking about the vulnerable in the community and the lack of hospital beds in the region. “I guess there is an element of [vaccination] being mandated, but we do mandate for health reasons all the time. Smoking, for example,” she says. “And a lot of people are moving here during Covid-19 so I think there’s a change here in perspective around vaccinating.” Mayoral candidate Asren Pugh says people’s perception of the Byron shire as a vaccine-resistant area is “overblown”, with a loud minority exaggerating the extent of anti-vaccination sentiment. “What we’ve seen with Covid-19 is that there are a whole lot of other things in the equation in making a decision – the actual real danger that you or family and friends might get sick – and the various rules and mandates are just pushing people over the line,” he says. “Lots of people reacted strongly when the mandate came in and have since come around because, ultimately, you can be as outraged as you like but there’s a point when there are consequences.” ‘I want to keep my job’ For some, the potential consequences include losing their job, including Sonya Will, who works in aged and dementia care. She lives with two unvaccinated people and says she is “still very much in their camp about it”. “I was really, really annoyed at first, but now I’ve just resigned myself to it,” she says. “It’s what has to be done because I want to live my life and be free. I just wanted to have a choice and it was purely because I want to keep my job. I love my job; I’ve had it for 13 years and I didn’t want to lose it.” Max Faulkner is equally explicit about why he is getting the vaccine. “Coercion. All the reasons they are making you get it: travel, work, trying to get interstate”, he says through his well-fitted mask. “I don’t really have any faith in [the government] running anything and I don’t feel they’re being fair. It seems quite tyrannical. If they’d just explained things better, people would have done it. Now they’re just forcing people and there’s confusion that goes along with everything. Nothing has been clear from the get-go.” Edan Agarom, who has spent time in lockdown in Melbourne, has a more prosaic reason. “I just want to go to the pub,” he says. “It’s been months – I just want a beer. I know that for a lot of people it’s a difficult decision and a tough dilemma [to get vaccinated] but the way that things are looking right now, we’re living in a new world and it’s a tough sacrifice.” O’Grady says medical professionals in the area have been able to alleviate the fears of many people who have been misinformed about the vaccine. Steve Thomas, who lives in the Mullumbimby hinterland, was initially reluctant because he was hearing the vaccines were “unsafe”. “I soon learned that it wasn’t as bad as they were projecting there for a while,” he says. “And a lot of smart people I knew were doing it. Just do your research and have a little bit of trust.” However, he admits he is selective about who in the community he tells. ‘It’s a choice between vaccine or Covid-19’ Backpackers Anthony and Thomas went to a pop-up clinic run by NSW Health at the surf club, because they are returning to northern France in a month and need to be vaccinated for the journey. Mel was there because her family is in Queensland and she wants to visit them for Christmas. Like Sonya, florist Ochre loves her job and says she has to be vaccinated to keep it, despite growing up in a “pretty alternative” family and never having vaccines. Massage therapist Kat says she hadn’t felt the need to be vaccinated and was “dragging her feet”. “In this area, we were in a nice bubble so it didn’t seem incredibly pressing,” she says. “It wasn’t that I was anti-vax; I was more of a fence-sitter. I was waiting for more data and I felt there was no need to rush out and get [vaccinated]. It just didn’t seem real – obviously it was – but a lot of people in this area didn’t have it personally affecting them so they didn’t feel a huge drive.” But when the government announced mandates and she needed to be vaccinated for her work, Kat just went out and did it. As they head into the clinic, Steve and his friend Graham say: “Life’s too hard without it now; it’s just become too difficult not to [be vaccinated]. “It shouldn’t have got to the stage where you’ve become an anti-vaxxer just because you ask questions,” Steve says. “It’s OK to ask questions. It’s OK to ask, ‘what is it?’ It just means you want to be informed.” O’Grady is urging those who are still unsure to come forward and talk about vaccination with their GP. “I think the important thing for people to realise is that as we open up, it’s not a choice between vaccine or no vaccine,” she says. “It’s a choice between vaccine or Covid-19.”“It was 2am when my alarm went off. I popped my dressing gown over my nightie and slipped some shoes on. In one hand I held a torch and in the other I wheeled my bin out to the curb as quietly as I could and then headed back to bed.” When my mum realised that the boy who lived next door to her was toppling her bins each collection night, this became a weekly routine. For months. In her eyes avoidance was better than directly approaching him or his parents about the issue. Like my mum, many Australians face issues with their neighbours at some stage in their life. A conflict between neighbours’ survey conducted by Relationships Australia in 2019 found that more than 60% of women and 68% of men had experienced it. Lawyer Chris Stone from South Australia’s legal aid agency says that their agency receives “more than 7,000 inquiries each year regarding neighbourhood disputes”. The issues are wide ranging. Stone said last year alone, they “handled 5,000 inquiries about fences and 1,500 inquiries about trees. We also had 200 inquiries about problems regarding dog laws and neighbourhood noise.” While the majority of neighbourly disputes are minor, there are sometimes more serious issues reported. Jill Wilson, volunteer development manager at Community Information and Support Victoria (CISVic), the peak body representing local community information and support services, including housing, says that they often “support people experiencing harassment and conflict with neighbours, particularly in high density homes or rooming house, public housing and caravan parks”. Formal mechanisms for handling the majority of disputes with your neighbours vary slightly between each state and territory – and depend on the issue at hand – but there are steps that can be taken before official help is sought. 1. Avoid it It turns out, my mother’s 2am escapades may well have been the right move. Avoiding or preventing any potential issues is a rule of thumb with neighbours, because it is much simpler than trying to resolve them. This often begins with thinking courteously about your own choices. For example, a spokesperson for the Queensland Department of Justice and Attorney General suggests avoiding disputes with your neighbours about trees by considering “carefully about the trees and shrubs you are planting; and if they may become a problem in the future”. If you are contemplating planting something that may result in later issues, they suggest you “discuss the potential issue with your neighbour” before you go ahead. 2. Talk it out If the train has already left the station, Stone says that from a legal standpoint “we recommend they start by constructively raising the matter with their neighbour. We suggest they adopt a friendly approach and remain mindful of the neighbour’s perspective. This is often preferable to kicking things off with a lawyer’s letter of demand.” Nick Tebbey, national executive officer of Relationships Australia echoes this, suggesting that it is better to get on to the issue sooner rather than later. “Minor things left to fester can create a feeling of distrust and often makes the situation worse.” Tebbey suggests it’s best to have this conversation face to face, rather than via a letter or text message – written communication can be misconstrued, causing further issues. So how exactly do you have this conversation? The Queensland Department of Justice suggests, “often a friendly conversation is all that is needed to get the ball rolling”. They recommend letting the neighbour know that you want to speak with them, then arranging a mutually convenient time and place to do so. Before your meeting, take some time to think carefully about what you want to say, and how you will say it. 3. Get it in writing “When you and your neighbour agree on a solution, get it in writing,” the Queensland Department of Justice and Attorney General suggests. They also propose some good resolutions for common disputes. Issues over fencing Consider the type of fence already in the area and what’s considered “standard”. Then, note down your concerns with the current situation, and what your needs are. Finally, obtain a few quotes for different solutions that would meet those needs. Noise issues Keep a record of when the noise occurs, how often, what else might be happening at that time. Is it worse or better at different times? What impact does it have on you (eg, disturbed sleep)? Overgrown grass/trees Become familiar with your responsibilities as a tree keeper and neighbour (this information can be obtained online and through your local council). Also consider the needs of your neighbour, and their practical ability to address your concerns. Issues with neighbours in high density housing Consult the body corporate or housing service relevant to you, to clarify your obligations and to be clear on how they can assist you. It can also be helpful to consider your role as a neighbour, and the environment. Think about what can be changed and what cannot, the needs of your neighbours, their ability to resolve your concerns, and what you can do for yourself to reduce the impact of living in a high-density area. 4. Seek mediation “If the matter remains unresolved, homeowners may consider going to a community mediation service that helps people settle disagreements without court involvement,” says Stone. This is often cheaper, easier and quicker than taking legal action and, in many cases, the process is free. “Overall, about 90% of Dispute Resolution Centre community mediations result in an agreement between the parties,” says the Queensland Department of Justice and Attorney General. Mediation services vary between each state and territory. Some are government run, while others are provided by NGOs, charities or businesses: Queensland, Victoria, NSW, South Australia, ACT, Western Australia, Northern Territory, Tasmania. 5. Legal action Usually, the final step in resolving a dispute with a neighbour is legal action, but it should generally only be considered as a last resort. “Lawyers are a valuable option in cases where one of the neighbours refuses to engage in discussions or negotiations. [But] people should bear in mind that they might have to live as neighbours for some time,” says Stone. If this avenue is pursued, the legal authority will ultimately make a legally binding decision about the issue, and enforce this through the courts. Unlike mediation, legal action can be very expensive. The exception If there is ever an issue that threatens your health and safety, including incidents of violence or intimidation, Tebbey says to contact the relevant authority or support organisation without delay. “Disputes with your neighbour can be detrimental to all aspects of your life. If this happens, reach out for help or professional assistance.”Former foreign secretaries from both Labour and the Tories have joined calls for Britain to repay a £400m debt to Iran that could end the detention of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe. Both Malcolm Rifkind and Jack Straw said that paying the money, relating to the outstanding debt, owed after a cancelled contract for 1,500 Chieftain tanks, could be done without breaching sanctions on Iran or angering western allies. Their plea comes days after Jeremy Hunt, another former foreign secretary, called for the money to be paid. Rifkind said that there was no dispute that the sum is due to Iran and that the main problem has been staying in line with international sanctions. “I find it difficult to believe that there is not some way through this particular problem,” he said. “I would very much hope that a way through this can be found. We all know what the Iranians are doing and why they’re doing it. They do it not just in relation to Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, but to many others – taking hostages for political purposes. It’s very distasteful having to deal with that. “I would be more despondent if there was a dispute about whether the debt is due in the first place. If that was in dispute, then, like anybody else, I would be very reluctant to give into that kind of blackmail. But the issue is whether there’s a procedure that can enable us to transfer the funds. And it ought to be possible to find a way through that.” Jack Straw, the former Labour foreign secretary, said: “The money should have been paid back years ago. I know for certain that in practice, there is no direct impediment on it being paid. There is no question in my mind, I can’t speak for anybody else, that it’s caught up in the issue of Nazanin’s release.” It has also emerged that in a 2014 Commons debate, Ben Wallace, the current defence secretary, described the unpaid debt as “not only a sorry story, but un-British in that the process … has been marred by double dealing and obfuscation”. However, some sources who had dealt with the issue of the debt over the years warned that there were genuine complications in repaying it. “There is no dispute that this money belongs to Iran,” said a source. “It has been held in a court escrow account for a long time. The questions are around exactly how much the sum due is (it has 40 years of interest and various other elements that have to be calculated) and how it could lawfully be transferred.” They cited concerns that the money could end up in the hands of those under sanctions, fears about the US’s reaction to the money being paid, the moral issues in handing money to a regime funding terrorism in the region and the practical issues of finding a bank willing to hand over the money, given the possible US reaction.Surrounded by brightly painted pebbles, posters and paintings calling for Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s release, Richard Ratcliffe brought his 21-day hunger strike to an end on Saturday, clinging on to hope his actions have made a difference to his wife’s fate. He walked away from his makeshift camp outside the Foreign and Commonwealth Office as he wanted to: not in an ambulance but with his head held high – at the last possible moment there was a chance he could reverse the damage he has inflicted on his body. Huddled in a fleece in front of his pop-up tent outside the Foreign Office, his cheeks red from the cold, and looking a decade older than his 46 years, Ratcliffe confessed he had spent Friday night racked with pain and dizzy spells. “My feet were really cold, like hurting cold,” he said. He took this as a “warning sign” that his body was struggling to keep warm and was beginning to make choices about which parts to shut down. He took medical advice and spoke to his wife on Friday night, who, over the phone, begged him to consider stopping. Minutes before he ended the strike early on Saturday afternoon, he said: “My job is to bring Nazanin home, but it’s also to keep a home here, with our daughter Gabriella, for her to come back to. And that is not served by gung-ho stubborn gestures which take things to the bitter end.” He began his strike fearing that Zaghari-Ratcliffe was about to imminently be returned to a prison in Tehran for another year. Zaghari-Ratcliffe, a British-Iranian aid worker who has already spent five years imprisoned in Iran on spying charges she has always denied, recently lost her appeal against new propaganda charges brought against her by the Iranian regime and is currently living at her parents’ home in Tehran. Each day, she wakes terrified she will be sent back behind bars for crimes she never committed. “Formally, she’ll get a summons to prison at any point but I think being here has bought us some time – a couple of months maybe,” he told a member of the public who stopped by on Saturday morning to see how he was. She tells him, tearfully: “I’m so proud of you.” She was not alone. The Observer spent Saturday morning by her husband’s side, and every five minutes he was interrupted by another well-wisher bringing him flowers, a cup of tea, a candle – or simply to express their support. “I’ve come to shake your hand, mate,” a young man with red hair told him. “I felt the need to come.” An elderly man, who looked as if he was in his early 90s, jumped lithely off his bicycle to tell Ratcliffe if he was a praying man, he would be praying: “Don’t damage yourself.” He added: “Good luck to you.” It was clear, each time, that these acts of “random kindness” lifted his spirits. “People have been coming from all walks of life, with different interests and different politics, but all united against injustice,” he said. In his final speech, to a crowd of 40 people who had come to witness the last minutes of his strike, he spoke movingly about the many acts of care and support from members of the public that had kept him going over the past three weeks. “It’s always been important to me that Nazanin knows that. For all the cruelty and all the horrible stuff that has happened, there’s a world of kindness, that has seen our injustice and walks alongside us.” Seven-year-old daughter Gabriella joined her father for the final moments of his protest, and the relief was visible on his face as he gave her a hug and kiss, knowing his ordeal was about to end. Throughout the strike, he has been drinking peppermint tea and taking key vitamins and electrolytes with water. His doctor, Lim Jones, hopes that this has made the hunger strike “as safe as it can possibly be” but he will only know what effect it has had on Ratcliffe’s muscles and organs after he is assessed in hospital. Even then, the danger will not have passed. “Refeeding after a hunger strike is an issue. If you get that wrong, there can be very significant organ damage that happens at a later date. So his food intake will need to be quite carefully monitored and planned,” Jones said. In the final hours of the strike, Ratcliffe was in good spirits but spoke more slowly than he usually does, as though he was finding it hard to compose his thoughts. Most of the time, he rested in a chair but when he stood up and walked about, his trousers were loose and baggy, hanging off him: “When I go for a shower and I look in the mirror, I can see that I’m a lot scrawnier.” Just after he said this, he was interrupted by a band of 15 female army cadets – en route to a Remembrance weekend war widows’ march past the nearby Cenotaph – who stopped by to express their solidarity with his cause. In a rather surreal moment, wearing smart brown uniforms, the teenagers stood behind his chair and sang Yellow Submarine, and then a “school song” about fortitude in the face of discouragement. “We just wanted to wish you all the very best,” their commanding officer told Ratcliffe, who looked deeply touched. Throughout the strike, Gabriella was being cared for at his home in London by relatives. She stopped by regularly to see him and give him “big, big cuddles” – as well as to scold him for growing a scratchy beard. Over the past few days, she’s been “increasingly” asking him when he was coming home, he said, and that has been preying on his mind. “She needs me. But it’s also been such a strain on my mum, dad and my sister.” Fears about his welfare have also been taking its toll on Zaghari-Ratcliffe in Iran, and she has been obsessively checking the weather in London, he said. “Definitely, as the days have gone on, I’ve felt the cold more.” Although Ratcliffe is hopeful that the protest has postponed his wife’s return to prison, he is bleak about her overall prospects and fears she will not be home for at least a year. “Loads” of politicians have been to visit him, he said, although far fewer Conservative MPs have come compared with his previous hunger strike outside the Iranian embassy. “Very few Conservatives have come here, with some notable exceptions like Jeremy Hunt and some backbenchers.”Unlike every single member of the public and the many celebrities who have visited him, the Conservatives who have come have not wanted to have their photos taken with Ratcliffe either. “I’m struck by how few Conservatives we have had, given how many constituents have written to their MPs.” He speculates about whether this is because of a “steer from above” by Boris Johnson. “Why have so few of his party come down to visit when two years ago, many did? That feels like an understanding that the boss wouldn’t be happy, if not explicit orders.” Johnson himself has not engaged at all with the protest, which Ratcliffe thinks is a “conspicuous dereliction of duty”. “That he’s hidden away, in the circumstances, I find remarkable.” He started taking photos of himself outside 10 Downing Street each day, “to remind him and remind the public that it’s his responsibility to get Nazanin home”. As he left the camp in a car heading straight for hospital, it was with the heavy knowledge that the breakthrough he was hoping for when he started the strike has not materialised. But Ratcliffe’s resolve to bring his wife home has never been stronger: “We need to fight another day. And we will.”A golden glow lit up this dark night in south-west London, and not all of it was down to the visitors’ distinctive jerseys. England have had bigger victories over Australia but a display of twinkling promise from their new fly-half Marcus Smith and an eighth successive red rose win in this fixture since 2016 sent the majority of the crowd away optimistic about the home side’s medium-term future. Eddie Jones always enjoys getting one over on his former employers and, given the Covid-19 disruption on the eve of the game, this result will give him as much pleasure as any. After Ireland’s fine effort against New Zealand it would have been instructive to see the All Blacks on English turf this week, but the world champion Springboks will still be a useful barometer of the true autumnal worth of Jones’s reshaped side. If there is still a nagging suspicion that playing a couple more players in their best positions would make a massive difference, Smith can clearly be his country’s first-choice No 10 for many years. The Harlequin man’s first completed pass created a fine score for the man of the match, Freddie Steward, after just seven minutes, and despite some muscular attention from the Wallaby midfield he was a consistently lively presence. Henry Slade, deployed largely in the back field but given licence to roam, had a conspicuous first 40 minutes while Kyle Sinckler, Courtney Lawes and Tom Curry all worked their dark blue socks off. Five penalties from Owen Farrell was also a decent return, tarnished only by the sight of the skipper limping off with an ankle problem with 12 minutes left. It was certainly a visually striking occasion, with the RFU having commissioned a pre-match sound and light show far removed from the regimental bandsmen of yore. Amid the searchlights and fireworks England were led out by Maro Itoje, winning his 50th cap on a stage that would have caused even his new celebrity mate Jay-Z to raise an admiring eyebrow. Not everything remained as dazzling once the game kicked off, but the mood was still reminiscent, for those of a certain vintage, of another significant England contest with Australia at Twickenham in 1988, when England had just appointed a marketable new captain in Will Carling and a 28-19 victory felt like the start of a bright new era. A distinct sense of expectancy certainly hung in the air and Smith, who had looked encouragingly sharp in the warm-up, did not waste time making his mark. With Farrell inside him he received the ball at second receiver but, in theory, the Wallaby defence had most bases covered. They reckoned without Smith’s ability to manipulate the space in front of him, a perfectly timed little double pump pass to the thundering Steward giving the big full-back the chance to swerve past the cover and register his first Test try. The signs were distinctly ominous for an Australia side that never really threatened the home tryline. After a flurry of penalties from Farrell and James O’Connor, England were only denied another eye-catching score when Jamie George, put away by a neat Lawes pass, was stopped in front of the posts by an illegal shoulder from winger Tom Wright. It cost Wright 10 minutes in the sin-bin and in his absence the traffic was virtually all one way. Soon afterwards the heavily-involved George was only denied a try by a desperate late intervention from Nic White and, in most respects, the Wallabies were hanging on for dear life. The final penalty count of 18 to nine against the visitors reflected the balance of the contest and England, 16-12 up at the interval, should have been much further ahead. Even the free-running Slade, in acres of space with Jonny May outside him, will look back and reflect that England did not take all the chances they carved out, with a quick tap effort by Ben Youngs also ruled out. Australia, nevertheless, would have trotted in at half time proud of the way they had scrambled and dug in. They were disappointing in Scotland and their two wins over South Africa this year merely reinforced the importance of having all their best players available. Samu Kerevi would have made a difference and, with two of their frontline props injured, much rested on the shoulders of James Slipper, playing his first Test at tight-head since 2012. Given this was his 113th Test, that is a long old time between drinks, but this was a career coming full circle. On his debut Slipper was required to come off the bench and prop on both sides of the scrum against dominant English opposition and this was a definite case of deja vu. With Allan Alaalatoa and Taniela Tupou both recovering from head injuries and Ollie Hoskins of London Irish only a late addition to the squad, his 67 minutes on the field amounted to another significant display of character. Even after the equally defiant Angus Bell was shown a 48th minute yellow card for upending Lawes, it was a similarly stubborn story. Australia could have closed to within a point at 19-18 had a penalty against Lawes not been reversed for a seatbelt tackle by Pete Samu, but Farrell’s fifth penalty with 15 minutes left and a 73rd minute three-pointer from Smith soothed any fluttering English nerves before a galloping last minute score from Jamie Blamire, the replacement hooker’s fourth try in as many Tests, finally raised the roof.Player ratings. Marcus Smith is ruddy good. More wins is the plan for Jones. Here’s the full match report Eddie Jones is offering his thoughts: “Pleased that we stuck at it, we’ve had a tough week with the COVID cases. Farrell and Smith are only just beginning, they’ll improve every time they play together and the first try was great. We knew today if we played with enough consistency and intensity that we’d have the edge in the last twenty minutes. “We’re delighted to be playing Springboks next, we want to go into the Six Nations with a South African scalp” “Not a great weekend for the trans Tasman teams, Lee” says Thomas Callaghan. You’re bang on, Thomas. However, at least NZ looked like a functioning rugby team earlier today, unlike Australia who looked like a collection of individuals who had accidentally wandered into a flashmob. Earlier this afternoon, Ireland had a victory for the scrapbook. Read all about it here. Owen Farrell, England captain is having a word. “We did what we need to do. A game against Aus is always a massive game, and we’ll take what we did today but we know we need to be a lot better. We want this team to play to all its strengths and we’ll build on that this week ahead of South Africa” Freddie Steward, player of the match is here: “It’s an incredible experience to play here, the stuff of dreams. For my try Marcus put me through a gap and it was elation as I dived over the line. It’s so good being in camp and playing alongside the likes of Maro, Faz and the others” Such a towering presence today, but up close looks very much the young fella he is. Well played. That’s the last act of the match and it’s a very convincing win for England. 80 mins. Australia have one last attack, with Ikitau prominent in the England have, but Simmonds rips the ball, pelts up the left touchline and pops inside to Blamire who runs it in from thirty metres. A lovely moment for the substitute hooker. Smith curls the extras from out wide. 77 mins. In a moment that sums up the entire Australian second half, Beale takes the ball in the line, does a shimmy, completely misses the ball with his boot when attempting a grubber, then a player in front of him plays the ball and gives away a penalty. You couldn’t write it. England subs. Raffi Quirke, Sale’s livewire teenage scrum-half is on for Ben Youngs. Trevor Davison replaces Bevan Rodd. Charlie Ewels for Johnny Hill Sam Simmonds in for Courtney Lawes Aus Subs. Tom Robertson for Angus Bell Tate McDermott for Nic White Noah Lolesio for James O’Connor 72 mins. Marcus Smith takes over kicking duties and calmly finds the middle of the posts after Nic White is penalised for an obstructing run. 70 mins. Meet the new hooker, same as the old hooker for Australia as Latu chucks the ball over his jumper at their latest lineout in a decent position. England clear the ball miles and Beale is engulfed by the white shirts on the chase, but the gold defence do enough to allow White to clear. 68 mins. This game has degenerated into people dropping things or kicking things between set pieces. At the latest scrum, England push the Wallaby pack back for miles. Ollie Hoskins is on for James Slipper Owen Farrell limps off, replaced by Max Malins. Subs: Tolu Latu replaces Folau Fainga’a for Australia, and Tom Wright is off for Izaia Perese For England, Dombrandt is permanently on for Underhill, two minutes after Underhill replaced Dombrandt. Still with me? 64 mins. Farrell adds three more after Australia cave in at a scrum. Australia sub: Will Skelton replaces Rory Arnold. England: Underhill returns to the field, Dombrandt off. 61 mins. From the latest penalty conceded by Australia, England take the scrum, which perhaps says much about Jamie Blamire’s throwing. Unfortunately the home pack are penalised for collapsing before Fainga’a cocks up his throw on the Wallaby lineout. Elite level, this. 58 mins. For a moment it looks like Australia have a penalty in the England half after Lawes moved too many times on the floor in the tackle, but the ref spots a seatbelt tackle on the England man in the build up and reverses the pen. Farrell then misses touch. A truly exceptional, top tier passage of play. 56 mins. Dombrandt opens his legs and carries the ball for twenty metres in behind the line, but a huge counter-ruck from the Wallabies wins the ball back. White feeds Paisami who steps inside and runs a fifty metres. He’s hauled down by Farrell and loose breakdown action means England can clear. Pete Samu is in for the injured Michael Hooper. 53 mins. Blamire misses Lawes in the lineout, albeit not by much. Hooper runs away with it, but he’s isolated and Itoje clamps on to win a penalty for the Wallaby captain not releasing. Farrell tees it up, but drifts it wide of the posts. 49 mins. Farrell strokes it over. Alex Dombrandt is on as Sam Underhill has gone off for a head injury assessment. 48 mins. The home side are camped in the Australia 22, the ball being recycled quickly and probing attacks causing problems in the Wallaby defence. In back play Bell lifts Lawes’s legs beyond the horizontal and drops him. Easy decision for the ref. 46 mins. The Wallabies have the ball robbed by Jonny Hill as they try to form a maul at their own lineout in their own half. Hill drives to the line and with help is rumbled over, but the Aus defence to enough to hold the ball up. 44 mins. Jamie Blamire’s nerves are tested on his first throw, and the results of the test are very much not straight. Australia waste no time in grabbing possession from the free kick and clearing their lines. 42 mins. Maro Itoje has his hands on the ground beyond the ruck, presenting an early chance for points to James O’Connor. A chance he grabs and stick through the posts. England receive the restart and we’re back in play. Half time change for England. Jamie George was limping late in the first half and he’s not returned, replaced by Jamie Blamire. Half time musings. England’s attack is looking pretty good, lots of mixing up of positions with Farrell and Smith swapping regularly, plus Tuilagi frequently off his wing and Steward up into the line. Evidence of Martin Gleeson’s influence, perhaps? Having said that, they could do with more points to show for their better performance. Australia are in this however, with only their own poor discipline stymying their attacking platforms, and when they get some territory England are not handling it as well as they should. Hence it there’s only four points in it. But, I feel the longer the game goes on like this, the more the home side are likely to pull slowly away. PEEE-EEE-EEEP! That’s yer lot for this half 39 mins. O’Connor does the necessary. Tom Wright is back on. 38 mins. In something of a turnaround from the last scrum, James Slipper gives it the full pasty and drives through Bevan Rodd to win a Wallaby penalty. That will boost his and and the Aussie pack’s confidence. England are then offside in the next phase of play and it’s kickable. If O’Connor nails this, then the score will be 3-3 in the Tom Wright sin-bin period. A great result for the visitors. 35 mins. The England pack catch and drive from the lineout and Jamie George breaks off but as he falls over the line to score Nic White comes in late from behind and punches the ball from his grasp. Outstanding last ditch defence from the Aussie scrum-half! 33 mins. Maro Itoje rips the ball in a tackle to set up a constructive half-dozen phases from England that takes them up into the Australia half. Under pressure out wide Nic White is penalised for a seatbelt tackle on Tom Curry. The Wallabies are penalised again - they are already up to 10. 30 mins. Once all that is over, Wright sits himself down and Farrell kicks the points. 29 mins. Jamie George is in behind into open pasture thanks to a pop pass from Lawes in midfield. He’s stopped by Beale and Tom Wright but the ref wants to take a look as Wright looks like he’s thrown his shoulder into the England hooker’s head. There’s lots of panto noises from the Twickenham crowd as the replays are shown, but Ref Peyper believes wright was passive, so no high level of danger. Yellow card. 26 mins. Australia are consistently giving away unforced penalties when in possession, which is very frustrating as they are in this when they hold the ball. This time it’s Fainga’a off his feet at the breakdown. England can do little from the penalty lineout as Paisami flew out of the line and smote Smith into knocking on. 24 mins. James Slipper is playing on the wrong side of the scrum and in the latest set-piece he’s driven to the ground for an England penalty. The home side goes full hands off first phase from the lineout and for split second it looks like May could be in, but Beale shepherds him well and bumps him into touch. 21 mins. Australia have some big carries in the England half through Leota and Valetini. As the ball comes to the right Beale can’t find Hooper out wide as he has to hoop a big pass over Owen Farrell who is lazily running back in an offside position. It’s yet another penalty with discipline is poor on both sides, and it’s O’Connor’s turn to take advantage. 18 mins. Another England lineout on the Wallaby 22 and it’s another first phase move to Tuilagi busting up in midfield. Paisami stops him but Hooper is too keen at the breakdown and Farrell takes the kicking opportunity. 15 mins. After the restart, Michael Hooper decides it’s time to do some Michael Hoopering and wins a penalty for his side at the breakdown. It’s in range and O’Connor nails it. 13 mins. The ball is won cleanly off the top of the lineout, and England work it to Tuilagi who despite his wing selection is very active in midfield in defence and attack so far. Smith is conducting confidently from 10 and eventually Australia are offside. Farrell calls for the tee and extends the lead. 10 mins. Rob Leota obstructs a kick chase and England have a lineout on the Australia 22 from the penalty. Sinckler is down receiving some treatment, but it looks like he can run it off. 8 mins. England have a free kick from the scrum which Youngs taps early. The ball goes right then back left for Marcus Smith to hold then delay-pop a pass to Steward joining the line who nips around Beale to score. Farrell converts 7 mins. Freddie Steward claims a high ball and Nick Mullins on comms calls him an ‘air Steward’, which causes something inside my soul to shrivel up and die. When I’m over that, there’s a knock on from Australia as they attempt to get amongst England’s attack. 4 mins. A few phases from Australia gain little territory and the ball is sent up in the air again. It looks like Slade has fielded it cleanly, but Bevan Rodd is penalised for a blocking run. It’s in O’Connor’s range and he slots it. 2 mins. Ball in play for a full two minutes, but mostly a lot of kicks back and forth probing for position with no obvious winner. Eventually May puts it out around halfway and the Wallabies will attack from there. Marcus Smith’s first touch is to get the game underway by chipping the ball deep into the Australia half. The teams are on their way out, with England led to the field by Maro Itoje winning his 50th cap. Big News Alert! Ireland have just put in a remarkable performance to beat the All Blacks 29-20 in Dublin. Have a read while you wait. Ugo Monye likes Tuilagi on the wing, find out why here Get in touch, why don’t ya? Let me know your thoughts either on the email or tweet. The big news for England is Marcus Smith starting at 10 with the returning captain Owen Farrell slotting in as a comfort blanket at 12. This displaces Manu Tuilagi from the centre to an unfamiliar wing berth while Adam Radwan is flirted from the matchday 23 entirely. Australia make two changes to their squad who lost to Scotland; Kurtley Beale starts at full-back with Andrew Kellaway starting on the wing. England: Freddie Steward; Manu Tuilagi, Henry Slade, Owen Farrell (capt), Jonny May; Marcus Smith, Ben Youngs; Bevan Rodd, Jamie George, Kyle Sinckler, Maro Itoje, Jonny Hill, Courtney Lawes, Sam Underhill, Tom Curry. Replacements: 16 Jamie Blamire, 17 Trevor Davison, 18 Will Stuart, 19 Charlie Ewels, 20 Alex Dombrandt, 21 Sam Simmonds, 22 Raffi Quirke, 23 Max Malins. Australia: Kurtley Beale; Andrew Kellaway, Len Ikitau, Hunter Paisami, Tom Wright; James O’Connor, Nic White; Angus Bell, Folau Fainga’a, James Slipper, Rory Arnold, Izack Rodda, Rob Leota, Michael Hooper (capt), Rob Valetini. Replacements: 16 Tolu Latu, 17 Tom Robertson, 18 Oliver Hoskins, 19 Will Skelton, 20 Pete Samu, 21 Tate McDermott, 22 Noah Lolesio, 23 Izaia Perese. England’s first big test of the Autumn rolls into town as Australia come to Twickenham. Eddie Jones will want to make a statement that isn’t anything to do with teenage women in another sport; the Wallabies, arriving on neither peak form nor personnel, present the perfect opportunity. If Australia perform similarly to Murrayfield last Saturday then it could be a long afternoon, but Dave Rennie’s side have had a habit of turning predictable narratives on their head this year. It’s a long shot but today could be one of those days. But probably won’t.Where now? Governments have agreed a weak climate deal which gets us a smidgen closer to holding temperatures to a rise of 1.5C. But as regards all the most important pledges to phase out coal, reduce subsidies and protect forests, Glasgow failed. The fossil fuel lobby, led by India, held its line, dramatically succeeding in watering down – at the last minute and without due, transparent process – the move to ‘phase out’ coal power, pledging instead to ‘phase down’. The poor came away with next to nothing, there was little urgency and we are still heading for catastrophe. Any chance of halving fast-rising emissions by 2030 – the declared aim of the talks – is now negligible. The UN climate process must be reformed to become more nimble. It is slow and measured and requires consensus and compromise. This is usually admirable, but it works against the scale and speed of action needed in a global emergency like this when millions of lives are at stake and every year of inaction counts. Soon we may have to accept that even when faced with flood, fire and famine, some countries will never act in the wider interest and will hinder the progress of others. So, short of locking leaders in a room and not letting them out until they have agreed something better, the only way 1.5C can be achieved must now be for those countries who want progress to work outside the UN process. That China and the US will meet next week is possibly the most positive development of the meeting. Leaders may not agree, but they can force the changes they could not make in Glasgow. Because most climate actions devolve to lower tiers of government, mayors, local authorities, counties and states can be enabled to slash transport and building emissions and help households. Most are well able and willing to take the initiatives that prime ministers and presidents resist. Glasgow will have helped give them the confidence and legitimacy to propose new ideas, and to act together. All it needs is backing and money. Equally, governments can take the gloves off, treat the few countries who are preventing climate action as criminals and reward those who do with trade deals, contracts, investments and aid. Other strands of possible future action became apparent in the Glasgow halls. One was for an emergency Marshall-style “plan for the planet” to catapult ambitious countries into a sustainable future. If trillions of dollars can be found to sort out the banking crisis or the Covid pandemic in a few weeks, then it can surely be found to help countries transition into a low carbon world, starting with the $100bn (£75bn) a year that rich countries offered the climate vulnerable in 2009. The shameful refusal of the rich to keep their promise to the world’s poor poisoned climate negotiations for a decade and may go down in history as one of the biggest diplomatic blunders of the age. Besides, it is pointed out, there is no shortage of money for action. There are now more than 2,700 billionaires, 600 more than one year ago. They, too, can be cajoled, bullied and taxed to make them act in everyone’s interests and commit to restore damaged nature. And finally, the World Health Organization must declare an immediate health emergency, making the link between the pandemic and the climate crisis, and explaining to politicians that climate change really is a life or death issue and will soon become the greatest challenge to human health that the world has ever known. World leaders failed us again in Glasgow, but the summit showed that countries with the vision to act in the interests of all will shape the future and benefit the most.So, with the final deal settled, does Cop26 look like a success or failure? The unsatisfactory answer is both, but it’s more the latter than the former. In relative terms, the agreements and deals made by the 196 nations in Glasgow nudged the world a little closer towards the path to keeping global temperature rises below 1.5C and avoiding the worst of the climate crisis’s impacts. But in absolute terms, there is still a mountain to climb. Before Cop26, firm pledges to cut emissions by 2030 pointed to 2.7C of global heating – a catastrophe. After, the figure is 2.4C – still a catastrophe. Longer term promises to go to net zero emissions, notably by India, might possibly restrict heating to 1.8C by the end of the century, but lack the concrete plans to be credible. And 1.8C still means immense suffering to people and the planet. The key agreements sealed in Glasgow essentially kick the can down the road. Big emitting nations with feeble plans to cut emissions must return in a year to improve them – that is how 1.5C can be said to still be alive. The $100bn a year to pay for clean energy in developing countries promised a decade ago for 2020 will not be delivered until 2023. Worst of all, a deal to compensate nations for the heatwaves, storms and floods that are already hitting the most vulnerable people was booted into a talking shop. There is currently just $2m in that “loss and damage” fund – a pittance. The climate emergency is a slow motion disaster and our escape was only ever going to be in slow motion too – remaking a world that has run on fossil fuels cannot happen overnight, particularly in the face of lobbying by rich vested interests. But the world has been kicking the climate can down the road for three decades now. The Cop26 deal means the next 18 months will truly be make or break. There are positives to build on. The 196 nations are now firmly fixed on the 1.5C target demanded by the science. For the first time, nations are called on to “phase down” coal and fossil fuel subsidies in a Cop text. As extraordinary as that sounds, it is a landmark that Russia, Saudi Arabia and others tried to erase, although it is regrettable India had the language watered down from “phase out” at the last minute. Deals on ending the razing of forests by 2030, cutting emissions of methane – a powerful greenhouse gas – and making green technology like electric cars the cheapest option globally are all encouraging, even if the pact to end sales of fossil fuel powered cars stalled, with the major markets and manufacturers failing to sign up. An end to international finance for coal power will also dent emissions and some of the most outrageous loopholes in proposed rules for a global carbon market rules were closed – but not all, and cheats may yet prosper. Other negatives included the initiative claiming to put the world’s financial institutions – which bankroll the fossil fuel industry – on a green path but it represented tiny steps. The reaction of countries to the Glasgow deal is calibrated by the imminence of the threats they face and the resources they have to cope. The US said it was “a very important step forward”. Aminath Shaunam, the delegate from the fast-disappearing island state of the Maldives, said: “This deal does not bring hope to our hearts. It will be too late for the Maldives. [We] implore you to deliver the resources we need in time.” UN climate summits are more complex these days, according to Saleemul Huq, a COP veteran from Bangladesh: “We now have to deal with two climate change problems: the old one of preventing catastrophic impacts for everyone if we go above 1.5C and a new one of dealing with the loss and damage already happening due to the increase already of 1.1C.” Cop26 could have and should have achieved more. So why did it not? The Covid pandemic made the essential diplomatic leg work ahead of the summit hard to conduct. The pandemic also curtailed the protests by millions of young people, whose voice and moral authority was so powerful. The host, the UK, may not have helped build the trust required to land a strong deal by cutting overseas aid in the run up, for which it was called out in the halls of Glasgow. Failing to join an alliance to phase out oil and gas at its own summit and planning a new oil field at home cannot have helped either. In the closing hours of Cop26, countries repeatedly said they were accepting weaker proposals than they wanted in the “spirit of compromise”. But there is no compromising with the science of global heating. UN secretary general António Guterres said in Glasgow that the goal of 1.5C was “on life support”. It still is.Boris Johnson is facing growing controversy over a proposed new law that will hand Michael Gove the power to set the remit of the hitherto independent watchdog that oversees elections and party finances, including donations. With the PM struggling to contain the fallout from attempts to undermine the parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, attention is now turning to his government’s efforts to bring the Electoral Commission to heel. The commission recently concluded an investigation into the funding of the refurbishment of Johnson’s Downing Street flat, which is yet to be published. Under the elections bill, now passing through parliament, the Cabinet Office minister, Gove, would be given power to set the entire remit of the commission, as part of a series of changes that ministers say will strengthen democracy. But opposition parties, and some senior Conservatives, say the bill will be seen as another attempt to dismantle checks and balances in the system, and rig the political process in favour of the Tories. A senior Tory MP close to discussions on the bill said: “There are issues which are not perfect to do with the Electoral Commission, but given what has happened there are dangers with being seen to be making another assault on the system. We have to be very, very careful with this.” Some pro-Brexit Tories have criticised the commission for over-reaching itself, particularly with its investigations into key figures in the Vote Leave campaign. Gove is known to have been one of those keen to rein in its work. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, last night called on Tory MPs to join opposition parties in opposing the bill. “Every time the prime minister attacks the independent institutions tasked with protecting us from corruption and upholding the integrity of our public life he attacks our democracy, corrodes public trust and diminishes our country’s standing as a proud democracy,” she said. Rayner added: “Conservative MPs must think long and hard about whether they want to walk through the voting lobbies again to support this prime minister in further undermining independent scrutiny and attacking those who uphold the integrity of our democracy, or stand up for our democracy.” Former Tory MP and attorney general Dominic Grieve said he did not agree with the way Johnson was clearly trying to “clip the wings” of the Electoral Commission. “It seems to me the commission has done a good job and has tried to enforce rules fairly. This seems to be yet another example of this particular government and this prime minister not liking the regulatory environment that has been created over elections and much preferring to have a free for all.” The Labour chair of the Commons standards committee, Chris Bryant, said the elections bill was further evidence of a “modus operandi” in Johnson’s government “to dismantle all the checks and balances that there are in the system and to seize control into political hands”. Critics of the bill say it bestows unprecedented and unchecked power on government over elections in two ways; first, by empowering ministers to set both the agenda and purview of the commission, and second, by enabling the minister for the Cabinet Office to change which organisations and campaign activities are permitted a year before any election in the UK. They say ministers will be able at a stroke to ban whole sections of civil society, including unions and charities, from engaging in elections by campaigning or donating. The Cabinet Office says the bill is a “necessary and a proportionate approach to reforming the Electoral Commission while respecting its independence”. Daisy Cooper MP, deputy leader of the Liberal Democrats, said: “First Boris Johnson tried to stitch up MPs standards and now he’s trying to do the same to our elections. This is an assault on British democracy and part of Boris Johnson’s attempts to rip up the very fabric of our liberal democracy. “This is something I would expect from Putin, not a British prime minister. He just doesn’t get it. At every turn, Boris Johnson is alienating former Conservative voters who think the way he behaves is utterly reprehensible.”Antonio Conte, the new Tottenham manager, has promised Spurs fans they “deserve to have a competitive team with a will to fight” and said he would “do everything to [earn] their support”. While the fans welcome Conte’s desire to improve the club’s standing – they sit ninth in the Premier League and have not won a major honour since 2007-08 – many believe what the team really needs an injection of cash from their billionaire owner, Joe Lewis. “We’re owned by this guy with a huge yacht who lives in the Bahamas, who appears more interested in making money out of us than investing in and supporting quality football,” says Jack Haw, a Spurs fan outside the glistening Tottenham Hotspur Stadium that sits on the site of the historic White Hart Lane ground, which was demolished on Lewis’s orders. The 84-year-old Lewis – the 457th-richest person in the world with a £4.8bn fortune, according to the Bloomberg billionaires index – first bought a 27% stake in Spurs from Alan Sugar in 1991 for £22m. Since then Lewis has increased his stake to 70.6% of Tottenham’s Bahamas-based parent company Enic, formerly English National Investment Company. The remaining 29.4% is owned by the family of the Tottenham chairman Daniel Levy, who tends to take the flack when things turn sour, as they did with Nuno Espírito Santo, who was sacked as manager after 17 games. Enic, which is registered 4,000 miles away from N17 at a Nassau lawyers’ office that specialises in creating offshore tax structures and cropped up regularly in the Panama papers financial secrets leak, owns 85.6% of Tottenham Hotspur Limited. The remaining shares are owned by small private shareholders who refused to sell out, many of them understood to be longstanding Spurs fans. The Tottenham Hotspur Supporters Trust is demanding a meeting with Lewis and Levy, saying the poor start to the season has “led many to question the focus of THFC’s board, what its objectives are and how it measures progress”. “While individual decisions on players and tactics are not within the Trust’s remit, it is our job to question wider strategy when performance on the pitch falls short,” the trust says. “The club has decided it does not want to address the questions many fans are asking. It has declined to speak to the board of its official supporters’ trust.” Lewis is rarely seen at the north London club, preferring to spend most of his time aboard his £98m superyacht Aviva. It is his third such yacht, each bigger and glitzier than the last, and all given the same name. Based mostly at his wife’s vast house in the ultra-exclusive Lyford Cay compound on New Providence island in the Bahamas (where there is no income tax, inheritance tax or wealth tax), Lewis travels the world aboard Aviva. He sailed it up the Thames in 2018, docking for a week beside Tower Bridge, when a passerby noticed something familiar through the portholes: Francis Bacon’s “Triptych 1974 - 1977” hanging on a lower deck. The paintings, which Lewis bought for £26m in 2008 and which are now worth multiples of that, had been until months earlier loaned to Tate Britain’s Bacon retrospective. They are just a small part of Lewis’s art collection, which includes pieces by Picasso, Matisse, Freud, Klimt, Degas and Moore. On his company website, Lewis’s collection is described as “one of the largest private art collections in the world”. It is from the Aviva – which is also equipped with banks of computers for currency trading, a full-size indoor tennis court and a series of leather bound editions of the official history of Tottenham - that Lewis plotted the breakaway European Super League (ESL) with other billionaire club owners. The JP Morgan-devised ESL plan collapsed less than 48 hours after it was announced in April following protests from fans at the six breakaway Premier League clubs. At Tottenham’s ground fans were seen with banners reading “I want my Tottenham back” and “ENIC Out - Sold a Soul You Didn’t Own”. Harry Redknapp, a former Spurs manager, sought to reassure fans that Lewis would start spending on players after bringing in the former Chelsea manager Conte. “I can see them spending. I don’t think he [Conte] would have come if he hadn’t been able to improve the team,” Redknapp told TalkSPORT. “It was probably one of the arrangements for his coming. “It’s not a poor club. Joe Lewis, people don’t realise how rich the Tottenham owner is, he’s up there with one of the richest men in the world. They can afford to bring in players and I think they sure will.” However, Redknapp, who was Spurs manager between 2008 and 2012, has previously said Lewis was only interested in Tottenham as an investment. “Joe doesn’t go to watch Tottenham play and, not to appear disrespectful, he’s probably only half-interested in watching games,” Redknapp said in April when the ESL was announced. “It’s a chance to make more money for his investment and that’s what he’ll do.” Lewis has been driven by money from an early age. Born above the Roman Arms pub in Bow, east London, he left school at 15 to help at his father’s catering company Tavistock Banqueting. Starting out as a waiter on £6 a week, Lewis hit upon a plan to attract more passing trade by carrying a concrete bus stop sign up the road to outside one of Tavistock’s cafes. Soon he took over from his father and expanded into tourist restaurants with names such as Shakespeare’s Tavern, the Beefeater, and the Cockney, that offered lowbrow entertainment such as sword swallowers and knights in armour. They led the way to themed restaurant chains, and Lewis invested in his protege Robert Earl’s ventures Planet Hollywood and Hard Rock Café. Lewis had brushes with the stars of the 1960s at a club he managed called The Talk of the Town, where Frank Sinatra, Diana Ross and Tom Jones all performed. He sold the family business in 1979 and relocated to the Bahamas, moving into the exclusive Lyford Cay, where neighbours included the late Sean Connery (who shot scenes for Thunderball on the beach there), and Count and Countess de Ravenel of France. As well as improving on his golf swing and tennis backhand, Lewis set himself up as a currency trader. Famously, he is said to have made more than £1bn betting against the pound on Black Wednesday in 1992. He hit the jackpot again three years later betting against the Mexican peso. Not all his financial bets have worked out so well, though. In 2008 he lost £1bn buying up shares in the US bank Bear Stearns as it teetered on the brink of collapse at the start of the financial crisis. Just days later it collapsed. His Tavistock Group holding company (named after his father’s catering business) now owns more than 200 businesses in 17 countries ranging from luxury hotels, and restaurants to biotechnology and financial services firms. A keen golfer, Lewis also owns the luxury gated community of Isleworth Golf and Country club in Florida, where Tiger Woods has a $40m mansion. Lewis once paid £1.4m at a charity auction for the privilege of a round with Woods, and the pair became friends, with Woods once telling an interviewer he tended to run business ventures past Lewis. Lewis does not do media. The only on-the-record interview with him in the last 25 years was given to the New York Times in 1998, in which he said: “One of the rewards of your success is the quiet enjoyment of it. Being on the front page of newspapers doesn’t allow that … The mystery to me is why there’s anything of particular interest about me.’’When Ray Wilkins left Paris Saint-Germain in 1987, it seemed entirely natural that he should join Rangers. He was, after all, joining two England internationals in Terry Butcher and Chris Woods at Ibrox. A year later they would be joined by another in Gary Stevens. There was the immediate context of the Heysel ban on English clubs competing in Uefa competitions but, still, that is another world. It seems almost incomprehensible in today’s financial environment that top English talent would flock to play in Scotland. And that perhaps is the most significant aspect of Steven Gerrard’s appointment as manager of Aston Villa – less what it says about him or Rangers, or even Scottish football, than what it says about the Premier League. Like Brendan Rodgers before him, Gerrard appears to have had little hesitation in accepting an offer, not from a Champions League qualifier but from a Midlands club with aspirations. Realistically, perhaps even after winning a Scottish league title, that is as big an offer as is going to come. And it is a big offer. Even with the sale of Jack Grealish for £100m in the summer, Villa’s net spend over the past four years is just under £250m. They are part of the Premier League’s growing middle class who may be beginning to reassert themselves. Just two wins separate sixth from 15th and the early signs are that this could be a less stratified league. Before anybody gets too excited, we probably should remember how the Premier League table looked at this stage last season. After 11 rounds of games, Tottenham, with 24 points, were top on goal difference from Liverpool, with Chelsea and Leicester within a win and Southampton fifth, four points back. Then came the two Manchester clubs, both of whom had a game in hand. The truncated pre-season, the compressed calendar, the empty stadiums – as Spurs beat Manchester United 6-1 and Aston Villa put seven past Liverpool – there was a thrilling wildness about football. Who knew what was going on? There was a thought that Pep Guardiola might have reached some sort of limit at City, six points behind the leaders in seventh, having already lost to Leicester and Spurs. But as it turned out, City won the title by 12 points, Manchester United, Liverpool and Chelsea took the Champions League slots and two of the promoted sides went down with a club who had come up the season before. Everything suddenly became extremely normal: funny things can happen at the start of a season and a little over quarter of the fixtures probably isn’t enough to draw any firm conclusions. Within two weeks, Tottenham had suffered the defeat at Liverpool that was the beginning of the end of José Mourinho’s time in charge, City had embarked on a run of 15 straight league victories and Burnley had secured the 1-0 win at Arsenal that ignited their surge away from the relegation zone. There has been none of that sense of chaos this season, yet still there feels a change from those three seasons before 2020-21 in which the champions took 98 or more points. There is a clear big three of Chelsea, City and Liverpool, but for all their qualities, none is without flaws. Three clear at the top, Chelsea are on course for 90 points. That is still historically high, the joint-seventh biggest tally for the champions, and four more than City’s total last season, but feels like a return towards normality. That may be to say no more than Chelsea’s re-emergence as a third major force now they have a manager to match the calibre of their squad necessarily dilutes the domination of the top two – and, of course, it remains possible that one of those big three could suddenly do what City did last season and win a dozen or more games on the spin to surge clear of the pack and towards a total in the mid-to-high 90s. But there is something more intriguing going on. The sense is that the Premier League has benefited from the financial crisis caused by Covid because of the strength of the TV deal. Although Premier League clubs experienced an average €59m (£50m) shortfall in revenue in 2019-20, that was proportionally less than was suffered in any of the other big five leagues. There is a tier of players – such as Son Heung-min, Youri Tielemans and Ollie Watkins – who in pre-Covid times might have moved on by now. At the same time those mid-ranking English clubs have been able to pick up talent from abroad relatively cheaply: players such as Boubakary Soumaré, Alex Kral and Leon Bailey. That has strengthened that middle band, with the result that nobody quite has the feel of doom Sheffield United and West Brom did at this stage last season (although Norwich soon may). Newcastle, without a win or a clean sheet so far, might have seemed on the brink, but the arrival of the Saudis, the appointment of Eddie Howe and the expectation that the bone-saw billions will lead to an influx of players in January means they can expect to improve. Much the same was said about the impact of the Premier League TV deal after Leicester’s title success in 2016, but the landscape was then changed again by a fresh wave of investment by City, including the arrival of Pep Guardiola, and Liverpool’s acquisitions of Virgil van Dijk and Alisson (funded by the sale of Philippe Coutinho and thus, indirectly, by PSG’s purchase of Neymar). Super-club spending reshaped the landscape quickly then, but Covid has shifted it once more. That means that the environment Gerrard comes into is extremely tough. Villa are one of probably six to eight clubs beyond the obvious four of Chelsea, Liverpool, City and United with realistic expectations of being regular European qualifiers and occasionally breaking into the Champions League. That means at least three or four of them each season are going to be very disappointed. Villa may not want to hear it, but lying just two points above the relegation zone, with Burnley starting to get results that match their performances and Newcastle’s lift-off to come, Gerrard’s first priority must be to avoid relegation.Labour has recorded its first poll lead over the Conservatives for almost a year in the wake of the row over Tory sleaze and second jobs, according to the latest Opinium poll for the Observer. Keir Starmer’s party recorded 37% support, a single point ahead of the Tories. It is the first Labour lead with Opinium since January, when the UK was in the grips of a covid peak and the government had imposed emergency restrictions over Christmas. The Lib Dems are on 9%, Greens 7% and SNP 5%. It comes after a week in which the government has faced severe criticism over its botched attempt to protect a former cabinet minister from a Commons suspension over lobbying and overhaul Westminster’s standards watchdog. Ministers also defended former attorney general Geoffrey Cox after it emerged he had been working for a month in the British Virgin Islands (BVI) during lockdown, earning thousands advising the territory over corruption charges brought by the Foreign Office. Boris Johnson’s own approval rating has just slipped to a new low since last week. It now sits at -21, with 30% approving and 51% disapproving of the job he is doing. Keir Starmer’s approval rating is -6%, slightly up from -8 last week. Johnson is now just one point ahead in terms of who people think would make the best prime minister, with 26% to Starmer’s 25%. However, both trail to the 34% of voters who opted for “none of these”. There did appear to be support for a ban on MPs being able to take on extra paid work outside their job as an MP - 45% backed a ban and 25% opposed it. Conservative voters were also more supportive than opposed to a ban (42% to 27%). However, there was more support for banning extra work such as lobbying and consultancy, compared to other duties such as medical work by MPs trained as doctors or nurses. “This is our first Labour lead since January but the red and blue lines have slowly been edging towards each since the end of the government’s vaccine bounce in May,” said Adam Drummond of Opinium. “While the various sleaze stories dominating front pages and have undoubtedly damaged the government, Johnson’s personal poll rating has been falling for some time, and the Conservative’s lead on “running the economy” has shrunk considerably. “However, Johnson still has a 1 point lead over Keir Starmer on who would be the better prime minister and only 27% of voters agree that the Labour leader ‘looks like a prime minister in waiting’. It’s notable that it has taken over a week of continuously dire headlines, on a subject the Conservatives have always struggled with, for Labour to claw its way into the lead.”Diplomats, scientists, charities and NGOs have been commenting on the adoption of the “Glasgow climate pact” at the end of the Cop26 conference. Here are some of their initial thoughts. Laurence Tubiana, one of the architects of the 2015 Paris deal and now CEO of the European Climate Foundation “Paris is working. Despite the Covid-19 crisis, we have accelerated action, responded to the [scientists’] call to close the gap towards 1.5C, and coal is in the text. But there is a lot more to do. The commitments and claims of the first week on finance, forests, end of public finance for fossil fuel, methane and cars must now be translated into real policy and oil and gas production still to be addressed. “This Cop has failed to provide immediate assistance for people suffering now. I welcome the doubling of adaptation finance as climate impacts are every year stronger, [but] loss and damage must be at the top of the agenda for Cop27. Vanessa Nakate, climate activist from Uganda “Even if leaders stuck to the promises they have made here in Glasgow, it would not prevent the destruction of communities like mine. Right now, at 1.2C of global warming, drought and flooding are killing people in Uganda. Only immediate, drastic emissions cuts will give us hope of safety, and world leaders have failed to rise to the moment. “But people are joining our movement. 100,000 people from all different backgrounds came to the streets in Glasgow during Cop and the pressure for change is building.” Mohamed Adow, director of Power Shift Africa “This summit has been a triumph of diplomacy over real substance. The outcome here reflects a Cop held in the rich world and the outcome contains the priorities of the rich world. “We are leaving empty-handed [on loss and damage] but morally stronger and hopeful that we can sustain the momentum in the coming year to deliver meaningful support which will allow the vulnerables to deal with the irreversible impacts of climate change created by the polluting world who are failing to take responsibility.” Alden Meyer, senior associate at the thinktank E3G “We saw a call here in Glasgow for emergency actions to deal with the existential threat of climate change – and some important initiatives were launched. But whether enough countries raise their 2030 ambition enough to keep 1.5C in reach [when they return in 2022] will be the real test of the success of this Cop26. “As a lifelong optimist, I see the Glasgow outcome as half-full rather than half-empty. But the atmosphere responds to emissions – not Cop decisions – and much work remains ahead to translate the strong rhetoric here into reality.” José Gregorio Mirabal Díaz, elected leader of Coica (an umbrella body that includes indigenous leaders from the nine Amazon nations) “We will always have the hope that we can stop the climate crisis with the support of all, but until now the extractivism development model has deceived the world. This must change now. “If the solution is to protect nature to avoid climate change, this can only be done with giving land titles for indigenous peoples, allowing us to self-demarcate our territories so that external invasions do not come, whether of oil, gold, mining or any type of extractive exploitation.” Jennifer Morgan, executive director of Greenpeace International [On India rewording the language from “phasing out” coal to “phasing down”] “They changed a word but they can’t change the signal coming out of this Cop, that the era of coal is ending. If you’re a coal company executive, this Cop saw a bad outcome. “It’s in the interests of all countries, including those who still burn coal, to transition to clean renewable energy, and richer countries need to do more to support the shift. Our future depends on it.” Rachel Kennerley, climate campaigner at Friends of the Earth “The road to 1.5C just got harder when these talks should have cleared the way to making it a whole lot easier. “The UK government cunningly curated announcements throughout this fortnight so that it seemed rapid progress was being made. Here we are though, and the Glasgow get-out clause means that leaders failed to phase out fossil fuels and the richest countries won’t pay historic climate debt. “With the Cop moment over, countries should break away from the pack in their race for meaningful climate action and let history judge the laggards. The UK, as a country with huge historical responsibility for emissions, can end support for a mega gas project in Mozambique, pull the plug on the Cambo oilfield, stop the new coalmine in Cumbria and drilling for oil in Surrey. After all, the prime minister talked a big game at the beginning of the fortnight.” Amanda Mukwashi, CEO of Christian Aid “We were told that Cop26 was the last best chance to keep 1.5C alive but it’s been placed on life support. Rich nations have kicked the can down the road and with it the promise of the urgent climate action people on the frontline of this crisis need. “After two weeks of negotiations, the voices of those experiencing the harsh impacts of climate change have largely been excluded and not been heeded. Warm words on loss and damage and finance for developing countries to adapt to climate change are not good enough. Rich nations need to accept their responsibility, put their money where their mouths are, and provide the billions needed. Developing nations have done the least to cause this crisis but have shown commitment to tackling it.” Lord Nicholas Stern, chair of the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change “Overall, Cop26 has been a major step along the way, but it has still left us far short of the target of limiting warming to 1.5C. That it is why it is so important that countries agree to put forward by the end of next year more ambitious pledges for emissions cuts by 2030. Cop26 embodied a shared understanding of just how dangerous our current path is, and indeed the dangers of warming beyond 1.5C. “There is so much work to do over the next 12 months ahead of Cop27 in Egypt. The work on finance will be crucial to raising ambition. If we are slow to unlock the finance, we will be slow to raise the ambition.”Countries have agreed a deal on the climate crisis that its backers said would keep within reach the goal of limiting global heating to 1.5C, the key threshold of safety set out in the 2015 Paris agreement. The negotiations carried on late into Saturday evening, as governments squabbled over provisions on phasing out coal, cutting greenhouse gas emissions and providing money to the poor world. The “Glasgow climate pact” was adopted despite a last-minute intervention by India to water down language on “phasing out” coal to merely “phasing down”. The pledges on emissions cuts made at the two-week Cop26 summit in Glasgow fell well short of those required to limit temperatures to 1.5C, according to scientific advice. Instead, all countries have agreed to return to the negotiating table next year, at a conference in Egypt, and re-examine their national plans, with a view to increasing their ambition on cuts. Alok Sharma, the UK cabinet minister who presided over the fortnight-long Cop26 talks in Glasgow, acknowledged the scale of the task remaining: “We can now say with credibility that we have kept 1.5C alive. But, its pulse is weak and it will only survive if we keep our promises and translate commitments into rapid action. “Before this conference, the world asked: do the parties here in Glasgow have the courage to rise to the scale of the challenge? We have responded. History has been made here in Glasgow.” António Guterres, the UN secretary-general, also warned that further urgent work was needed: “Our fragile planet is hanging by a thread. We are still knocking on the door of climate catastrophe. It is time to go into emergency mode – or our chance of reaching net zero [emissions] will itself be zero.” The return to negotiations next year, to begin an annual process of revising national targets on greenhouse gases, will be a fraught process, as some countries contend that they are already doing their utmost. Even the small step of agreeing to revise the plans was only achieved after overcoming stiff opposition, yet revision is essential if the world is to avoid surpassing the 1.5C threshold. One of the fiercest disagreements in the final hours was over the wording of an intention to abandon coal, which was watered down from a “phase-out” to a “phase-down”. Yet it marked the first time that such a resolution had been made under the UN climate process. Jennifer Morgan, executive director of Greenpeace International, said: “It’s meek, it’s weak and the 1.5C goal is only just alive, but a signal has been sent that the era of coal is ending. And that matters.” Poor countries were also left frustrated at the pact, which they said did not address their concerns about “loss and damage”. This refers to the destruction caused by extreme weather, which is now hitting vulnerable countries far harder and more frequently than had been predicted. Current climate finance, which is provided to countries to help them invest in green technology and other emissions-cutting efforts, and to adapt to the impacts of the climate crisis, is already falling short of promises, and even if fulfilled would be insufficient to cover these heavy losses and humanitarian disasters. By 2050, these hits could amount to a fifth of GDP for some poor countries, according to estimates from the charity Christian Aid. But rich nations have been reluctant to agree any mechanism for providing funding for loss and damage, in part because some of the debate has been framed in terms of “compensation”, which rich countries cannot countenance. Many observers called on countries to step up their efforts in the next year. Mary Robinson, former UN commissioner for human rights and chair of The Elders group of leaders and former statespeople, said: “Cop26 has made some progress, but nowhere near enough to avoid climate disaster. While millions around the world are already in crisis, not enough leaders came to Glasgow with a crisis mindset. People will see this as a historically shameful dereliction of duty. Leaders have extended by a year this window of opportunity to avert the worst of the climate crisis. The world urgently needs them to step up more decisively next year.” Tina Stege, climate envoy for the Marshall Islands, representing the High Ambition Coalition of developed and developing countries, said: “This package is not perfect. The coal change and a weak outcome on loss and damage are blows. But it is real progress and elements of [it] are a lifeline for my country. We must not discount the crucial wins covered in this package.” Mohamed Adow, director of the Nairobi-based thinktank Power Shift Africa, took a harsher view: “The needs of the world’s vulnerable people have been sacrificed on the altar of the rich world’s selfishness. The outcome here reflects a Cop held in the rich world and the outcome contains the priorities of the rich world.” Many poor nations accepted defeat on their pleas to put stronger provisions on loss and damage into the text, in the closing hours of the conference, in order to allow the broader deal to go through. Making the concession, Lia Nicholson, lead negotiator for Antigua and Barbuda, which chairs the 37-strong Alliance of Small Island States, said: “We are extremely disappointed and we will express our grievance in due course.” Adow added: “We are leaving empty-handed but morally stronger, and hopeful that we can sustain the momentum in the coming year to deliver meaningful support which will allow the vulnerable to deal with the irreversible impacts of climate change, created by the polluting world, who are failing to take responsibility.” The Cop also resolved several outstanding technical issues that had prevented aspects of the 2015 Paris climate agreement from coming into operation. These issues, on carbon trading and the “transparency” with which countries monitor and report their emissions, have dogged the annual climate meetings for six years but compromises were finally reached, which earned applause for Sharma. Patricia Espinosa, executive secretary of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, said: “After six years, this is a significant accomplishment.” One of the most contentious clauses in the final decision was a vaguely worded resolution to phase down “inefficient” fossil fuel subsidies. Energy experts are clear that phasing out coal will be essential to stay within 1.5C of global heating, but the opposition to the inclusion of the reference to a phase out – particularly from major coal-using countries including China, India and South Africa – showed how hard it will be to gain a global end to the dirtiest fossil fuel in time to avoid a 1.5C rise. Fatih Birol, executive director of the International Energy Agency, told the Guardian that more than 40% of the world’s existing 8,500 coal plants would have to close by 2030, and no new ones could be built, to stay within the limit. He said: “I would very much hope that advanced economies take a leading role and become an example for the emerging world. If they don’t do it, if they don’t show an example for the emerging world, they shouldn’t expect the emerging world to do it.”England 15 Freddie Steward Effortlessly graceful in the air – he never looks like dropping one – and took his first of what should be many tries well. 8/10 14 Manu Tuilagi Rarely stayed on wing, coming infield and charging at the defence. Perhaps best to play him in his best position, though. 6 13 Henry Slade Spent a lot of time at wing or full-back and, while he showed his quality, looked a square peg in a round hole at times. 6 12 Owen Farrell (capt) A solid return to the side but, if he limps off, then it’s a safe bet he is hurt. A concern, with South Africa due here next week. 6 11 Jonny May Did not make the most of one promising opportunity in the first half and was subdued thereafter. 5 10 Marcus Smith Not bad. Kicked too much early on but showed his ability when putting Steward away. Forced things a little. 7 9 Ben Youngs Kicked well and distribution on the money, including one fizzed long pass when falling backwards. 7 1 Bevan Rodd Needless early penalty against but responded with strong carry in Australia’s 22. Brought some ballast to the scrum, too on impressive debut. 8 2 Jamie George Rampaging run up the middle, just when England were going quiet. But dropped one over the line and was injured in the process. 6 3 Kyle Sinckler Plenty of grunt but his delicate touch with ball in hand sets him apart and grew in influence as match wore on. 8 4 Maro Itoje Not his most disciplined of performances but upped his game when Australia threatened a comeback. 6 5 Jonny Hill Strong carry early in the second half but ultimately held up. Slowly but surely growing in stature at this level. 7 6 Courtney Lawes As usual, lovely footwork to buy himself an extra yard. England’s most consistent forward at present. 7 7 Sam Underhill Not one of his more conspicuous matches but perhaps hard to make an impact when breakdown was such a mess. 6 8 Tom Curry A lot of work, though yet to convince fully at No 8 and Dombrandt’s cameo showed what a specialist can do when given the chance. 7 Australia 15 Kurtley Beale Beaten a little easily for Steward’s try and endured a frustrating afternoon, finding himself on the end of too many loose passes. 5 14 Andrew Kellaway The former Northampton wing had a big impact on the Rugby Championship but hasn’t been able to bring that form north. 5 13 Len Ikitau Has “effort” emblazoned on his wristband and there was no lack of it. Almost caught England napping but Smith was alert to it. 6 12 Hunter Paisami Levelled Smith in the first half to force the knock on, and made a scything break in the second. 7 11 Tom Wright Can have no complaints over yellow card – which felt the correct sanction – and fumbled the ball when well placed to dart down the left. 4 10 James O’Connor Goal-kicking was on the money from the off and, having sat far too deep against Scotland, brought a better balance to his game. 6 9 Nic White Busy and industrious throughout and came up with a remarkable tackle to deny George a try. 7 1 Angus Bell Mindless tip tackle on Lawes earned himself a yellow card when Australia were just a point behind. 4 2 Folau Fainga’a One or two wobbles at lineout time and missed a couple of tackles before being replaced. 5 3 James Slipper Gave up one scrum penalty to Rodd but responded well and kept on toiling away at the coal face. 6 4 Rory Arnold Brings a bit of muscle to the Wallabies pack and made some important metres in heavy traffic. 6 5 Izack Rodda Silly breakdown penalty against but was disruptive at the lineout and a general thorn in England’s side. 7 6 Rob Leota Provided a lineout option and showed up well as a carrying option but his discipline was a problem. 6 7 Michael Hooper (capt) Effort and energy in abundance, as we have come to expect. Was the game’s top tackler when he limped off after 55 minutes. 7 8 Rob Valetini Made a monstrous tackle on Youngs when England were threatening and made a couple of dents. 6Tapping the lectern for emphasis at the Cop26 summit last week, the prime minister intoned: “I just want to say, the most important thing is: those who break the rules must be investigated and should be punished.” New documentary evidence suggests Boris Johnson himself may have broken the rules governing ethical conduct in public office when he was London mayor – but was never punished. In 2019 allegations that Johnson had used his position as mayor to benefit the business interests of his American lover Jennifer Arcuri were referred to the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC). The IOPC concluded in May 2020 that it would not launch an investigation. But it did not have access to Arcuri’s handwritten diary entries in which she says she contemporaneously noted down the highlights of his telephone calls and their conversations. Until now, these extracts have never been published. They appear to show just how recklessly Johnson disregarded the Nolan ethical standards expected of public office holders by ignoring advice from his staff not to help Arcuri promote her business of ticket sales tech conferences called Innotech. Arcuri declined to disclose these extracts to the IOPC because she says she is sensitive to the allegation that any City Hall grants she was awarded and trade missions she was allowed to attend were not on merit, but the result of Johnson’s generosity to her. To date, there remains no direct evidence that any of them were granted to her by Johnson (though there is evidence that he knew about the trade missions). Arcuri entrusted me with her diaries after I reported on her affair with Johnson for an ITV documentary shortly before the 2019 election. At the time, the Conservative party told me: “Any claims of impropriety in office are untrue and unfounded.” Her diaries appear to suggest otherwise – and after Johnson’s strictures in Glasgow about public probity, having tried to protect his friend Owen Paterson from parliamentary censure for lobbying ministers and officials on behalf of clients who had been paying Paterson a total of up to £112,000 per year, Arcuri has released me from my confidentiality undertaking. The diaries appear to be a contemporaneous record of Johnson’s obsession with having sex with Arcuri while appearing to offer help with her business as an inducement: “How can I be the thrust – the throttle – your mere footstep as you make your career? Tell me: how I can help you?” he told her in October 2012. In January 2014 he also compliments her “most amazing body”. He appeared to finally succeed in his ambition in September 2012 when he stopped by at Arcuri’s east London flat en route to attending the 2012 Paralympics. Later Johnson is noted in the diary as having told Arcuri: “I can barely control myself whenever I see you. You make me too excited. Baby I couldn’t wait. All year I have been waiting for you. All year. You drove me nuts. I have thought about no woman as I have thought of you.” However, although they continued to meet, Arcuri says they did not have sex again before she returned to the US late in December 2012, despite Johnson continuing to offer: “How can I be your footstool to your career?” He was “always trying to think of ways to please me”, she told me. On Arcuri’s return to London in early 2013, Johnson paid an afternoon visit to her flat, where she took him up on his offer. One way of pleasing her, she told him, was to agree to be the keynote speaker at the launch of her Innotech business model in April. At first, she says, Johnson demurred. The previous November, her diary noted he had told her: “You are going to get me in so much trouble.” She claims he spoke of a conflict of interest, but he never explained that their relationship posed a head-on conflict with the Nolan principles that were incorporated into the Greater London Authority (GLA) code of conduct. She says she had never heard of Nolan until after news broke about their relationship in the autumn of 2019. As Arcuri persisted that afternoon with her request to Johnson to be her keynote conference speaker, he acquiesced. While seemingly pursuing Arcuri for sex in 2012, Johnson had endorsed the GLA’s 2012 code of conduct in which he undertook not to bring the GLA “into disrepute” by using his position “improperly to confer on or secure for themselves or any other person, an advantage or disadvantage”. Having succumbed to Arcuri’s request to be the keynote speaker at the launch of Innotech, Johnson is recorded in a diary entry for February 2013 as proudly boasting that he had ignored the advice of his staff not to attend: “I just want you to know they came to me and I crushed them – they said ‘You can’t do this Innotech in April.’ I said ‘Yes, I can, I’ll be there.’ I only want to do this to make you happy. How I do wish to make you satisfied.’” To which Arcuri quipped: “Well, at least we know there’s one way you can satisfy me” – and notes that Johnson “started laughing”. Johnson agreed to appear at two further tech conferences organised by Arcuri. If her diary is a fair reflection of how, as mayor, he helped launch her Innotech business in April 2013, his insistence both to me in 2019 and earlier to the BBC’s Andrew Marr that “everything was done with full propriety” was clearly misleading. Advancing Arcuri’s business interests in the expectation of sexual reward without declaring their relationship in his register of disclosable pecuniary interests manifestly was a breach of the spirit of the Nolan principles that promote “selflessness, integrity, objectivity, and honesty” in public life. When pressed by Marr to say if he had declared his relationship with Arcuri as a pecuniary interest, Johnson replied: “There was no interest to declare.” In this, at least, the canny Johnson appears to have relied on a change to the GLA code that he had approved as mayor shortly before having sex with Arcuri, which specifically removed “close associate” from the list of persons required to be declared as having a “pecuniary interest”. However, while concluding not to investigate Johnson over allegations of criminal misconduct in public office, the IOPC did find that, had he been in an intimate relationship with Arcuri (as distinct from just a close associate) and used his influence to benefit her without declaring a conflict of interest, he “could still be in breach of the Nolan-type principles of the code and thus bring the GLA into disrepute”. The IOPC said of Johnson: “It would have been wise for him to have declared this as a conflict of interest, and a failure to do so could have constituted a breach of these broader principles contained within the GLA 2012 code of conduct.” The new diary evidence suggests that Johnson did indeed bring the GLA into disrepute as London mayor. He was not just in an “intimate relationship” with Arcuri; he appears to have obsessively pursued her, even offering to advance her pecuniary interests in the hope and expectation that this might lead to sex, while, she notes, boasting that he had ignored his staff’s advice to help Arcuri her – presumably because they knew or suspected what was going on. As an apologist for Paterson’s multiple breaches, –not just of the Nolan principles but also of parliament’s lobbying rules – the prime minister can now add parliament to the list of institutions he has brought into disrepute, despite his new moral imperative that rule-breakers should be punished. John Ware was the reporter for the documentary When Boris Met Jennifer in ITV’s Exposure series in November 2019For a few precious seconds before the start it felt as if Marcus Smith had Twickenham all to himself. Alone on the halfway line, with England lined up behind him, Australia spread out in front, he bounced the ball up and down while the referee paced around and counted down the last few seconds before kick-off. Smith looked pretty sure of himself down there under the bright lights, the hardest 80 minutes he has ever played stretching out ahead of him. If he had noticed the 82,000 fans gathered around, hanging on his next step, one would never have guessed it from watching him. He radiates self-confidence. And then Smith made that first kick and it became clear that, even though he was wearing 10, he was not really playing fly-half, not the way he does for Harlequins anyway. When Dave Rennie was asked earlier in the week about Eddie Jones’ decision to pick Manu Tuilagi on the wing, he said anyone watching should ignore the number on Tuilagi’s back, because he expected him to swap into the centre. It turns out that the same went for Smith and Owen Farrell, too. Often as not it was Farrell who was in at first receiver while Smith flitted around behind him. It is all part of Jones’ grand plan. He says he wants his backs to be able to mix and match positions. He calls it his “ensemble attack”. And it doesn’t half make the game complicated. The one constant is that they all work around Farrell. It is his team, and he is the man who dictates how they play. It looked good when it worked. But it did make it feel a little as if Smith was the kid who has been brought a new car for his birthday but has not yet been trusted with the keys to go with it. Instead he gets to ride in the passenger seat and watch someone who knows better teach him how to handle it. England have the makings of a fine partnership here, and an attack that could carry them through the next World Cup, but it is going to take a while for them both to grow into it. Jones compared the pair of them to a couple of batsmen opening the innings together for the first time. He says they will get better every time they play together. Which is progress. Last time a gifted fly-half broke up Farrell’s lifelong partnership with George Ford he did not get much of a chance. That was when Jones picked Danny Cipriani on the tour to South Africa in 2018. If they were batting together they might have tried to run each other out. There is an infamous bit of footage from the third Test of that series that shows Farrell saying “what are you doing?” as Cipriani kicked a raking cross-field kick to Jonny May on the far wing. Cipriani never played again. In the opening quarter the new partnership looked good. In those moments one could see how it was supposed to work. Smith’s attacking threat seemed to free up Farrell to get on with the simple things he does so well, while he kept one eye on the state of the game, and the shape of the play. When Farrell is playing alongside Ford it sometimes feels as if England are an orchestra with two conductors, but now that job was Farrell’s alone, while Smith got on with the virtuoso work. There was not as much of that as Smith’s admirers would have liked. But what there was told plenty about how good he is. Like that first try, which Jones described as one of the best England have ever scored. Freddie Steward finished it but Smith’s fingerprints were all over the build-up. He started the attack with an up-and-under. Andrew Kellaway spilled the catch and from the following scrum, Smith fed Farrell, then looped around his back before Farrell passed the ball back to him. Then Smith stepped Len Ikitau, made a half-break. England surged forward. A little grunt work up front and Farrell, in at first receiver again, fed Smith. He offered a little shimmer of a dummy to the defender standing in front of him, just enough to help open up the split-second gap that Steward raced through as Smith slipped the ball on to him. By now Australia were starting to line Smith up. Next time he tried to run that loop-move with Farrell, Hunter Paisami came charging out of the line and knocked him flat on his back. Paisami ended up doing more damage to himself than he did to Smith, who bounced straight back up from it. Moments later Michael Hooper came for him too. This time Smith saw him coming and deftly sidestepped his way out of trouble, although the pass he threw afterwards missed its mark. The kid is plenty tough enough for Test rugby. He even ended up topping England’s tackle count. In the end it was Farrell who went off injured and Smith was left to run the game his way for the last 15 minutes. He did not crash it. In fact England won that little stretch 10-0. Jones will have taken note.Boris Johnson took the stage at Glasgow as the Cop26 summit neared its conclusion last Wednesday, aiming to galvanise the conference into a deal that would stave off climate breakdown. Instead, confronting the world’s media immediately afterwards, he faced a barrage of questions about Tory sleaze, the global problems of the climate crisis eclipsed by a sordid Westminster scandal. Even as the prime minister was forced to deny that the UK was a corrupt country, unknown to him or his closest aides, the real international statesmanship was going on in windowless rooms barely 100 metres away in the windswept conference centre. John Kerry, the US climate envoy, and Xie Zhenhua, China’s head of delegation, were putting the finishing touches to a statement by the world’s two superpowers that would set the tone for a Glasgow climate deal. Xie and Kerry laid out the details of their pact on Wednesday evening in the same press conference room where Johnson had sweated under close questioning a little over an hour beforehand. Downing Street was blindsided, having played no part in the announcement, hailed as “game-changing” by observers. For some of those following the talks, it was just the latest in a long series of prime ministerial misses, absences and gaffes. Most of the past year has been marked by Johnson’s long silences on climate issues, punctuated by a few set-piece occasions. “Johnson has been largely a bystander,” says Tom Burke, veteran climate adviser to governments and co-founder of the E3G green thinktank. “He has not imposed his stamp on this issue. He has not put in the hours. He has not been spending the time he needed to, meeting his peers in other countries, which you have to so that you build up those key relationships.” Johnson chaired no meetings on the climate even as the UK was preparing to host the talks, from the end of the previous Cop in Madrid in 2019 to the launch of the UK’s presidency in February 2020. He participated in a joint UK-UN-French celebration of the five-year anniversary of the Paris agreement in December 2020, then was largely silent for months until a White House climate summit in April. After that, while the UK cabinet minister and Cop26 president Alok Sharma conducted a hectic round of diplomacy from 9 Downing Street, almost nothing was heard on the climate from No 10 until Johnson hosted the G7 in Cornwall in July, a meeting dominated by rows over Brexit and sausages. Along the way, there have been scandals that angered green experts far more than any rows over MPs’ second jobs. The protracted decision, still ongoing, over a potential new coalmine in Cumbria outraged climate scientists early this year; new licences for oil and gasfields in the North Sea gave a poor signal to other countries, whatever the government said about allowing them only if there was a “climate test”; the decision to slash overseas aid looked ill-judged, coming as the UK was exhorting other countries to offer billions to developing nations in climate finance. Downing Street appeared not to realise how damaging these gaffes were. “Johnson was not paying enough attention,” says Burke. Seen from abroad, the UK has performed well on the organisational aspects of Cop26 and on climate diplomacy, but Johnson himself has been a puzzle. His rhetorical flights of fancy involving “mung-bean munching” and “bunny-hugging” – references to the supposed activities of environmentalists – were judged “divisive and insulting” by green experts in the UK, while many outside the country struggled to follow. “It is easy to be green,” he told the UN general assembly, a Muppets quip that left his fellow world leaders nonplussed. “The messaging was confusing – mung beans, Kermit the Frog, that this was an environment agenda rather than a [global] safety and health and survival agenda,” says Rachel Kyte, formerly a top climate official at the World Bank, now dean of the Fletcher School at Tufts University in the US. “Saying he gave [Cop26] a six out of 10 chance of success as he arrived at the UN general assembly was odd.” Paul Bledsoe, a former Clinton-era White House climate adviser, now with the Progressive Policy Institute thinktank in Washington DC, says the UK performed well logistically and diplomatically, but that Johnson’s role was always going to be limited by the realities of geopolitics. “Realistically, Johnson himself was never going to be the key negotiator or creator of innovative diplomatic or technical breakthroughs. The US, China, India, Brazil, Russia, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia and a few others – these are the nations where policy positions have played the largest roles, as usual.” But he gives Johnson credit for being a Conservative politician who has seen the importance of the climate agenda when some on the right have sought to deny or obfuscate it. “Johnson’s genuine climate advocacy as a leader of a centre-right political party has been important to setting an atmosphere of ambition on urgency. The question is, will he continue to push China, Russia and other climate laggards, and also double down on UK domestic commitments after the television crews have left Glasgow?” Although Cop26 has ended, under the UN rules, the UK will remain Cop president for the next year, until Egypt takes over at Cop27 next autumn. That gives Johnson a year in which to press ahead with this agenda and secure a global legacy of climate action to ensure the outcome of the summit is carried through into policies and measures around the world. Shaun Spiers, of the Green Alliance thinktank, says: “This is an opportunity to present Global Britain to the world. But the last two weeks have shown that climate diplomacy requires sustained attention. This must be a whole government effort.”Eddie Jones has targeted a “South African scalp” to round off England’s autumn internationals campaign after an eighth-straight win over Australia but faces an anxious wait to discover the extent of Owen Farrell’s ankle injury. Tries from Freddie Steward and Jamie Blamire, as well as 17 points from Farrell, steered England to victory against an ill-disciplined Australia side after a week blighted by a Covid-19 outbreak that ruled Joe Marler and Ellis Genge out of the match. Farrell and Marcus Smith dovetailed as part of England’s new-look 10-12 axis but the captain’s injury will be a worry for Jones with the Springboks due at Twickenham next Saturday. Farrell expressed hope he would be fit but on Saturday night admitted it was too early to judge the extent of the injury, adding only that “we’ll see what it turns up tomorrow”. Jones will be desperately hoping his captain comes through, however, with England preparing for a first match against South Africa since the 2019 World Cup final defeat. “They are the World Cup champions and we are not,” said Jones. “It is going to be an important Test and we want to finish off the autumn well – it is the final game of the autumn and we will see it as a final and we want to take them on. We will have to play differently to beat them. It’s the final game and we want to go into the Six Nations with a South African scalp.” While England wait to learn the seriousness of Farrell’s injury, the outlook is worse for Jamie George, who went off injured at half-time. With Kyle Sinckler battling through a dead leg and Bevan Rodd playing 72 minutes on debut after he was a late call-up with Marler and then Genge ruled out with Covid-19, it was England’s resilience that pleased Jones most. “We had two Covid positives, we had a young prop come in on Thursday and made him a starting guy and we lost Jamie at half-time,” he said. “Kyle Sinckler got a bad dead leg in the first half so we had to battle really hard and I was really pleased with the attitude of the players. We predicted more of a free-flowing game, as Australia like to play but it turned out to be a heavy penalty game and I was pleased how we adapted.” Should Farrell be passed fit to face South Africa, he could continue his burgeoning partnership with Smith, which shone in glimpses against the Wallabies – notably when the latter released Steward for England’s opening try. “They are a bit like two opening batsmen who haven’t batted together and are facing the new ball for the first time,” said Jones. “Every time they bat together after this they will be better. But I thought our first try was one of the best I have seen from an England side. Our handling, the lines we were running, hitting the holes was absolutely outstanding and we want a bit of that. It is not going to happen all the time but it was really promising from those two guys. “They have both got to get picked. But the competition in this squad is red hot, we know Owen is a good player, that was his 100th Test including the Lions and he is getting close to 100 with England, we know he is a bloody good player and we know Smith will be a good player if he keeps working hard.” Australia, meanwhile, pinpointed the 18-9 penalty count as key to their undoing, with both Tom Wright and Angus Bell sent to the sin-bin. The Wallabies head coach, Dave Rennie, refused to point the finger at the referee Jaco Peyper, however. He said: “We just couldn’t get anything going – we got hammered in the penalty count and we just made too many errors and dumb penalties. If we could have strung a few phases together we could have put them under some heat. But most of the issues were our own doing.”Lewis Hamilton’s Formula One world championship hopes hung by the slenderest of threads after he was disqualified from Friday’s qualifying at the Brazilian Grand Prix. Yet with typical indomitable fortitude the world champion refused to accept his fate. He delivered an exceptional performance in Saturday’s sprint to give himself a chance to keep his title hopes alive at Interlagos and stay in touch with Max Verstappen. F1 had scrupulously followed its rules in punishing Hamilton but it was impossible to ignore the sense of disappointment that accompanied the likelihood that the most exciting title fight for years might be decided in the stewards’ room rather than on the track. Hamilton described the decision as “devastating” but had no intention of throwing in the towel. Relegated to the back of the grid after the FIA confirmed his Mercedes team had broken regulations in their rear wing drag reduction system (DRS) during Friday’s qualifying, Hamilton gave a masterclass in controlled, aggressive driving to move from 20th to fifth in just 24 laps. The sprint was won by his teammate Valtteri Bottas, who will start from pole, with Verstappen in second. “I just tried to get as far up as possible, then all of a sudden, I was chipping away at it much faster,” Hamilton said. “You just can’t give up. You just have to keep going.” So quick and so precise was Hamilton that what had appeared to be an insurmountable task is now all to play for. He scythed through the field, including an absolutely bravura pass on Lando Norris through turn one on the final lap to take fifth, but the challenge remains significant. With his grid penalty for taking a new engine earlier in the weekend applied he will start the grand prix from 10th. Yet such was his pace that making a tilt at the front with a full 71 laps to play with is within his grasp. A bullish Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, was hugely pleased with the result especially as he felt his team had been harshly treated. “Fuck them all,” he said to Hamilton as he crossed the line. Wolff insisted the comment was not aimed at the stewards but rather an expression of building up resilience. He believed the attention to the Mercedes wing brought by Red Bull and the refusal to allow for what he believed was damage incurred during its use was unfair. “In a way there was a gentleman’s agreement that exists, now it doesn’t any more,” he noted before celebrating Hamilton’s performance. “Today it reminded me why I love this sport,” he added. “Everything is possible, we have everything to play for tomorrow.” Hamilton trails Verstappen by 21 points with four rounds, including today’s, remaining and 104 points available. Before the sprint Verstappen looked all set to open a chasm to the world champion, now the fight remains on albeit with the numbers still stacked up against the British driver. If Verstappen scores three points more than Hamilton on Sunday he could finish second to him in the three remaining meetings and still take his first title. Hamilton’s team were found to have breached the technical regulation during the qualifying on Friday that decided the grid for the sprint race. His punishment was finally confirmed on Saturday afternoon and Mercedes have stated they will not appeal. Verstappen too had been drawn into the protracted steward’s enquiry and was fined €50,000 (£43,500) for touching Hamilton’s car after qualifying. For Mercedes it was a technical infringement that was not intentional. The rear wing passed the FIA test before qualifying but failed to do so afterwards. The stewards confirmed they believed there had been no deliberate rule breaking, reporting there was “no question of any intent to exceed the maximum dimension either by action or design”. However, they did state the issue was likely caused by a “play in parts” (contact between different elements), a fault with the mechanism or incorrect assembly. Wolff said the team were convinced that the wing had been damaged but it had yet to be returned to them for inspection. It was a huge blow for Mercedes. Since the turbo-hybrid era began in 2014 they have been dominant and performed operationally and mechanically at an exceptionally high standard. The sequence of events had begun after qualifying finished on Friday at 2pm in Brazil and only concluded a full 19 hours later. With Hamilton having secured pole for the sprint race with a dominant performance, Red Bull lodged a complaint about the DRS. Mercedes were then summoned to the stewards after the FIA technical delegate, Jo Bauer, had inspected and found an infringement. The DRS opens a flap in the wing, reducing drag and allowing the car to go car faster in a straight line. The gap is mandated to be no more than 85mm and Hamilton’s was found to be marginally larger. The stewards investigated and Mercedes put their case, and the intrigue only ratcheted up when Verstappen and Red Bull were also summoned to the stewards. They were called to explain a breach of the parc fermé rules that forbid the touching or checking of cars once qualifying is complete. Footage filmed by a fan had emerged of Verstappen inspecting and touching the rear wing of his car and then Hamilton’s under parc fermé conditions and he was duly fined. The process ground on, only finally reaching its conclusion shortly before the sprint began, and for that brief period Hamilton’s title hopes looked absolutely forlorn. Then he took to the track, once more refused to be bowed and is on absolutely fighting form for Sunday’s race.One of the things everyone says about Gareth Bale is that, for him, the team is always king, so he would have been unbothered at not getting in on the act as Wales effortlessly routed Belarus on his 100th cap. Instead Bale, wearing an enormous smile, applauded from the substitutes’ bench – he was withdrawn at half-time on his comeback from injury – as Ben Davies added a fourth goal, following an Aaron Ramsey double and a strike by Neco Williams. Connor Roberts found a late fifth goal shortly after the Belarus substitute Artem Kontsevoi had hit a consolation strike. Attention turns to Tuesday’s game here with the Group E winners, Belgium. While it is mathematically possible for Wales to finish second on goal difference if they lose narrowly but score, realistically they need a draw unless the Czech Republic fail to win at home to Estonia. Wales have secured a play-off spot via the Nations League but need to come second to have a chance of being seeded. Bale will be there to aid their efforts. After the final whistle last night he embarked on a lap of the pitch, wearing a black Wales coat. He blew kisses to his family, including his parents, Frank and Debbie, and when he reached the Canton Stand, his long-time best friend in the squad, Wayne Hennessey, who is next in line to reach a century after coming on for his 98th cap, gave him a bear hug before worshipping him with both hands. Supporters and teammates alike followed, and then Bale mirrored the gesture, the feeling mutual. “It speaks volumes about him as a person,” said the interim Wales manager, Rob Page. “He is so humble, he appreciates his teammates and I thought that was a real touch of class. In the changing room the boys acknowledged [his achievement] with a round of applause.” For Bale, this was a landmark milestone on a journey that started in 2006 in Graz, where he claimed his first assist as a baby-faced full-back aged 16 and 315 days. Bale was reluctant to bask in the achievement in the buildup to the game but the occasion was always going to be about him. A few young supporters held a “Diolch Bale” cardboard cutout. Before the game, the Football Association of Wales presented him with a commemorative shirt with the congratulatory message “Longyfarchiadau 100” and the first hearty rendition of Viva Gareth Bale reverberated around this stadium 10 minutes before kick-off. By his standards, this was a low-key 45 minutes but a couple of neat flicks drew gasps from the home crowd. This was, after all, his first game since September because of a hamstring tear. “As much as I would have loved to come off to an ovation, the most important thing is the game, the team,” Bale said. “I’m just happy to be back – it was a hard road back from injury.” A typically electric national anthem set the tone and Wales, seemingly supercharged, overwhelmed Belarus from kick-off. Sergei Chernik spilled a Davies shot from the edge of the box and Ramsey was on hand to tap in the rebound inside two minutes. It was an ominous start for a Belarus side that had lost their previous 14 away qualifiers. Williams then beat Chernik at his near post on 20 minutes. Bale was beckoned to shoot after driving forward from halfway but instead passed on the baton. Williams cut inside from the left flank and his tame right-foot shot squeezed past Chernik, who should have done better. The second half was only five minutes old when Wales put the game beyond doubt. It would have been a tailor-made opportunity for Bale to mark his milestone with a goal, only he was not on the pitch when Ruslan Yudenkov was penalised for handball inside the box. Ramsey stepped up to coolly send Chernik the wrong way. Davies headed in a corner for his first international goal before Roberts flicked in a free-kick for Wales’s fifth. Hennessey arrived a minute later to a warm roar but this was Bale’s night. “A special occasion,” he said.Ben Fisher was in Cardiff tonight to see Wales run riot. His report has landed. Thanks for reading this Clockwatch. Nighty night! Two-goal Aaron Ramsey talks to Sky. “We did what we wanted to do: be on the front foot early in the game, and we managed to do that. It’s not always easy to play against a low block. It’s amazing to be back in front of our home fans. Tuesday’s game will be massive, hopefully we can get another result. Hopefully Gareth Bale will be good to go on Tuesday. I’m not sure but I think his substitution was just a precaution. We’ve had some great battles against Belgium over the years, so hopefully we’ll have another great night here.” France join Belgium in Qatar next winter, four-goal Kylian Mbappe having put Kazakhstan to the sword. The Netherlands were eight minutes away from joining them, but inexplicably let a two-goal lead slip in Montenegro. They’re still two points clear at the top of Group G, but both Turkey and Norway can now beat them to automatic qualification. Tuesday’s games - Montenegro v Turkey, Netherlands v Norway - promise box-office thrills. That’s a fine victory for Wales, who are now second in Group E with a three-point and two-goal advantage over the third-placed Czech Republic. Belgium, who travel to Cardiff on Tuesday, have secured their place in Qatar with their win over Estonia. Gareth Bale, now a member of the 100 Club, modestly, bordering on reluctantly, soaks up an ovation from the crowd, forced up front and centre by his happy team-mates. Wales could have another ton-up merchant soon, as well, Rob Page having sent on Wayne Hennessey for Danny Ward with a couple of minutes to go, so he can claim his 98th cap. There’s nice. Group D Bosnia and Herzegovina 1-3 Finland France 8-0 Kazakhstan Group E Wales 5-1 Belarus Belgium 3-1 Estonia Group G Norway 0-0 Latvia Turkey 6-0 Gibraltar Montenegro 2-2 Netherlands Four for Kylian Mbappe. Throw in one assist, and it’s been quite the performance from the PSG star. Incidentally, there was a lovely moment on 85 minutes in Cardiff, as the crowd paid a warm, heartfelt tribute to the late Gary Speed. The former Wales star won 85 caps for his country, and took charge of his final game as manager ten years ago this week. ... but the Welsh re-establish their four-goal lead quick-smart, Harry Wilson whipping a free kick from the right touchline towards the near post, where Connor Roberts flicks home! It’s a quickfire double in Cardiff, too, as Artem Kontsevoi sends a screeching dipper into the top right from an absurd distance. What a consolation goal! ... and another! Nikola Vujnović equalises and it looks like the Dutch will have to wait. It’s going to be a nervous final few minutes for the Dutch, who are suddenly no longer certain of automatically making it this evening. Substitute Ilija Vukotić halves their lead. Antoine Griezmann gets in on the act from 12 yards. He’d earned the right to take it, having had the back of his leg raked, the ref pointing to the spot. He unveils a t-shirt commemorating the victims of the November 2015 terror attacks in Paris. A free kick out on the left for Wales, who load the box. Harry Wilson whips a stunning ball through the six-yard box. It hits the unaware Ben Davies and nearly squirts into the bottom right. It would have been one hell of a fluke - albeit with one hell of an assist - but Sergei Chernik gathers. A slew of substitutions in Cardiff. The Welsh flow is interrupted. See the last entry, except Adrien Rabiot’s header was flush. France are making their way over the line in smooth style. A corner from the right. Ben Davies rises highest to meet it with his ... shoulder. Never mind, it flies in anyway, and that’s his first goal for Wales, who have a couple of goals on the third-placed Czechs now. Ah, it doesn’t matter, forget all that. Substitute Thorgan Hazard restores Belgium’s two-goal cushion in short order. Well, well, well. Erik Sorga pulls one back in Brussels, and perhaps Belgium aren’t home and hosed quite yet. Mind you, they’ll still be all but qualified if they only draw: Wales would have to run up a cricket score against them in Cardiff to pip them, 7-0 by my back-of-fag-packet calculations (though I wouldn’t rely on my maths if I were you). Estonia would have to score a couple more to realistically crack the door open for Wales. Dan James goes down in the Belarus box, having been gently brushed from behind by Aleksandr Selyava as he was lashing at a shot from a tight angle. He takes a fresh-air kick instead and hits the deck. Just a corner. There wasn’t a whole lot in it, you could argue, but Selyava got away with one there. Ethan Ampadu is booked for crumping his elbow into Vladislav Klimovich’s lughole as the pair contest a high ball. No need for it, especially as the yellow card means he’ll miss the big climax against Belgium in three days’ time. He cocks his head back and crunches his eyes in pained irritation. Kylian Mbappe scored his first-half hat-trick in 26 minutes. Karim Benzema is going at an even quicker lick here, scoring his second in four minutes, this one assisted by Mbappe. The champions enjoying themselves. Memphis Depay scored the opener from the spot after Davy Klaassen was felled in the box. This goal is converted from much closer range. About 11 yards closer, in fact. Holland, who failed to make it to Russia, are surely back in the big time. Someone else gets on the scoresheet at the Parc des Princes. Karim Benzema makes it four from close range, having been set up by Theo Hernández. Yannick Carrasco, with an assist already to his name this evening, chalks up a goal as well. Roberto Martínez’s side are almost certainly going to qualify from Group E in first place. That will hopefully make life a bit easier for Wales on Tuesday night. It’s not exactly shocking news to report that Belarus look a thoroughly beaten docket. They’re on course to lose their ninth game in a row, and are second to everything right now. Wales have a chance to fill their boots here, and boost their goal difference over the third-placed Czechs. Belarus keeper Sergei Chernik jigs about on his line in the Grobbelaar -Dudek tradition. He doesn’t faze Aaron Ramsey, who gives him the eyes, sends him the wrong way, and passes gracefully into the bottom right. What a lovely penalty. Penalty for Wales! Brennan Johnson makes an instant impact, pressuring Ruslan Yudenkov as they chase a high ball. Yudenkov loses his bearings and allows the ball to slap off his arm. The referee has a quick think, then points to the spot! Wales captain Gareth Bale’s 100th appearance for his country is over. He’s replaced at half-time, presumably blowing hard, having not played a single game since early September. Nottingham Forest’s Brennan Johnson comes on in his place. Half-time entertainment. Jonathan Wilson’s Observer column is hot off the press. You know the drill: click for your edification! Group D Bosnia and Herzegovina 1-3 Finland (FT) France 3-0 Kazakhstan (HT) Group E Wales 2-0 Belarus (HT) Belgium 1-0 Estonia (HT) Group G Norway 0-0 Latvia (FT) Turkey 6-0 Gibraltar (FT) Montenegro 0-1 Netherlands (HT) Wales continue to ping it around, but Belarus are holding their shape on the edge of their box. A gentle drift towards half time. Wales keep searching for a third goal. Ramsey and Williams take turns to have shots blocked. The hosts are getting plenty of joy down this left wing. Here’s some information on Finland’s earlier 3-1 win over Bosnia-Herzegovina, courtesy of our old pal Kári Tulinius, who will be loving Kylian Mbappe’s antics right now. “Finland is hoping France cruise through tonight and will have their foot off the gas for their final match, against the Eagle-Owls. Speaking of, Finland’s win was impressive considering Raitala was sent off with about half an hour played, so they were a man down for an hour or so, but still were comfortably the better team against Bosnia, who admittedly were missing Dzeko. Norwich fans will be heartened to know that, even though he missed a pen, Pukki is back to his best, creating the first with a fine assist, and chased down a lost cause which led to the second.” Kylian Mbappe’s hat-trick goal was a hell of a finish, by the way. Another right-wing cross from Kingsley Coman, met with a header perfectly aimed across the keeper and into the top left. Anything Harry Kane can do, Kylian Mbappe can manage a little bit faster. He completes a first-half hat-trick, and the world champions are sailing to Qatar in style. Harry Wilson and Gareth Bale exchange crisp passes down the inside-left channel. Wilson very nearly releases Neco Williams with a slide-rule pass, but the flag goes up for offside. Wales are playing some very easy-on-the-eye stuff. Wales are in search of a third. Dan James and Neco Williams combine well down the left, the former teeing up the latter to cross deep for Connor Roberts, who sends a hard-won header over the bar. The Dutch are going to Qatar as things stand. Memphis Depay has given Louis van Gaal’s side the lead in Podgorica, slotting a 25th-minute penalty. As things stand, Belgium will qualify automatically from Group E, while Wales move into second, three points clear of the Czech Republic in third. Crucially, they now have the same goal difference as the Czechs, so a couple more this evening would be most welcome. The Czechs host Estonia in their final game on Tuesday, while Wales welcome the Belgians. Goal difference could make or break Welsh hopes of a home tie in the play-off semis. Gareth Bale strides purposefully towards the Belarus box. The crowd encourage him to shoot from a daft distance. He declines and opts to feed Neco Williams to his left. Williams drops a shoulder to make space and sends a shot towards the bottom left. Sergei Chernik should claim, it wasn’t the purest strike, but he fumbles the ball into the corner and Wales haven’t taken long to establish a two-goal cushion in this must-win game. Belarus bear their teeth for the first time this evening, Nikolai Zolotov bustling down the middle before hoicking a long-distance shot well over the bar. The visitors probably should have been awarded a corner, the ball taking a nick en route to the stand behind, but they don’t get one. A nice pattern developing in this match, as Kylian Mbappe follows up his sixth-minute goal with another on 12. This time he converts a cross from the right, sweeping Kingsley Coman’s low pass into the net from 12 yards. Connor Roberts passes up a great chance to make it two for Wales. He’s got time and space inside the box, 12 yards out and level with the right-hand post. Aiming for the bottom left, he drags his diagonal shot well wide. With only the keeper to beat, he should have done better. Belgium will make it through with a win tonight as well, and they’re off to a brisk start. Christian Benteke has opened the scoring at the King Baudouin Stadium in Brussels, tapping home from close range after good work by Yannick Carrasco down the left, and the 2018 bronze medallists have one foot on the plane to Qatar. The reigning world champions should qualify automatically, of course, but here we are. Never mind, France can qualify tonight, should they see off Kazakhstan in Paris, and they’re off to a great start. Theo Hernández reaches the byline down the left, cuts back, and Kylian Mbappé pokes instinctively into the bottom left. It could be a long evening for Belarus, who have lost their last eight games on the bounce. On the bench, coach Georgi Kondratiev chews his fingernails nervously. The corner’s pulled back to Joe Allen, whose shot from the edge of the D is deflected over the bar. And from the second corner, Ben Davies drive is parried by Sergei Chernik. A fine save as the ball flies through a crowded box, but he can only tee up Aaron Ramsey, who taps in from a couple of yards. What a start! Here we go, then. A minute of respectful silence in memory of the fallen, then the roof comes off the Cardiff City Stadium as Wales get down to business, winning an early corner down the left through Dan James. The teams are out in Cardiff. Gareth Bale leads the team out. The Wales captain will be making his 100th appearance for his country. We’ll be off in a minute, after the choir in the stands belts out a rendition of Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau. Wales have been warming up in t-shirts supporting David Brooks and Dan Barden. The Bournemouth midfielder and Livingston goalkeeper are both currently undergoing treatment for cancer. The FAW have joined Tenovus Cancer Care to raise awareness of the charity and its support line. Best wishes to David and Dan. Wales boss Rob Page speaks to Sky Sports. “We knew there would be a strong possibility that we’d get that play-off place, so we didn’t celebrate it. The plan is to finish second. It could go down to goal difference, so it’s all out for a win tonight. Gareth Bale has done really well to get himself fit, and will get his 100th cap. But our full focus is on the three points, we can celebrate that afterwards. It’s game on.” Belgium: Courtois, Castagne, Denayer, Vertonghen, Meunier, Witsel, Vanaken, Carrasco, De Bruyne, Eden Hazard, Benteke. Subs: Trossard, Dendoncker, Thorgan Hazard, Saelemaekers, Theate, Mignolet, Boyata, Origi, Casteels, Sambi Lokonga, De Ketelaere, Mertens. Estonia: Igonen, Paskotsi, Tamm, Mets, Teniste, Poom, Kreida, Vassiljev, Ojamaa, Zenjov, Anier. Subs: Sorga, Purg, Lukka, Vallner, Soomets, Sappinen, Puri, Pikk, Aksalu, Miller, Sinyavskiy, Kirss. Wales: Ward, Ampadu, Rodon, B Davies, C Roberts, Allen, Ramsey, N Williams, Wilson, James, Bale. Subs: Hennessey, A Davies, Gunter, Mepham, T Roberts, Colwill, Morrell, Thomas, Harris, Vaulks, Johnson, J Williams. Belarus: Chernik, Zolotov, Yudenkov, Selyava, Pechenin, Naumov, Klimovich, Yablonski, Sedko, Ebong, V Lisakovich. Subs: Khatkevich, Pavlyuchenko, Shevchenko, Sokol, Ebong, Bakhar, Solovei, Yuzepchuk, Kontsevoi, Lisakovich, Levitski, Antilevski. France: Lloris, Kounde, Upamecano, Lucas, Coman, Kante, Rabiot, Hernandez, Griezmann, Benzema, Mbappe. Subs: Diaby, Areola, Veretout, Digne, Tchouameni, Pavard, Guendouzi, Zouma, Costil, Lenglet, Dubois, Ben Yedder. Kazakhstan: Pokatilov, Bystrov, Yerlanov, Taikenov, Alip, Marochkin, Zharinbetov, Kuat, Tapalov, Omirtayev, Aimbetov. Subs: Seisen, Baytana, Zhaksylykov, Vasiljev, Tursynbay, Kasym, Kairov, Shayzada, Shushenachev. Montenegro: Sarkic, Marko Vukcevic, Vujacic, Savic, Tomasevic, Radunovic, Jankovic, Osmajic, Haksabanovic, Djurdjevic, Jovovic. Subs: Vujnovic, Vukotic, Dreskovic, Agovic, Mirkovic, Raickovic, Beciraj, Bozovic, Mijatovic, Simic. Netherlands: Bijlow, Dumfries, de Vrij, van Dijk, Blind, Wijnaldum, Klaassen, Frenkie de Jong, Depay, Malen, Danjuma. Subs: Ake, Bergwijn, Malacia, Lang, Gravenberch, Weghorst, Rensch, Cillessen, de Ligt, Til, Flekken, Koopmeiners. Group D Bosnia and Herzegovina 1-3 Finland (FT) France v Kazakhstan Group E Wales v Belarus Belgium v Estonia Group G Norway 0-0 Latvia (FT) Turkey 6-0 Gibraltar (FT) Montenegro v Netherlands FULL TIME: Norway 0-0 Latvia. FULL TIME: Turkey 6-0 Gibraltar. No joy for Norway in Oslo. Two dropped points, coupled with Turkey’s rout of Gibraltar, means they slip to third. Turkey leapfrog them into second on goal difference. Both teams are just a point behind the Netherlands, who can now secure qualification tonight if they win in Montenegro. Ødegaard whips in a cross from the right. Alexander Sørloth flashes a header, meant for the top-right corner, inches over the har. With 30 seconds remaining, that could be that. Norway are currently piling everyone forward in their desperation. Eight minutes of injury time, though. During the first four, Martin Ødegaard nearly squeezes one home from a tight angle on the right, while the luckless Mohamed Elyounoussi has a rasping drive blocked. There are two matches going on now. Turkey are beating Gibraltar 5-0 with ten minutes to go, while Norway are being held at home 0-0 by Latvia. If Norway fail to find a goal in the five minutes plus stoppages that are left, Turkey will leapfrog them into second place in Group G. That would seriously dent Norwegian hopes of qualification, given their last match is away to the Netherlands, while Turkey go to Montenegro. It’s tense in Oslo, then, where Mohamed Elyounoussi has had an effort cleared off the line and seen a goal chalked off by VAR for offside. There’s already been one result in European qualifying today. Finland have won 3-1 in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a result that puts them second in Group D behind leaders France, who can qualify tonight by beating Kazakhstan. Teemu Pukki missed a 10th-minute penalty, but Marcus Forss put Finland ahead soon after, and Robin Lod made it two on 51 minutes. Luka Menalo pulled one back on 69 minutes, but Daniel O’Shaughnessy restored Finland’s two-goal cushion four minutes later, and that was that. It all sets up a big night on Tuesday, as Finland welcome France while Bosnia-Herzegovina host third-placed Ukraine, who are two points behind the Finns. You want World Cup qualification drama? We got ... well, actually, let’s not oversell the product. The big game from our point of view this evening is Wales versus Belarus, and while there’s some jeopardy for Rob Page’s men - they need to pip the Czech Republic to second spot in Group E if they’re to have any chance of a home draw in the play-off semis - they’ve got a safety net of a guaranteed play-off place by dint of having won their Nations League group last year. So while a win tonight would be mighty handy, there’s no scope for any Zenica-style party or Bodinesque wake. Kick-off in Cardiff is 7.45pm GMT. Mae ymlaen! Other 7.45pm kick-offs are available. France and Belgium can seal automatic qualification with home victories over Kazakhstan and Estonia respectively, while the Netherlands will also make it should they beat Montenegro and Norway fail to see off Latvia, about which you’ll hear more in a cold minute. Let’s get on with it, then.A fierce fight is being waged in the Gulf of Maine between lobster fishers desperate to maintain their way of life and conservationists who argue that the waters are a vital haven for the threatened North Atlantic right whale. Last month, a federal judge in Maine rejected a federal ban on lobstering in a section of the Gulf of Maine that is meant to protect the whales. The decision reflects the tense battle between a centuries-long lobstering industry – and bedrock of the local economy – that is fighting for its survival and conservation groups, who argue lobster fishing in the area has had detrimental effects on an endangered species who have been injured and killed by the fishing equipment. On 17 October, District Judge Lance Walker ruled in favor of several lobstering bodies including the Maine Lobstering Union when he rejected a four-month federal ban that would have prevented lobstering from continuing on offshore fishing grounds in the Gulf of Maine. Lobster industry advocates argued that there was insufficient evidence to prove that the whales frequented the area. Walker questioned the federal statistical models used to evaluate the risk of whales becoming entangled in lobster fishing equipment. According to him, federal regulators from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration used “markedly thin” modeling to prove the whales’ presence in the thousand-square mile area off the Maine coast. Lobstering advocates such Virginia Olsen of the Maine Lobstering Union praised Walker for his decision, saying, “we felt like someone actually took a look at that data that we had been looking at and finally came to some of the same conclusions. “We felt like this was a step that was going to hurt our fishery, our communities,” Olsen said, referring to the federal ban. “What we needed as fishermen was some validation that what we were doing was actually in the best interest of the right whale … and we didn’t feel like the seasonal closure was that right step,” she added. Maine’s $1.4bn lobster industry has for decades been the lifeline for numerous lobster fishers including Olsen herself. But conservationists see its lobstering practices as a significant factor in the reduction of right whale populations over the years. In data released last month, the North Atlantic Right Whale Consortium revealed that in 2019, the right whale numbered 366, before dropping to 336 in 2020, the lowest number in nearly 20 years. Entanglement is a leading cause of death among right whales. The consortium cited human activities as the driving force behind the species’ extinction, as 86% of identified right whales have been entangled one or more times in fishing gear. “When they encounter a vertical line that’s in the water, there’s a buoy on the surface and then there’s a string of up to twenty traps on the seafloor … [The whales] generally can’t see the ropes and it’s very violent. The whale will thrash in the water and at the surface, trying to escape,” said Gib Brogan, a fisheries campaign manager at Oceana, an international ocean conservation group. Ropes entangling the whales can dig into their flesh, and wrap around their mouths, preventing them from feeding, breeding and socializing, Brogan said. . Entangled whales, especially young calves, may drown if they cannot reach the surface; others die slowly of starvation. “What the government is saying is that [the Gulf of Maine] may not be an aggregation area. [Rather] it may be a pathway as the whales are migrating from either the eastern Gulf of Maine or the Gulf of St Lawrence … This is a time and place where a lot of whales are using this as their habitat … which have a lot of functions. It can be a breeding, feeding and socializing area,” Brogan said. Noaa has appealed Walker’s order, arguing that the lobster unions and dealers failed to provide evidence of irreparable harm that the closure of the waters would have on them. It also argued that the lobstering bodies did not provide hard evidence that the closure would result in economic havoc. Over the years, ropeless fishing has been promoted as an alternative to lobstermen that would pose less risk to whales. Instead of using the traditional lines that connect traps on the seafloor to a buoy, ropeless traps can be raised to the surface by remote control. However, the industry has not yet widely embraced this method, with many such as Olsen citing ropeless fishing’s availability, cost and safety as major concerns. A ropeless trap costs about $4,000, while a traditional lobster trap costs between $80 and $180. The National Marine Fisheries Service loans experimental gear technology to collaborating fishers, but Noaa expects a maximum of only 330 ropeless traps to be available coastwide – from Maine to Florida – in the coming years. Some groups are calling for collaboration between the two sides. Erica Fuller, a senior attorney at the Conservation Law Foundation, said promoting new methods of fishing – and providing the means for lobstermen to adopt them – would help solve the fight. “I don’t think any conservationist would say that ropeless fishing is ready today, nor is it affordable yet. But we have to get there,” said Fuller. “What in a collaborative fashion would be helpful would be if fishermen that might be otherwise closed out of a certain area or fishermen who generally want to be part of a solution would try on some of this gear … Based on fishermen’s feedback, we get the best gear modifications. “If Maine wants to play a more collaborative role in trying to move that transition forward, that would certainly be an area where we do everything in our power to help those fishermen,” she added.A further indication of the raising of standards within the Scotland camp was delivered by the lack of triumphalism among Steve Clarke and his players as a World Cup play-off berth was secured. The Scottish support were jubilant after the 2-0 success in Moldova which earned second place in Group F, but Clarke had already turned his mind to the challenge ahead. Namely, progressing through two games next March that would seal Scotland’s place in a World Cup for the first time since 1998. “We are not going to celebrate getting to a play-off,” Clarke said. “It is a measure of the improvement in the team and the squad. But we want to go to Qatar. When we get to March we will save the celebrations for then hopefully. ‘Job done’ is to qualify for Qatar.” Hampden Park is likely to host a party on Monday evening when Denmark visit, but Clarke has an alternative mindset. Scotland will almost certainly need at least a draw from the runaway group winners to earn what could be a crucial seeded berth in the play-offs. That would mean a home game in at least the first of those March fixtures. “We need probably something from the game on Monday to be seeded but even without something on Monday night, we have to win two more matches,” added Scotland’s manager. “We want to finish well. It will be a full house at Hampden. We want to finish the campaign well. If we can get one or three points on Monday it should secure a seeding. We relaxed and enjoyed ourselves on the flight back – without alcohol - but we will get ourselves ready for Monday. We will enjoy the fact we have had a good campaign up to now and we want to finish it. We are now two matches away from Qatar. We are getting closer.” Clarke’s job is rendered trickier by the ridiculous ruling that means suspensions and yellow cards carry into the play-offs. Just two bookings incur a ban. Eight Scotland players – Scott McTominay, Stephen O’Donnell, Billy Gilmour, Andy Robertson, Jack Hendry, Kevin Nisbet, Che Adams and John McGinn – are sitting on a single yellow card. Clarke is understood to be privately unhappy about the rule but in public he is circumspect. He will have to balance competitiveness and the potential for an upcoming selection headache against the Danes. Nathan Patterson will serve a suspension against Denmark after collecting a booking in Moldova. The young full-back, who cannot command regular game time at Rangers but has been targeted by Everton, scored a terrific goal amid a generally excellent display on Friday evening. “I thought he started a little bit slowly, to be honest,” said Clarke of Patterson. “But he is not playing enough football as a young player developing and this is not a criticism of anyone. He is not getting enough minutes on the pitch. It took him a little time to find his feet in the game but once he did, he played all right, didn’t he?” Clarke is in that rare position of being a Scotland manager adored by supporters. For so long, it felt as if the role should carry a health warning. Clarke changed that dynamic entirely by taking his country to the delayed Euro 2020 finals. He even broke with his own tradition by granting a request from the Scottish fans for a wave in the closing minutes of the Moldova clash. “I get nervous when I do that,” Clarke said with a smile. “I did it once as a younger manager somewhere, I can’t remember where. And we conceded a goal straightaway. I would ask the Tartan Army if they want a wave, can they wait until after the game. I actually turned to the bench: ‘Do you think I should wave?’ They were good, it was fantastic to see. They are amazing. “I spoke to one boy outside and he had jumped on a plane 22 hours earlier in America to come and watch the game. Twenty-two hours travelling. To be honest, he looked as fresh as a coat of paint. I would have been dead after that. So that’s a measure of the guys that want to be here. Thankfully we gave them a good night and they can enjoy themselves.”At least 68 prisoners have been killed and 25 injured in a jail in the city of Guayaquil in Ecuador after bloodletting between rival gangs broke out on Friday night, the attorney general’s office said on Saturday. The latest massacre occurred in the Litoral penitentiary, the same jail where at least 119 inmates lost their lives a little more than a month before in the country’s deadliest ever prison riot. It is the latest bloodshed in a wave of prison violence in Ecuador this year which pushes the death toll to more than 280 inmates. The scale and savagery of the violence between rival drug trafficking gangs vying for control of prisons has stunned the country. The latest carnage was no exception. Videos on social media purportedly posted by inmates overnight showed victims being beaten and burned alive in a prison courtyard. Other videos showed detainees begging for help to stop the violence as shots and explosions rang out in the background. The Guardian could not independently verify the origin of the videos. The outbreak was triggered by a power vacuum after a gang leader’s release, according to Pablo Arosemena, the governor of Guayas province where Guayaquil is located. “Other cell blocks with other groups wanted to subdue them, get inside and have a total massacre,” he said in a press conference on Saturday. Ecuador’s president, Guillermo Lasso, took to Twitter on Saturday to lambast judges. He accused them of restricting the state’s ability to combat the violence by limiting a 60-day state of emergency in the prison system – declared at the end of September – which aimed to free funding and allow heightened controls with military assistance. “The state’s fundamental duty is to guarantee the life of citizens, without discrimination. It is a fundamental human right,” Lasso tweeted. “Unfortunately, today that job has been made impossible by judicial decisions which impose exaggerated restrictions on the coordination between the state security forces to defend life. They do not allow us to defend life,” he said. Lasso, a 65-year-old former banker, said the state needed the “constitutional tools to protect the population, retake order in the prisons and fight against the mafias that profit from the chaos”. Col Mario Pazmiño, the former director of Ecuador’s military intelligence, said the latest violence demonstrated that the government was unable to “combat the threat which has spiralled out of control long ago”. The violence spiked when local criminal gangs started working for the rival Mexican Sinaloa and Jalisco New Generation drug cartels, he added. “The level of corruption is so high that the prison staff and officers are totally corrupted and the prisoners run the jail,” Pazmiño added. “It is total chaos.” The situation was worsened by an “inoperative justice system” which meant many prisoners were jailed before sentencing, Pazmiño said, leading to overcrowding and the mixing of highly dangerous criminals with prisoners jailed for alleged theft or drug use. A total of 11 people were found hanged in the same prison in October. The authorities have said they may have been suicides. Police operations since the state of emergency was declared – especially in the Litoral penitentiary – have uncovered stashes of guns, grenades, knives, munitions, mobile phones and drugs.The UK has recorded 157 deaths in the latest 24-hour period, bringing the total since the beginning of the pandemic to 142,835. It also recorded 38,351 new coronavirus cases, bringing the total to 9,524,971. The UK government is to allow people to have their Covid booster jab after five months, a month sooner than under the current policy, in an effort to help stop the NHS becoming overwhelmed this winter. Morocco will conduct rapid Covid-19 tests to passengers arriving in its airports and ports and will deny access to any visitor with a positive result, the government said. In the first year of the pandemic, 25 children and young people in England died as a result of coronavirus infection, according to research published this week. “These results are important for guiding decisions on shielding and vaccinating children,” the researchers said in the journal Nature Medicine. Matt Hancock, the former UK health secretary, may be set to write a book entitled How I Won the Covid War. According to the Daily Mail, Hancock is in talks with HarperCollins for a blow-by-blow account of lockdown rows with ministers, aides, scientists and doctors. A US court upheld a decision to halt Joe Biden’s vaccine mandate for companies with more than 100 workers, condemning it as “staggeringly overbroad”. “The mandate is a one-size-fits-all sledgehammer that makes hardly any attempt to account for differences in workplaces,” judges said. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, urged unvaccinated people to reconsider getting their jabs, as the seven-day coronavirus incidence rate in Germany rose to the highest level since the pandemic began. “Difficult weeks lie ahead of us, and you can see that I am very worried,” Merkel said. Germany is preparing to bring in the army to assist overrun healthcare services, according to reports. Der Spiegel reported that 12,000 soldiers will be mobilised by Christmas. Among their missions will be providing booster vaccinations and tests in care homes and hospitals. A new record Covid death toll has been reported in Russia, with 1,241 dying from the disease in the past 24 hours. There were 39,256 new coronavirus cases recorded in the same period. It came after most of Russia’s 80-plus regions lifted a weeklong workplace shutdown at the beginning of the week. Greece has once again tightened its restrictions on the number of people that can enter supermarkets, just weeks after it relaxed the measure. As of Saturday, supermarkets will only be allowed to allow in one person per 9 sq m, after the rule was eased on 25 October. Several thousand people rallied in Melbourne, Australia against vaccine mandates. Vaccinations are voluntary, but some areas mandate vaccinations for many occupations and have barred the unvaccinated from activities such as dining out and concerts. Protests also took place in Christchurch, New Zealand. Brazil has registered 14,642 new cases of coronavirus over the last 24 hours and 731 further deaths, the country’s health ministry said on Saturday, Reuters reports. You can follow the latest Covid developments in Australia here: The US administered over 9.5 million doses of Covid-19 vaccines in the past seven days, the highest weekly total since late May, a White House official said on Saturday. In total, the US administered 439,034,461 doses of vaccines as of Saturday morning and distributed 553,881,535 doses, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said, according to Reuters. The publisher HarperCollins said it is not in talks with former UK health secretary Matt Hancock and has “no knowledge” of any book about his pandemic experience. “We have no knowledge of such a book and are not in talks,” it said in a tweet. Carbon emissions, after a brief plunge last year owing to the Covid-19 lockdowns, are set to rise again by a record amount next year as countries return to their fossil-fuel habits. Emissions must fall by 45% by 2030, compared with 2010 levels, to have a good chance of sticking to the 1.5C limit, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Three German state health ministers have urged parties negotiating to form a new government to prolong states’ power to implement stricter pandemic measures such as lockdowns or school closures as the country’s seven-day Covid incidence rate hit record highs. The number of people per 100,000 infected last week rose to 277.4, data from the Robert Koch Institute showed on Saturday, and has risen to over 500 in some regions of the country. The head of Germany’s largest doctors’ association, Marburger Bund, told German media group Funke Mediengruppe that overburdened intensive care units may need to move patients between regions to find beds in coming weeks, Reuters reports. The federal government and leaders of Germany’s 16 states are due to discuss new pandemic measures next week, but the three parties negotiating to form a new government have agreed to let a state of emergency, in place since the start of the pandemic, expire on 25 November as planned. But state health ministers of Baden-Wuerttemberg, Hessen and Brandenburg argued that states needed to keep the option open of implementing policies that required a state of emergency to enforce – such as curfews, lockdowns or school closures – if the situation worsened. “In the face of the burden on hospitals, which in some regions are close to absolute overload, the epidemic status should be prolonged on a national level,” the three health ministers said in a joint statement. The drive to get the population vaccinated in Australia is gathering momentum despite the issue dividing families and straining friendships in some parts of the country: France has reported 14,646 new coronavirus cases, Reuters reports. The country has had more than 7.26 million cases overall. Morocco will conduct rapid Covid-19 tests to passengers arriving in its airports and ports and will deny access to any visitor with a positive result, the government said. Travellers with a positive test must be returned at the cost of the airline that brought them into the country, unless they have a permanent residency document, it said. Passengers visiting Morocco should also have proof of vaccination, Reuters reports. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice UK group said any memoir by former health secretary Matt Hancock would “inevitably cause pain and hurt” for those mourning people who died after contracting the virus, and urged a rethink by the potential publisher. The group posted on social media: “You’d think the health secretary who presided over one of the worst death tolls in the world would have some humility or seek to reflect on the many lives lost, rather than try and cash in on the tragedy. “We’d urge HarperCollins to reconsider paying for a story that will inevitably cause pain and hurt for those of us who have lost loved ones. “Families have a right to hear about the decisions that have changed their lives forever in an inquiry, not a tell-all memoir.” France has reported a further 16 deaths, bringing the total to 91,211, Reuters reports. The country also said there are 1,202 people in intensive care units for Covid-19, an increase of 20. Matt Hancock has been “approached” about writing a book about his experience as the UK’s health secretary during the coronavirus pandemic, his spokesperson has confirmed, provoking anger from campaigners and the Labour party. The former minister, who stepped down in June after it was revealed he had broken Covid restrictions, had been contacted but no deal had been made, his spokesperson said. More data from Italy. Patients in hospital with Covid-19 – not including those in intensive care – stood at 3,597 on Saturday, up from 3,525 a day earlier. There were 39 new admissions to intensive care units, up from 47 on Friday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 453 from a previous 445, Reuters reports. Some 540,371 tests for Covid-19 were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 498,935, the health ministry said. The UK government is to allow people to have their Covid booster jab after five months, a month sooner than under the current policy, in an effort to help stop the NHS becoming overwhelmed this winter. The major change to the vaccination programme could see ministers flouting the advice of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, which recommends that people should wait until six months after their second dose before having their top-up in order to maximise protection. It is unclear whether the policy would apply only in England or across all of the UK. It means that millions of Britons will be able to have their booster sooner than expected to reduce the risk of hospitals failing to cope with large numbers of people becoming seriously ill with Covid during the winter months, when the NHS always comes under intense pressure. Singapore has reported 2,304 new Covid-19 cases, compared with 3,099 the previous day, and a further 14 deaths, Reuters reports. Italy reported 53 coronavirus-related deaths on Saturday, while the daily tally of new infections was 8,544, Reuters reports. Italy has registered 132,739 deaths linked to Covid-19 since February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after the UK. The country has reported more than 4.8 million cases to date. The UK has recorded 157 deaths in the latest 24-hour period, bringing the total since the beginning of the pandemic to 142,835. It also recorded 38,351 new coronavirus cases, bringing the total to 9,524,971. A catastrophic winter wave of coronavirus is unlikely in the UK, an influential pandemic adviser to the government has said. “I think it is unlikely we will get anything close to what we had last year, that catastrophic winter wave,” Prof Neil Ferguson, from Imperial College London, said on Saturday morning. In the first year of the pandemic, 25 children and young people in England died as a result of coronavirus infection, according to research published this week. “These results are important for guiding decisions on shielding and vaccinating children,” the researchers said in the journal Nature Medicine. Matt Hancock, the former UK health secretary, may be set to write a book entitled How I Won the Covid War. According to the Daily Mail, Hancock is in talks with HarperCollins for a blow-by-blow account of lockdown rows with ministers, aides, scientists and doctors. A US court upheld a decision to halt Joe Biden’s vaccine mandate for companies with more than 100 workers, condemning it as “staggeringly overbroad”. “The mandate is a one-size-fits-all sledgehammer that makes hardly any attempt to account for differences in workplaces,” judges said. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, urged unvaccinated people to reconsider getting their jabs, as the seven-day coronavirus incidence rate in Germany rose to the highest level since the pandemic began. “Difficult weeks lie ahead of us, and you can see that I am very worried,” Merkel said. Germany is preparing to bring in the army to assist overrun healthcare services, according to reports. Der Spiegel reported that 12,000 soldiers will be mobilised by Christmas. Among their missions will be providing booster vaccinations and tests in care homes and hospitals. A new record Covid death toll has been reported in Russia, with 1,241 dying from the disease in the past 24 hours. There were 39,256 new coronavirus cases recorded in the same period. It came after most of Russia’s 80-plus regions lifted a weeklong workplace shutdown at the beginning of the week. Barnsley is set to unveil one of the first public memorials in England to the heroes of the coronavirus pandemic later this month. The bronze statue will feature seven figures – a refuse collector, a nurse, a teacher, a carer, a police officer, an elderly man and a young girl. Greece has once again tightened its restrictions on the number of people that can enter supermarkets, just weeks after it relaxed the measure. As of Saturday, supermarkets will only be allowed to allow in one person per 9 sq m, after the rule was eased on 25 October. Several thousand people rallied in Melbourne, Australia against vaccine mandates. Vaccinations are voluntary, but some areas mandate vaccinations for many occupations and have barred the unvaccinated from activities such as dining out and concerts. Protests also took place in Christchurch, New Zealand. Police in the Netherlands have arrested at least five people in connection with protests that led to clashes with police in The Hague over new pandemic restrictions. Demonstrators were accused of throwing rocks and fireworks at police, and disobeying police instructions, German news agency dpa reported. Police eventually used water cannon to disperse the crowd. Barnsley is set to unveil one of the first public memorials in England to the heroes of the coronavirus pandemic later this month. The bronze statue, featuring seven figures – a refuse collector, a nurse, a teacher, a carer, a police officer, an elderly man and a young girl – is to be installed in the redeveloped town centre on 22 November, the Independent reports. The ceremony will be led by John Sentamu, the previous archbishop of York. The £210,000 sculpture was funded by Barnsley Council and designed by Graham Ibbeson. A line composed by the local poet Ian McMillan will be inscribed on its plinth: “Barnsley’s fierce love will hold you forever in its heart.” Ibbeson told the Independent: “With this work we are paying tribute to the incredible work of our key workers and the ordinary people that have bound a community together. “We are literally putting these ordinary working people on a pedestal, acknowledging their extraordinary, efforts, sacrifices, and skills in protecting our community, and giving us hope for the future.” There’s more on the news, broken by the Mail this morning, that Matt Hancock, the former UK health secretary, has been approached to write a book about his role in the country’s Covid pandemic response. Relatives of people who have died from Covid in the UK have criticised Hancock after the Mail reported a potential title for the book was How I Won the Covid War. Now a spokesperson for Hancock has confirmed he has been “approached” by a publisher. She told the PA Media news agency: “Matt has been approached to write a book about his experiences in the pandemic, but no decisions have been made. There is no deal. “The people who were heroic during the pandemic were the NHS staff who worked round the clock to save lives.” Children aged between five and 11 in Vienna will be able to start getting coronavirus vaccinations next week as part of a pilot project. According to the Associated Press, the Austrian broadcaster ORF reported that about 200 children in Austria’s capital would be able to get jabs of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine each day. The European Medicines Agency, which regulates approval within the European Union, has not yet given the go-ahead for vaccinations of children under the age of 12, although it has been evaluating the Pfizer jab for this age group since last month. Several pediatricians in Austria have been vaccinating children of this age group already, since demand is very high as the infection rate in the country has been rapidly increasing, ORF reported. “The interest in off-label vaccination is enormous,” Peter Voitl, a pediatrician and vaccination expert with the Vienna Medical Association, told ORF. “We vaccinate the age group five to 11 at our clinic and have several hundred people on the waiting list.” Matt Hancock, the former UK health secretary forced to resign after a scandal involving an extramarital breach of social distancing guidelines, may be set to write a book entitled How I Won the Covid War. According to the Daily Mail, Hancock is in talks with HarperCollins for a blow-by-blow account of lockdown rows with ministers, aides, scientists and doctors. The paper suggests the former cabinet minister could be set for an advance of up to £100,000. The Mail quoted Hancock as saying: “I have been approached to write a book, but no decisions have been made.” Bereaved relatives of victims of the pandemic criticised Hancock, urging him to “have some humility”, the i reported. Lobby Akinnola, the spokesperson for Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice, told the paper that Hancock was “cashing in” on the tragedy. “You’d think the health secretary who presided over one of the worst death tolls in the world would have some humility or seek to reflect on the many lives lost, rather than try and cash in on the tragedy,” Akinnola said. “If he thinks he has ‘won the Covid war’, it’s hard not to feel like our loved ones were used as cannon fodder.” Hancock stepped down from his role as health secretary in June after CCTV camera footage emerged of him in a clinch with a colleague in his office, in a breach of social distancing regulations. Three snow leopards have died as a result of complications of Covid-19 at a zoo in Nebraska, according to local media. Lincoln children’s zoo announced a month ago that two Sumatran tigers and three snow leopards showing signs of infection had tested positive for the coronavirus. The tigers have since recovered, after a regimen of treatment including steroids and antibiotics to prevent secondary infection, KOLN 10/11 NOW reported. The snow leopards died despite having been cared for “tirelessly” by vets, the zoo was quoted as having said in a press release. “We know how much each of our animals means to our community inside and outside of the zoo,” a spokesperson said. “It is very tough to lose any animal unexpectedly, especially one as rare and loved as the snow leopard. We are all heartbroken by the loss of Ranney, Everest, and Makalu and we are grieving together.” Germany has reversed a decision to stop paying for coronavirus tests, as fears grow in the country over rising rates of infection, Deutsche Welle reports. The decision comes just a month after authorities said they would stop paying for the tests, which are necessary for unvaccinated people to obtain a coronavirus health pass. According to the Robert Koch institute, Germany’s public health authority, 45,081 new infections and 228 Covid-related deaths were recorded over the past 24 hours. It comes after the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, urged unvaccinated people to reconsider their hesitancy. A decision on whether to authorise a Covid vaccine for children aged between five and 11 in Canada will come “in the next one to two weeks”, the country’s medicines regulator has said. Dr Supriya Sharma, the chief medical adviser to Health Canada, said the government department was “actively continuing” its review of the Pfizer/BioNtech jab for younger children, Global News reported. The chief medical officer, Dr Theresa Tam, said that age group continues to have the highest rates of coronavirus infection of any in the country. There was an 11% increase in the rate of new Covid cases in Canada this week, Tam said. She said more than 1,800 were admitted to hospital, 528 of whom were placed in intensive care wards. There was an average of 22 deaths a day from the disease, she said. In the first year of the pandemic, 25 children and young people in England died as a result of coronavirus infection, according to research published this week. The study, published on Thursday in Nature Medicine, found that of 12,023,568 people aged under 18 in the country, 3,105 died, including 61 who were positive for Sars-CoV-2. Of those who died while infected with the virus, 22 died of Covid, while three died as a result of “paediatric inflammatory multi-system syndrome temporally associated with Sars-CoV-2”. On the back of those figures, the researchers calculated a coronavirus-infection survival rate in under-18s of 99.995%. The new figures emphasise the extremely low mortality risk from coronavirus infection in young people, and will add fuel to an already heated debate around vaccinating young people against it. “To distinguish between CYP [children and young people] who died as a result of Sars-CoV-2 infection and those who died of another cause but were coincidentally infected with the virus, we undertook a clinical review of all CYP deaths with a positive Sars-CoV-2 test from March 2020 to February 2021,” the researchers said. “These results are important for guiding decisions on shielding and vaccinating children. New variants might have different mortality risks and should be evaluated in a similar way.” Germany is preparing to bring in the army to assist overrun healthcare services, according to reports. Der Spiegel reports that 12,000 soldiers will be mobilised by Christmas. Among their missions will be providing booster vaccinations and tests in care homes and hospitals. So far, 630 soldiers have been deployed, according to the paper. The army was not immediately available for comment, Reuters reports. Thousands gathered in Christchurch to protest against current government and pandemic controls on Saturday. There have been a number of protests across New Zealand this week including one outside parliament in the capital, Wellington, on Tuesday. The protests come as New Zealand prepares to implement a vaccine mandate for workers employed in education and the health and disability sectors. The majority of the population supports the public health measure, with a survey by Talbot Mills Research finding that 78% agree with a vaccine mandate for health workers, and 76% with one for teachers, according to the New Zealand Herald. Greece has once again tightened its restrictions on the number of people that can enter supermarkets, just weeks after it relaxed the measure. As of Saturday, supermarkets will only be allowed to allow in one person per 9 sq m, after the rule was eased on 25 October. It had been changed to one customer per 2 sq m, according to the Kathimerini newspaper. The reintroduction comes after it was deemed not feasible to require unvaccinated shoppers to show proof of a negative rapid test, with the minister for development, Adonis Georgiadis, saying on Friday: “There are problems ... There are some of our fellow citizens who will not even take a rapid test and we cannot deprive them of access to basic goods.” Since 6 November, unvaccinated people have been obliged to show a recent negative test to enter most indoor public areas, including banks, most shops, government buildings and hair salons. Greece registered a record number of cases this week, with its tally of new daily infections rising to 7,335 on Monday. Four times as many people in Tokyo are likely to have been infected with the coronavirus between September last year and this March than were reported in official figures, new research has claimed. Based on a survey of more than 23,000 people in the Japanese capital, researchers at the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science estimated that the seroprevalence of Covid antibodies was 3.4% during that period, the Japan Times reports. That indicates that 470,778 out of Tokyo’s total population of about 14 million had been infected with Covid. “The estimated number of individuals in Tokyo with a history of Sars-CoV-2 infection was 3.9-fold higher than the number of confirmed cases during the period,” the study said. It has been peer reviewed and was published in the Japan Epidemiological Association’s Journal of Epidemiology. California has become the latest US state to make Covid vaccine booster doses available for all adults, despite a call from federal health officials to limit their distribution to people most at risk. It follows similar moves by Colorado and New Mexico, which have among the highest rates of new infections in the US. California, the country’s most populous state, has now joined them in the “high” tier for transmission, according to recent figures from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In a letter to local health officials and providers, seen by the Associated Press, California’s public health officer, Tomás Aragón, said they should “allow patients to self-determine their risk of exposure” and not turn away anyone over the age of 18 who has gone more than six months since their second dose of vaccine. Pharmacies should prioritise boosters for people working in skilled nursing or living in care homes, but generally “should not miss any opportunity” to give top-up jabs to anyone visiting a drug store, hospital or medical office, he said. These were the scenes in The Hague on Friday night as the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, announced new coronavirus restrictions across the Netherlands. Police fired water cannon against hundreds of firework-throwing protesters gathered outside the justice and security ministry during Rutte’s press conference. About 200 protesters threw stones and fireworks at riot police and built barricades, according to AFP. Police used water cannon to disperse them, with loud bangs and chants echoing through the centre of the city as mounted police rounded up the stragglers. The Dutch restrictions, which include at least three weeks of Covid curbs on restaurants, shops and sporting events, are western Europe’s first partial lockdown of the winter. From Saturday, bars, restaurants, cafes and supermarkets will have to shut at 8pm for the next three weeks, while shops classified as non-essential must shut at 6pm. Public events will be scrapped while football matches, including the Netherlands’ home World Cup qualifier with Norway next week, will have to be played behind closed doors. People will be limited to having four visitors at home and have been advised to work at home unless absolutely necessary. However, schools will remain open, and people will be allowed to leave their homes without restrictions. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, has urged unvaccinated people to reconsider their decision, as the seven-day coronavirus incidence rate in Germany rose to the highest level since the pandemic began. “Difficult weeks lie ahead of us, and you can see that I am very worried,” Merkel said in her weekly video podcast on Saturday. “I urgently ask everyone who has not yet been vaccinated: please reconsider.” Germany’s seven-day incidence rate – the number of people per 100,000 to be infected over the last week – rose to 277.4 on Saturday, data from the Robert Koch Institute showed, according to Reuters. The record in the third wave of the pandemic, last December, was 197.6. The federal government is due to meet the leaders of Germany’s 16 states next week to discuss new pandemic restrictions. However, the three parties negotiating to form a new government have agreed to let the expiry of a state of emergency that has been in place since the start of the pandemic go ahead on 25 November as planned. The UK is in “quite a different situation” from other European nations where curbs on freedoms are being considered, an influential pandemic adviser to the government has said. Prof Neil Ferguson, from Imperial College London, said high Covid case numbers in the summer had boosted immunity in the UK’s population, compared with Germany, the Netherlands and France. He said he hoped the UK could avoid returning to social distancing restrictions this winter, adding: “I think it is unlikely we will get anything close to what we had last year, that catastrophic winter wave.” Asked on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme what direction he believes the country is going, Ferguson said several weeks of declining Covid cases and hospital admissions had been followed by “a hint of an uptick in the last few days”. “But we are in quite a different situation from those European countries [the Netherlands and Germany] you are talking about,” he said. “We’ve had very high case numbers – between 30,000 and 50,000 a day – really for the last four months, since the beginning of July. “That has obviously had some downsides. It has also paradoxically had an upside of boosting the immunity of the population compared with countries like Germany, the Netherlands and France, which have had much lower case numbers and are only now seeing an uptick.” About 400 South Korean and Japanese tourists have become the first to visit Vietnam in almost 20 months, after the country closed its borders in an effort to contain the coronavirus. The passengers, who were required to show proof of vaccination and negative Covid test results before departure, travelled on charter flights from Seoul and Tokyo to Nha Trang, a resort city in the south of Vietnam, according to AFP. Vietnam, which closed its borders to international visitors in March last year, is desperate to revive its badly hit economy after months of lockdowns. The communist one-party state was widely praised for its handling of the pandemic last year, with only dozens of known coronavirus cases. However, the highly transmissible Delta variant arrived in the country this April, and Vietnam has since recorded more than a million infections and almost 23,000 deaths. A new record Covid death toll has been reported in Russia, with 1,241 dying from the disease in the past 24 hours. There were 39,256 new coronavirus cases recorded in the same period, according to Reuters. At the beginning of the week, most of Russia’s 80-plus regions lifted a weeklong workplace shutdown that was designed to curb a surge in case numbers. A US court has upheld a decision to halt Joe Biden’s vaccine mandate for companies with more than 100 workers, rejecting a legal challenge from his administration. A three-member panel of the 5th US circuit court of appeals in New Orleans affirmed its ruling despite the Biden administration’s claim that putting the vaccine mandate on hold could lead to dozens or even hundreds of deaths, according to Reuters. “The mandate is staggeringly overbroad,” the opinion said. “The mandate is a one-size-fits-all sledgehammer that makes hardly any attempt to account for differences in workplaces (and workers),” circuit court judge Kurt Engelhardt wrote for the panel. Vaccine mandates are controversial. Supporters say they are needed to put an end to the almost two-year pandemic, while opponents argue they violate the US constitution and curb individual liberty. In a boost to critics of the mandate, Engelhardt wrote: “The public interest is also served by maintaining our constitutional structure and maintaining the liberty of individuals to make intensely personal decisions according to their own convictions – even, or perhaps particularly, when those decisions frustrate government officials.” The rule, issued by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), mandates that businesses with at least 100 employees require staff to get vaccinated or face weekly tests and face mask requirements. Biden imposed the requirement in September, telling Americans that “our patience is wearing thin” with those refusing to get vaccinated. Boris Johnson, the UK prime minister, has urged elderly and vulnerable people to get their coronavirus vaccine booster jabs to prevent a rise in Covid cases, as he warned of “storm clouds” forming over parts of Europe. Germany, Austria, Slovakia and Croatia are among the countries that have recently seen a surge in Covid cases, with the former recording its highest coronavirus case numbers since the start of the pandemic. Speaking in a broadcast clip, Johnson said the situation was of concern. “I’m seeing the storm clouds gathering over parts of the European continent. And I’ve got to be absolutely frank with people: we’ve been here before. We remember what happens when the wave starts rolling in,” he said. The World Health Organization’s regional director for Europe, Hans Kluge, has said a lack of uptake of Covid vaccines is behind the increase. While Johnson noted that cases in the UK had been “drifting down for a while”, he said it was unclear whether the trend was set to continue. “I’m looking at what’s happening overseas, and I’m simply saying to the British people … this is the moment to get your booster,” he said. Several thousand people rallied in Melbourne against new vaccination mandates on Saturday, with a few comparing the state government to Nazis and calling for violence against politicians. In Australia, where 83% of people aged 16 and above have been fully vaccinated against the coronavirus, nationwide vaccinations are voluntary. But states and territories have mandated vaccinations for many occupations and barred the unvaccinated from activities such as dining out and concerts. The Melbourne demonstration against the vaccination mandate that came into effect on Saturday – requiring construction workers in Victoria state to be fully vaccinated – was peaceful, with no immediate reports of unruly behaviour or arrests, according to Reuters. But a reporter at The Age posted video on Twitter of a protester carrying a mock gallows with three nooses hanging from it, and the newspaper showed a protester carrying a poster depicting the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, with a Hitler moustache and the hashtag #DictatorDan. “We’re being governed by insane medical bureaucrats,” Craig Kelly, a former Liberal party member of parliament and now the leader of the United Australia party, told the rally, media reported. Good morning from London, and welcome to yet another coronavirus live blog. I’m Damien Gayle and I’ll be keeping you up to date with all the latest headlines and developments from the coronavirus pandemic around the world. Got a coronavirus-related story you think we should be covering? Drop me a line at damien.gayle@theguardian.com, or via my Twitter profile @damiengayle.On Glasgow Green, there lies a stone that commemorates the spot where the engineer James Watt in 1765 conceived the idea for a separate condenser for the steam engine. It is Watt’s invention, which revolutionised the efficiency of the steam engine, that means Glasgow can lay claim to be the place from which the Industrial Revolution sprang. Just over a quarter of a millennium later, delegates from all over the world meeting in the same city have agreed the text of a critical international agreement to try to bind countries into the action required to slow the catastrophic global heating that the Industrial Revolution set in train. It does not go anywhere near far enough. In recent years, scientists have warned that the goal in the 2015 Paris climate agreement to limit global temperature rises to “well below” 2C above pre-industrial levels is not sufficiently ambitious. The implications of the world heating beyond 1.5C are much worse than previously thought. Even 1.5C would still result in significantly more extreme weather events – and some irreversible changes such as sea level rises, the melting of Arctic ice and the warming and acidification of the oceans – but those impacts will be more manageable. The challenges going into Cop26 in Glasgow were immense. Global temperatures have already risen by about 1.1C, and global emissions of CO2 continue to rise. In order to limit heating to 1.5C, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has said that global greenhouse gas emissions must peak in the next four years, and coal- and gas-fired plants must close within the next decade. This requires a huge shift in global commitments: before Glasgow, the non-binding commitments countries have signed up to put the world on course to warm up by 2.7C, according to the UN – a level of overheating that would result in tens of millions of people dying as a result of drought, and large swaths of the planet becoming completely uninhabitable. The geopolitical context always made it unlikely sufficient progress would be made at Glasgow to inspire confidence that a limit of 1.5C of warming will be achieved. Xi Jinping, president of China – the world’s largest emitter – did not attend in person. Wealthier countries have failed to honour commitments made 12 years ago that developing countries would receive $100bn a year to help them adapt, and the UK’s cuts to international aid have eroded its moral standing as host of the conference. Countries’ competing objectives – the desire of some states to keep drilling for oil even as others’ continuing existence is dependent on imminently halting the extraction of fossil fuels – were always going to make for a difficult set of negotiations, but the pandemic has sharpened the divide between richer and poorer nations, as some countries have vaccinated virtually all their citizens while others have barely started. It is widely acknowledged that the UK went into the conference underprepared, as the government’s diplomatic efforts have been primarily focused on Brexit in recent years, rather than on laying the ground for the negotiations of the past two weeks. The best that can be said about Cop26 is that it has kept the possibility of limiting global heating to 1.5C alive, if only by a thread. The worst outcome of this conference would have been if countries had agreed to next reopen their commitments to reduce emissions only in five years’ time, as was agreed in Paris in 2015. This would have been nothing short of a disaster. It would have firmly put the world on the path to catastrophic and irreversible overheating – involving the deaths of tens of millions of people and the total obliteration of some countries as a result of rising sea levels. It would have thrown away humanity’s last chance of avoiding this fate. Instead, countries have agreed to come back to revisit their commitments in a year’s time, and every year after that. Something radical will need to shift in the next year or two in order to achieve the commitments that are urgently needed to limit warming to 1.5C. Take the UK’s net zero strategy, for example, which falls far short of what is needed in order for it to achieve its stated goal of net zero emissions by 2050. It has been estimated we need to be investing about 1% of GDP to meet this; but the government has committed just a fraction of that, and the strategy is further undermined by the government reneging on its own policy commitments, including its recent scrapping of the green homes schemes and the delay in the phase-out of gas boilers. The UK’s strategy is far from the worst in terms of its failure to be powered by strong government commitments, which serves only to convey the scale of what is still needed from countries across the world. However, the US-China bilateral agreement, if thin in terms of commitments, is a real sign of diplomatic progress. More than 100 countries have committed to end deforestation by 2030; five of the richest countries have pledged $1.7bn to support the conservation efforts of indigenous people; and the US and EU have signed up to an initiative to cut methane emissions. But it is not enough. There are too many gaps, too few commitments, insufficient willpower. At the 11th hour, the already-weak resolution on the phasing-out of coal and fossil fuel subsidies was watered down even further so as to make it virtually meaningless. Countries pleaded in the final plenary sessions that they can go no further, but go further they must. Disaster is not yet certain; but humanity’s “code red” is still blaring. The cost of ignoring it is unthinkable.It’s more than 30 years since Withnail retreated to the Lake District in his sweeping checked coat. The original was bought at auction by Chris Evans in 2000 but you can still commission your own from the film’s costume designer, Andrea Galer, via her website, andrea-galer.co.uk (from £1,500), or purchase one of her patches featuring the film’s characters (£20) to stitch inside your own checked homage to the film. What makes a checked coat a hardy perennial of menswear is the easy way it slips into your wardrobe, allowing you to pick one colour from the pattern to build your outfit from and instantly bringing a smarter feel to a casual jeans and jumper ensemble with very little effort. While generally sitting at the smart end of the spectrum, a bolder check allows you to have a bit of fun with your look; see Cos’s blurred melange check (£225) from their recent see-now, buy-now London fashion week show, with strands of pale blue and orange running through it. Scotch and Soda’s bold check (5) also sits at the fashion statement end of the checked gamut. Throw it on over a low-key look and you’re good to go. Ted Baker’s cream and grey style looks great with a winter white outfit (1) but would also work over a black jeans, roll neck and Chelsea boot look. Reiss (£350) and The Kooples (7) each offer a brown check option that can be dressed up for work or down over a favourite chunky knit, beanie hat and sturdy boots. It’s just the thing for a long walk culminating in a bottle of red at a warm pub – something else Withnail would agree on. 1. £450, tedbaker.com 2. £390, uk.tommy.com 3. £149, moss.co.uk 4. £100, riverisland.com 5. £470, scotch-soda.com 6. £159, zara.com 7. £406, thekooples.com 8. £390, allsaints.com