Consumers starting their Christmas shopping earlier than usual amid concern over supply chain shortages and rising prices helped to drive a recovery in UK retail sales last month, industry figures show. The British Retail Consortium said total sales were up 1.3% in October from the same month a year ago, and up 6.3% from the same month in 2019, before Covid-19 tipped the UK into the worst recession for 300 years. In September, the Office for National Statistics recorded its fifth month of contracting sales volumes, the longest slump to hit the sector since 1996. Faced with gaps on shelves and lengthy delivery times amid the worst supply chain disruption since the 1970s, consumers rushed to buy toys and presents to avoid disruption closer to the festive period. The retail rally comes despite rising pressure on household budgets as soaring energy bills push up inflation and eat into families’ spending power. According to the BRC, clothing and footwear sales performed well, as Halloween helped to boost sales of children’s costumes and chocolates. However, global supply chain disruption continued to hold back sales of furniture and electrical items. Food shops also reported weak growth, with spending dented by the gradual return of consumers to pubs and restaurants after the reopening of the hospitality sector. Separate figures from Barclaycard showed that overall spending on credit cards grew by 14.2% in October from a year earlier, with particularly strong growth in spending on travel, digital entertainment and subscription services. According to a survey of 2,000 consumers for the credit card provider, more than a third said they were so concerned about shortages on the shelves that they adjusted their spending habits this year. More than half of this group said they had brought forward their spending, including on children’s toys and gifts. Colder weather led to a 127% jump in online takeaway spending from a year earlier, according to Barclaycard, while the release of new series and box sets such as Squid Game and Succession fuelled growth in demand for online streaming services. Spending on cinema tickets grew on an annual basis in October for the first time since the pandemic started, with sales helped by the release of the new James Bond film, No Time to Die. Spending on flights and overseas holidays also rose by the most since the pandemic began, as travel agents and airlines benefited from rising sales after the government slashed the number of countries on the Covid “red list” of destinations. Helen Dickinson, chief executive of the BRC, said that demand was getting “back on track” before the pivotal Christmas shopping period, with retailers benefiting from social calendars filling up again after pandemic restrictions were eased. Dickinson said retailers would do everything they could to offer choice and availability throughout the Christmas period, prioritising the food and festive goods needed to celebrate. “However, there are challenges ahead, with higher prices on the horizon compounded by the many increasing costs faced by consumers such as higher energy bills and rising National Insurance.” It comes after analysis from YouGov and the Centre for Economics and Business Research showed consumer confidence dropped to the lowest level since March, amid a worsening outlook as the government cuts benefits and increases taxes and inflation set to rise inflation this winter. The YouGov/CEBR household finance index, which is compiled from a survey of more than 6,000 individuals on the outlook for their finances over next 12 months, slumped by 9.7 points to 81.1 in October, compared with a month earlier. A score of 100 is neutral; anything above that value indicates optimism, while lower values indicate pessimism. Paul Martin, UK head of retail at the accountancy firm KPMG, said that although the squeeze on household finances was yet to translate into weaker retail sales, risks for retailers still remained. “With rising costs putting a strain on most retailers, they will be placing all hopes that demand remains strong as consumers plan for a bumper Christmas, shopping early for those much wanted gifts and spending more than last year, when Christmas gatherings were cancelled. The main concern is now how trade will develop post-Christmas into 2022,” he said.A billion people will be affected by extreme heat stress if the climate crisis raises the global temperature by just 2C, according to research released by the UK Met Office at the Cop26 climate summit. The scientists said that would be a 15-fold increase on the numbers exposed today. The key goal of Cop26 is to keep the chance of limiting global heating to 1.5C alive but delegates said there is much work to do to achieve this in the summit’s final week. The Met Office assessed wet-bulb temperature, which combines both heat and humidity. Once this measure reaches 35C, the human body cannot cool itself by sweating and even healthy people sitting in the shade will die within six hours. The Met Office analysis used a wet-bulb temperature limit of 32C, at which workers must rest regularly to avoid heat exhaustion, for at least 10 days a year. If efforts to end the climate emergency fail and temperatures rise by 4C, half of the world’s population will suffer from this extreme heat stress. Heat is the most obvious impact of global heating and extreme heat in cities across the world has tripled in recent decades, according to a recent study. In the summer of 2020, more than a quarter of the US population suffered from the effects of extreme heat, with symptoms including nausea and cramps. At least 166,000 people died due to heatwaves around the globe in the two decades to 2017, according to the World Health Organization. The UK government has been repeatedly warned by its official climate advisers that the country is “woefully unprepared” for increased heat, particularly in vulnerable locations such as hospitals and schools. The Met Office analysis is derived from research from the EU-funded Helix project, which also maps the rising risks of river flooding, wildfires, drought and food insecurity. Virtually the entire inhabited world is affected by at least one impact. Andy Wiltshire, at the Met Office, said: “Any one of the climate impacts presents a scary vision of the future. But, of course, severe climate change will drive many impacts, and our maps show that some regions will be affected by multiple factors.” Tropical countries including Brazil, Ethiopia and India are hardest hit by extreme heat stress, with some parts being pushed towards the limit of human liveability. But Prof Albert Klein Tank, director of the Met Office Hadley Centre, said: “These maps reveal areas of the world where the gravest impacts are projected to occur. However, all regions of the world – including the UK and Europe – are expected to suffer continued impacts from climate change.” Scientists have been warning about deadly levels of heat and humidity for some years. A 2015 study showing the Gulf in the Middle East, the heartland of the global oil industry, set to suffer heatwaves beyond the limit of human survival if climate change is unchecked. The deadliest place on the planet for extreme future heatwaves will be the north China plain, one of the most densely populated regions in the world and the most important food-producing area in the huge nation, according to 2018 research.When it comes to sleep, Goldilocks may have argued the trick is to find a bed that is “just right” but research suggests there may also be an optimal time to nod off – at least when it comes to heart health. Not too early and not too late, with the sweet spot being between 10pm and 11pm. The study, based on data from more than 88,000 participants of the UK Biobank, suggests going to sleep at 10pm or shortly after is associated with a lower risk of developing cardiovascular disease compared with falling asleep earlier or later at night. The study cannot prove that early or late bedtimes contribute to the development of cardiovascular disease – not least since when people fall asleep may be linked to other health conditions or behaviours, such as staying out late and drinking, that may be linked to cardiovascular disease risk. Moreover, the study did not look closely at the quality of the participants’ sleep, only length and timing. However, Dr David Plans, the head of research at Huma Therapeutics and senior lecturer at the University of Exeter, who co-authored the study, said one possibility was that early or late bedtimes might result in individuals missing important cues such as morning daylight, which help to reset the body’s internal clock each day. If the body clock is not reset properly over a long period of time, “that misalignment of behaviours and the circadian clock increases inflammation and can impair glucose regulation, both of which can increase risk of cardiovascular disease”, Plans said. Writing in the journal European Heart Journal – Digital Health, Plans and colleagues report that 3,172 of the 88,026 participants, recruited between 2006 and 2010, developed cardiovascular disease over an average follow-up time of 5.7 years, none of whom had the condition, or a sleep disorder, at the start of the study. The team then drew on data from wrist-based devices worn by participants for seven days to explore whether there was an association with the time that participants fell asleep at night. The team found that of the 3,172 participants, 1,371 fell asleep after midnight on average over the seven days of device wearing, 1,196 nodded off in the hour from 11pm, and 473 fell asleep in the hour from 10pm. Only 132 dozed off before 10pm. After taking into account various information, such as participants’ age, sex, smoking status, duration of sleep, sleep irregularity, whether they had diabetes, their blood pressure and socioeconomic status, the researchers found participants who fell asleep between 10pm and 10:59pm had a lower risk of cardiovascular disease than those who dozed off earlier or later. More specifically, those who fell asleep at midnight or later had a 25% higher risk of going on to develop cardiovascular disease, while those who fell asleep before 10pm had a 24% increased risk. Even nodding off an hour later was linked to a difference – those falling asleep between 11pm and 11:59pm had a 12% greater risk of cardiovascular disease than those who fell asleep in the hour before. “Because we also adjusted for all of the other more common cardiovascular risk factors, it’s clear that this association is significant in some way,” said Plans. The team say the findings appear to be stronger in women than men, although the reasons for this remain unclear. The study has limitations, including that it is based only on data from adults aged 43 to 79, and participants of the UK Biobank – a database of genetic and lifestyle information that researchers are using to investigate myriad health issues – are predominantly white. Plans said further research, with larger numbers of participants, is needed to examine the findings, adding there was not enough evidence at present to prescribe a particular bedtime to the public. However, he said the study added support to the importance of sleep hygiene – habits that help with a good night’s rest. “People often assume that cardiovascular disease is a consequence of physiological influences,” Plans said. “Whereas actually, the behavioural influence on the cardiovascular system as a result of circadian disruption is enormous.”That’s all for today, thanks for following along. Some links and developments from the day: Barack Obama has called on world leaders to “step up and step up now” to avert climate breakdown, singling out China and Russia for being foremost among countries that are failing to cut planet-heating emissions quickly enough. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack has issued subpoenas to six of Donald Trump’s associates involved in the effort to overturn the results of the 2020 election from a “command center” at the Willard Hotel in Washington DC. A man who was shot and wounded by Kyle Rittenhouse during protests against racial injustice in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last year testified in the 18-year old’s murder trial, telling jurors he thought he “was going to die”. NSO Group’s legal problems have deepened after a US appeals court thoroughly rejected the Israeli spyware company’s claim that it ought to be protected under sovereign immunity laws. A handful of Republican members of Congress have arrived at the UN climate talks in Glasgow in an attempt to portray the party as engaged on the climate crisis, with this message already badly undermined by colleagues back in the US. The United Nations special rapporteur on the right to health has called on the US supreme court to uphold the right to abortion in America or risk undermining international human rights law. Biden will travel to Baltimore on Wednesday to deliver a pitch on the benefits of the bipartisan infrastructure bill, after the House approved the proposal on Friday night. Ron DeSantis began his campaign to be re-elected Florida governor in 2022, a campaign most observers expect to presage a campaign for the White House in 2024. The US fully reopened to many vaccinated international travelers today, and the AP captured stories of families and friends reuniting for the first time since Covid closed the US to millions of people. The AP wrote: Parents held children born while they were stuck abroad. Long-separated couples kissed, and grandparents embraced grandchildren who had doubled in age. Octavio Alvarez and his 14-year-old daughter zipped through a pedestrian crossing in San Diego in less than 15 minutes on their way to visit his mother-in-law in California. “It’s a big feeling,” said Alvarez, 43, who lives in Ensenada, Mexico, a two-hour drive from San Diego. Prior to the pandemic, his family would visit California twice a month. The emotional cost of the border restrictions were “very high,” he added. More photos of reunions here: The US supreme court heard arguments today in a case that could determine whether the US government faces accountability for its mass surveillance of Muslim Americans after 9/11. As my colleague Ed Pilkington summarized it over the weekend: The nine justices will be asked to decide on whether Muslim US citizens who were subjected to undercover surveillance by a paid informant at their southern California mosque can receive redress through the courts. Sheikh Yassir Fazaga, Ali Malik and Yasser Abdel Rahim, the three plaintiffs, argue that they and thousands of other Muslims were targeted because of their religion, and the federal authorities who subjected them to such unconstitutional treatment should answer for that. Lawyers for the government will counter that the case should be dismissed, as litigating it would reveal intelligence about federal anti-terrorism operations that would be harmful to national security. Information on who they were investigating and why, as well as details of the FBI’s sources and methods, should remain confidential on grounds that they are “state secrets”. Ahilan Arulanantham, a human rights lawyer at UCLA who will be arguing FBI v Fazaga for the plaintiffs on Monday, told reporters that the question for the court was simple: “Will the people we represent ever get their day in court? Are the courts open to protect this community’s religious freedoms, or can the government slam the doors shut whenever it claims to be acting in the name of national security?” The LA Times reported today that the Department of Justice lawyer’s argument about national security faced skepticism from conservative and liberal justices. More background on the ACLU’s arguments here: More than 11,000 employees of Boeing are seeking an exemption to vaccine mandates on religious or medical grounds, representing nearly 9% of its US workforce, according to a new Reuters report, citing people familiar with the matter. The Biden administration has put in place a vaccine mandate for federal contractors, so the widespread reluctance of Boeing employees has left the company scrambling, Reuters reported. The news agency obtained a Boeing email that said workers had until 4 January to comply with the new rules: Anyone who has not received their final dose or been approved for an accommodation, and registered their vaccination status by Jan. 4, will be issued a final warning, and will be expected to promptly come into compliance if they wish to remain employed at Boeing.” More here: More updates from the Kyle Rittenhouse murder trial: A man who was shot and wounded by Rittenhouse during the racial justice protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin last year, testified today, saying that he thought he “was going to die”, and, “I thought the defendant was an active shooter.” From reporter Maya Yang’s coverage for the Guardian: Gaige Grosskreutz, 27, who had a gun in his hand as he stepped toward Rittenhouse, was wounded in the arm moments after Rittenhouse fatally shot Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, last August. “I believe in the second amendment,” Grosskreutz said in court on Monday. “I’m for people’s right to carry and bear arms. And that night was no different than any other day. It’s keys, phone, wallet, gun.” Rittenhouse traveled from his home in Antioch, Illinois, in response to a Kenosha-based militia calling for protection for businesses against protesters supporting the Black Lives Matter movement. Then 17, Rittenhouse was armed with an AR-15-style rifle. Grosskreutz, who trained as a paramedic, testified that he volunteered as a medic at protests in Milwaukee in the days after the May 2020 murder of George Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer who kneeled on his neck. President Biden was just asked if he felt there was now momentum for his Build Back Better plan. He told an NBC News reporter he was optimistic: I’m always optimistic. It’s going to be a tough fight ... It ain’t over yet ... I think people are beginning to realize it’s important to get it done...” Asked if he had learned any lessons from the infrastructure bill, he said, “Nothing I didn’t already know.” Our coverage from over the weekend: Hi all - Sam Levin in Los Angeles here, taking over our live coverage for the rest of the day. A North Dakota GOP representative who organized a rally to oppose Covid vaccine mandates has said he was no longer able to attend the event after becoming infected with Covid. The AP reports: The state representative, Jeff Hoverson, posted on Facebook on Sunday that he was “quarantining and each day is getting better”. The Minot lawmaker said he was taking the deworming drug ivermectin as a Covid-19 treatment and had not checked into a hospital. Ivermectin is designed to fight parasitic infections but conservative commentators have promoted it as a treatment for Covid-19, despite a lack of evidence that it helps. “It’s making me better,” Hoverson said. Groups opposed to vaccine mandates also staged a protest in Los Angeles today as the city’s new vaccine requirements went into effect. Some municipal employees have claimed that they will quit instead of getting vaccinated, but it remains to be seen whether there will be mass resignations. Here is the full North Dakota story: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Sam Levin, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection subpoenaed six more associates of former president Donald Trump. The six associates include Trump’s 2020 campaign manager, Bill Stepien, and his former national security adviser, Michael Flynn. The committee seems particularly interested in meetings that Trump’s allies held at the Willard Hotel in Washington in the days leading up to the Capitol attack. Jill Biden kicked off her campaign to convince more American parents to vaccinate their children against coronavirus. The first lady’s kickoff event, which took place this afternoon at an elementary school in McLean, Virginia, comes less than a week after the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention approved the administration of a lower dose of the Pfizer vaccine to children between the ages of five and 11. Biden will travel to Baltimore on Wednesday to deliver a pitch on the benefits of the bipartisan infrastructure bill, after the House approved the proposal on Friday night. The president has not yet signed the bill, which includes $555bn in new federal funding for roads, bridges and railways, among many other projects. Barack Obama criticized Trump’s climate policies while speaking at the Cop26 conference in Glasgow. The former president lamented his successor’s decision to withdraw from the Paris climate agreement, saying, “I wasn’t real happy about that.” But Obama predicted that Biden’s climate agenda will “set the United States on course to meet its new climate targets”. Sam will have more coming up, so stay tuned. In his statement on the new subpoenas, select committee chairman Bennie Thompson emphasized that the witnesses must respect the lawmakers’ requests for information. “The Select Committee expects all witnesses to cooperate with our investigation as we work to get answers for the American people, recommend changes to our laws that will strengthen our democracy, and help ensure nothing like January 6th ever happens again,” Thompson said. The House has already recommended a criminal contempt charge against one of Donald Trump’s associates, Steve Bannon, for refusing to comply with the committee’s subpoenas. (The justice department has not yet decided whether to prosecute Bannon.) The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection is particularly interested in meetings that Donald Trump’s allies had at the Willard Hotel in the days leading up to the attack. Hugo Lowell reports: The subpoenas seeking documents and testimony are aimed at obtaining the legal advice offered to Trump on how he could manipulate events on 6 January to stop certification of [Joe] Biden’s election win, [one] source said. House investigators are moving to pursue Trump lieutenants who gathered at the Willard to uncover the ‘centers of gravity’ from which Trump and his advisers conspired, the source said – and whether the former president had advance knowledge of the Capitol attack. The select committee appears to be seeking a full account of what transpired in several suites at the Willard in the days leading up to 6 January and during a final ‘war room’ meeting the night before the Capitol attack. According to the new statement from the select committee, at least three of the Trump associates who were subpoenaed by the panel -- Jason Miller, John Eastman and Bernard Kerik -- are believed to have participated in that January 5 meeting at the Willard. Here are all six of the associates of former president Donald Trump who have just been subpoenaed by the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection: Bill Stepien, who managed Trump’s reelection campaign. The committee is looking to ask him about the campaign’s alleged efforts to delay or deny certifications of Joe Biden’s victories in battleground states. Jason Miller, a former senior adviser to Trump. The committee notes Miller falsely claimed Democrats would attempt to “steal” the presidency even before the election was held. Angela McCallum, who served as a national executive assistant to Trump’s reelection campaign. She was allegedly involved in efforts to spread lies about widespread fraud in the election. John Eastman, a conservative legal scholar who reportedly urged state legislators to refuse to certify Biden’s victories. Michael Flynn, Trump’s former national security adviser. Flynn reportedly participated in a meeting in the Oval Office last December, during which he discussed potentially seizing voting machines and declaring a national emergency in response to Biden’s victory. Bernard Kerik, who reportedly worked with Rudy Giuliani to investigate baseless allegations of voter fraud. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has issued subpoenas for six more associates of former president Donald Trump. Among those being subpoenaed are Trump’s 2020 campaign manager, Bill Stepien, and his former national security adviser, Michael Flynn. According to a statement from the committee, the six individuals are all believed to have been involved in efforts to spread lies about widespread fraud in the presidential election. “In the days before the January 6th attack, the former President’s closest allies and advisors drove a campaign of misinformation about the election and planned ways to stop the count of Electoral College votes,” committee chairman Bennie Thompson said. “The Select Committee needs to know every detail about their efforts to overturn the election, including who they were talking to in the White House and in Congress, what connections they had with rallies that escalated into a riot, and who paid for it all.” Meanwhile, the Milwaukee Bucks have arrived at the White House to celebrate their victory in the 2021 NBA championships. The team shared a photo from the White House on Twitter: Joe Biden will soon hold an event on the South Lawn to congratulate the team on their victory, so stay tuned. The principal of Franklin Sherman Elementary School, Kathleen Quigley, welcomed Jill Biden and Vivek Murthy to the pop-up vaccination clinic for students. When asked for her message to parents who are hesitant to vaccinate their children, the first lady said she would tell them that the vaccines are “great, effective and free”. According to a pool report, about 260 children will be vaccinated at Franklin Sherman today. The majority of those children attend the elementary school. Jill Biden has arrived at Franklin Sherman Elementary School in McLean, Virginia, to promote coronavirus vaccinations for children. The first lady is joined by Dr Vivek Murthy, the surgeon general. The event comes less than a week after the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention approved the administration of a lower dose of the Pfizer vaccine to children between the ages of five and 11. Franklin Sherman also has a unique history, as it was the first school to administer the polio vaccine in 1954. The deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, would not provide a specific timeline for when Joe Biden will sign the bipartisan infrastructure bill. The president previously indicated that he would wait to sign the bill until Democratic lawmakers are back in town. The House and the Senate are both out of session this week. “It’s urgent, but we also want to make sure that the people who spent the last couple of weeks, last couple of months just all in delivering on this promise are here for the signing as well,” Jean-Pierre said. Although she would not provide a specific date for the bill-signing, Jean-Pierre said it would happen “very soon”. After taking over the briefing room podium, deputy press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre was asked about Republican resistance to the Biden administration’s new policies requiring coronavirus vaccines in many workplaces. A federal appeals court has temporarily blocked one of the rules, which requires workers at companies with 100 or more employees to get vaccinated or receive regular coronavirus testing. “Defending a policy is not a new thing from an administration,” Jean-Pierre said of the court ruling. “This is something that happens all the time.” Jean-Pierre argued there was clear precedent for the federal government to keep workers safe by setting certain standards for employers. “The administration clearly has the authority to protect workers, and actions announced by the president are designed to save lives and stop the spread of Covid-19,” Jean-Pierre said. Transportation secretary Pete Buttigieg said the bipartisan infrastructure bill will also provide funding to strengthen America’s supply chain networks. The House passage of the bill comes as the country has experienced product shortages as a result of supply-chain issues caused by the pandemic. Buttigieg added that the most effective strategy to address supply-chain issues is to boost vaccination rates to limit the spread of coronavirus and keep workplaces open. “The best way to end a pandemic-related shortage is to end the pandemic,” Buttigieg said. Transportation secretary Pete Buttigieg confirmed that Joe Biden has not yet signed the bipartisan infrastructure bill, although the House passed the proposal on Friday night. Buttigieg would not specify when Biden might sign the legislation, but he said he will “be there with bells on” when the bill-signing occurs. The cabinet secretary also echoed the president’s claim that Americans will be able to see the effects of the infrastructure bill within a couple of months. Buttigieg acknowledged it will take longer to establish the new programs included in the bill, but he said existing programs that are receiving additional funding from the legislation should be able to move forward more quickly. He also noted that the department of transportation will have to take on additional staff to handle the distribution of funds from the infrastructure bill. The deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, is now holding the daily briefing, and she is joined by transportation secretary Pete Buttigieg. The cabinet secretary touted the House passage of the bipartisan infrastructure bill, which includes $555bn in new federal funding for roads, bridges and other projects. Buttigieg noted the bill would provide funding to replace out-of-date water pipes, improve railway systems and invest in public transit. “We are excited with an exclamation point,” Buttigieg said of the bill. Ron DeSantis has begun his campaign to be re-elected Florida governor in 2022, a campaign most observers expect to presage a campaign for the White House in 2024. At a press conference this morning, the Republican said paperwork filed regarding next year’s gubernatorial contest was simply a formality. Most polling makes DeSantis a strong contender for the Republican presidential nomination – if you remove Donald Trump from the equation, of course. On Monday DeSantis, who has chaneled Trump and Trumpism very effectively since winning election in Florida in 2018, also previewed a key campaign theme – or, well, repeated a key theme of his everyday approach to political battle – by taking a shot at a Biden administration rule that says businesses with 100 or more employees must demand from those employees either vaccination against Covid-19 or weekly testing. “No cop, no firefighter, no nurse, nobody should be losing their jobs because of these jabs,” DeSantis told reporters. “We have got to stand up for people and protect their jobs and protect their livelihoods.” For the moment no cop, firefighter, nurse or anyone else will be losing their jobs because of the Biden rule, which was temporarily stayed by a conservative judge in New Orleans on Saturday. The administration says it is confident it will prevail. Charlie Crist and Nikki Fried are among Democrats who would like to challenge DeSantis for governor in Florida. Fried, the highest-placed Democrat in the state, as agriculture commissioner, has often clashed with DeSantis publicly, notably over posthumous honours for the conservative shock jock Rush Limbaugh. Crist was a Republican when he was governor in the 2000s – he’s now a Democratic member of the US House. No Democrat has won a gubernatorial election in Florida since 1994. The United Nations special rapporteur on the right to health has called on the US supreme court to uphold the right to abortion in America or risk undermining international human rights law and threatening that right elsewhere in the world. The special rapporteur, Dr Tlaleng Mofokeng, is one of just a handful of global observers whose mandate is to travel the world defending human rights. Mofokeng has argued in a brief filed in a US court that overturning abortion rights would violate international human rights treaties ratified by the US, including the convention against torture, should women be forced to carry pregnancies to term. Donald Trump once described Mitch McConnell as his “ace in the hole” and wrote, in a foreword to the Senate Republican leader’s autobiography, that he “couldn’t have asked for a better partner” in Washington. Except, according to Trump, he didn’t. Speaking to the Washington Post for a profile of the Senate minority leader published on Monday, Trump said he told McConnell: “‘Why don’t you write it for me and I’ll put it in, Mitch?’ Because that’s the way life works.” McConnell did not dispute Trump’s account, about the book The Long Game, telling the paper: “I really don’t have anything to add related to him.” The Post profile lands at a tricky time for Republican leaders. Last week’s stunning victory in the election for governor in Virginia was achieved by a candidate who kept Trump at arm’s length while deploying many of his tactics. But the former president remains a dominant presence, seemingly likely to run for the White House again. He and McConnell, the two most powerful men in the GOP, are firmly at odds over Trump’s lie that the 2020 election was stolen and over control of a party McConnell steers in the 50-50 Senate, which Democrats control via Vice-President Kamala Harris. McConnell’s support for the bipartisan infrastructure deal which the House sent to Joe Biden’s desk on Friday only deepened the divide. In a statement on Sunday, Trump said “all Republicans who voted for Democrat longevity should be ashamed of themselves in particular, Mitch McConnell”. Here’s where the day stands so far: Jill Biden will kick off her campaign to convince more American parents to vaccinate their children against coronavirus. The first lady’s kickoff event, which will take place this afternoon in McLean, Virginia, comes less than a week after the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention approved the administration of a lower dose of the Pfizer vaccine to children between the ages of five and 11. Biden will travel to Baltimore on Wednesday to deliver a pitch on the benefits of the bipartisan infrastructure bill, after the House approved the proposal on Friday night. The president has not yet signed the bill, which includes $555bn in new federal funding for roads, bridges and railways, among many other projects. Barack Obama criticized Donald Trump’s climate policies while speaking at the Cop26 conference in Glasgow. The former president lamented his successor’s decision to withdraw from the Paris climate agreement, saying, “I wasn’t real happy about that.” But Obama predicted that Biden’s climate agenda will “set the United States on course to meet its new climate targets”. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. At least one high-profile Democrat, Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, has already indicated that she opposes the potential renomination of Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell. “Your record gives me grave concerns,” the progressive lawmaker told Powell at a Senate hearing last month. “Over and over, you have acted to make our banking system less safe, and that makes you a dangerous man to head up the Fed, and it’s why I will oppose your renomination.” Federal Reserve governor Randal Quarles has announced he will resign next month, giving Joe Biden another opening to fill at the US central bank. “After more than four years as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and given the completion last month of my term as Vice Chairman for Supervision of the Board, I intend to resign my position as a Governor of the Federal Reserve during or around the last week of December of this year,” Quarles said in a letter to Biden. “It has been a great privilege to work with my colleagues on the Board, throughout the Federal Reserve System, and among the global central banking and regulatory community.” Quarles’ announcement comes as Biden also has to make a decision on whether to nominate Federal Reserve chairman Jay Powell for another term. Bloomberg News reports: Also, Vice Chair Richard Clarida’s term as a governor expires at the end of January, and there is an open seat on the board. Together, these appointments give Biden an opportunity to reshape the Fed Board. Biden recently met with Chair Powell and Fed Governor Lael Brainard, according to people familiar with the matter. Brainard is the only sitting governor on the Board appointed by a Democrat who is seen as a contender for all three leadership positions. After the House passage of the bipartisan infrastructure bill, Democrats’ attention has turned to the $1.75tn reconciliation package, which includes more than $500bn for climate initiatives. A handful of House progressives voted against the infrastructure bill because of their demand that the reconciliation package advance at the same time. Progressives worried that some of their centrist colleagues, like Senator Joe Manchin, would not feel motivated to pass the reconciliation package once the infrastructure bill was sent to Joe Biden’s desk. Asked about concerns that Democrats may lose momentum in the negotiations over the reconciliation bill, Biden said on Saturday, “I feel confident that we will have enough votes to pass the Build Back Better plan.” Barack Obama addressed the Cop26 climate change conference today, opening with a cheery “Hello, Glasgow!” The former US president, tieless and looking relaxed, said that he doesn’t need to attend such conferences anymore, but “you will have a hard time keeping me away” when it comes to the future of the planet. Obama said “meaningful progress” has been made since the Paris climate accords, which he helped to strike, but he acknowledged that more needs to be done. “What is also true, collectively and individually we are still falling short,” he said. “We have not done nearly enough to address this crisis, we will need to do more.” Obama admitted that “some progress stalled” when Donald Trump withdrew the US from the Paris deal. “I wasn’t real happy about that,” he added, but said the “US is back” under Joe Biden’s leadership. He also argued that, despite opposition within the Democratic party, some version of Biden’s ambitious $555bn climate package will pass in Congress in the coming weeks. “It will set the United States on course to meet its new climate targets,” he said. Follow the Guardian’s live blog for more updates from Cop26: Joe Biden has now arrived back at the White House, after he and the first lady spent some time at their home in Rehoboth Beach, Delaware, this weekend. As the president approached the White House, reporters shouted questions at him about his economic agenda and the results of last week’s elections. When asked about whether he would soon speak to Glenn Youngkin, the Republican governor-elect of Virginia, it sounded like the president replied, “I tried to call him.” The White House deputy press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, said on Thursday that the president had not yet spoken with Youngkin. “The will of the people is clear, and the president has always believed in working across party lines for the good of the American families,” Jean-Pierre said at a press briefing. “And he looks forward to doing that with Governor-elect Youngkin.” The Guardian’s Martin Pengelly and David Smith report: In his Saturday remarks, Joe Biden praised the infrastructure bill as a “once-in-a-generation investment that’s going to create millions of jobs, modernise our infrastructure, our roads, our bridges, our broadband, a range of things turning the climate crisis into an opportunity, and a put us on a path to win the economic competition of the 21st century that we face with China and other large countries in the rest of the world”. The House approved the $1tn bill late on Friday, after Democrats resolved a months-long standoff between progressives and centrists. The measure passed 228-206. Thirteen Republicans, mostly moderates, supported the bill while six progressive Democrats opposed it, among them Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York. Approval sent the bill to the desk of a president whose approval ratings have dropped and whose party struggled in elections this week. Biden said he would not sign the bill over the weekend because he wanted those who passed it to be there when he did so. “We’re looking more forward to having shovels in the ground,” Biden said. “To begin rebuilding America.” Joe Biden will travel to Baltimore, Maryland, on Wednesday to deliver a pitch for the benefits of the bipartisan infrastructure bill, which passed the House on Friday. In Baltimore, the president will “discuss how the Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal delivers for the American people by upgrading our nation’s ports and strengthening supply chains to prevent disruptions,” per the White House’s guidance on the trip. The House was able to pass the bill on Friday night, after speaker Nancy Pelosi decided to delay another planned vote on the larger spending package championed by Democrats. The infrastructure bill, which passed the Senate in August, provides $555bn in new federal funding for roads, bridges and railways, among many other projects. Celebrating the House’s passage of the bill, Biden said on Saturday, “This is a blue-collar blueprint to rebuild America. And it’s long overdue.” As Jill Biden launches her campaign to encourage American parents to vaccinate their children against coronavirus, the White House is taking additional steps to boost vaccination rates among kids. The AP reports: Health and Human Services Secretary Xavier Becerra and Education Secretary Miguel Cardona are sending a letter to school districts across the country calling on them to organize vaccine clinics for their newly eligible students. The officials are reminding school districts that they can tap into billions of dollars in federal coronavirus relief money to support pediatric vaccination efforts. The Biden administration is providing local school districts with tools to help schools partner with pharmacies to administer shots. And it’s asking schools to share information on the benefits of vaccines and details about the vaccination process with parents, in an effort to combat disinformation surrounding the shots. The White House is encouraging schools to host community conversations and share fact sheets on the vaccines and is working with the American Academy of Pediatrics to partner local physicians with schools aiming to share science-based information about the shots. Many US schools have been affected by coronavirus-related closures this year, and there are high hopes that the approval of a vaccine for all school-aged children could help keep classrooms open moving forward. Eric Berger reports on the Biden administration’s efforts to enact vaccine requirements in workplaces: Biden administration plans to get US companies with more than 100 or more workers to vaccinate their staff or bring in regular tests have been welcomed by public health groups but slammed by Republicans and trade groups, who claim government overreach with negative economic consequences. Such divided reaction to the rules announced last week mirrors much of America’s problematic vaccine rollout, where social and political headwinds have seen vaccination take-up slow down worryingly. US vaccination rates are some of the lowest in industrialized countries where the vaccine is readily available. Subject at least to a temporary stay issued by a circuit court in New Orleans on Saturday, the new rule from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Osha) will take effect on 4 January. But the rules sparked new backlash from Republican lawmakers and conservative groups who described the measures as unconstitutional. Republican governors or attorneys general in 15 states plan to file lawsuits against the mandate, according to the Associated Press. “This rule is garbage,” South Carolina’s attorney general, Alan Wilson, a Republican, said, according to the AP. “It’s unconstitutional and we will fight it.” Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. First lady Jill Biden will kick off a campaign this afternoon to convince more American parents to vaccinate their children against coronavirus. Biden and Dr Vivek Murthy, the surgeon general, will visit a vaccination clinic at Franklin Sherman elementary school in McLean, Virginia, which was the first school to administer the polio vaccine in 1954. The event comes less than a week after the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention approved the administration of a lower dose of the Pfizer vaccine to children between the ages of five and 11. The Biden administration is now coordinating with schools, pharmacies and local health departments to ensure families have access to vaccines and (perhaps more crucially) give parents information about why kids should get their shots. The first lady, who is an educator herself, will have the opportunity to deliver that message in person today. Stay tuned.Dylan Alcott, one of Australia’s greatest tennis players, has called time on his celebrated career and will retire from the sport after next year’s Australian Open. Alcott, who earlier this year became the first man in any form of tennis to earn the calendar year golden slam of all four major titles and Paralympic or Olympic gold, will bid farewell in front of a home crowd at Melbourne Park in January. Making the announcement on Tuesday, the 30-year-old stressed the importance to him of making one final appearance at the tournament in his home town, where he has accumulated a record seven quad singles titles – all in consecutive years. “There’s no way I could finish my career a few weeks ago because the US Open was not my home,” Alcott said. “This is my home and the Australian Open changed my life. What better way to finish than in my home in front of crowds.” Alcott’s triumph at the US Open in September was his third title at Flushing Meadows, adding to his two Wimbledon and three French Open wins in a career haul of 15 grand slam singles titles. He has also collected eight grand slam doubles titles, along with four Paralympic gold and two silver medals, and lays claim to being the most successful quad tennis player of all time. “I’ve known this day was coming for a while,” he said. “It’s been an incredible ride and I think the time has come to move onto other things that I do. In saying that, I’m going to train my arse off for the next two months and try and go out on a high.” He praised the Dutch teenager, Niels Vink, for pushing him to new levels in the most recent US Open final and on Tuesday Alcott said he felt it was the right time to stand aside and let players like Vink rise to prominence. “The time has come, I feel redundant, I feel old, washed up,” he said. “It’s the next generation’s turn to dominate and get the recognition they deserve. I’m really looking forward to getting out there and doing my thing one more time. We will see what happens. I’m just enjoying the moment.” Alcott was left a paraplegic after being born with a tumour gripping his spinal cord; surgery meant he would never walk. He was bullied for his disability during his childhood and he revealed after his US Open victory that he used to “hate himself so much”. “I hated my disability, I didn’t even want to be here any more and then I found tennis and it changed and saved my life,” he said in New York. Alcott’s talents are not limited to the tennis court. His sporting career began as a wheelchair basketballer – he won Paralympic gold and silver medals with the Australian national team – and he since added several other strings to his bow, notably as a radio DJ and TV commentator. He has also used his platform to be a vocal advocate for disability rights and helped raise awareness of mental health issues. “I am so proud and proud of the work we have done, to be honest,” he said. “Being a good tennis player is not the priority of my life. Being a good person is. “Being a good advocate and changing perceptions for people like me so they can live lives they deserve to live and get the opportunities I have had. I am so lucky. “We have all done this, my team, family, doubles partner, everybody that is a part of what we do. It is a big juggernaut but it has really changed perceptions, I hope, and I will never forget.” Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley led tributes at Alcott’s announcement, saying the retiring great is “an incredible person”. “His influence, infectious personality and positivity has impacted countless people, and across a far wider field than just sport or tennis,” Tiley said.In the wake of Malcolm Turnbull’s witheringly accurate assessment of Scott Morrison’s character last week, conservative political operatives have become increasingly aggressive in demanding that former prime ministers observe “dignified” silence about the current government’s myriad failures. This, of course, is a transparent effort to shield Morrison from pointed criticism, particularly from his own side, ahead of the next federal election. It is also breathtaking in its hypocrisy. Mysteriously these political attacks by the Murdoch media and government ministers, present and former, only seem to apply to former prime ministers who dare to criticise Morrison. Where is the criticism of Tony Abbott, who has been published in Murdoch papers more than 30 times since leaving parliament? What about Abbott’s fortnightly podcast produced by the Institute of Public Affairs, where Abbott waxes lyrical about the evils of the Australian Labor party? As a free speech advocate, I think Abbott is perfectly entitled to remain fully engaged in public political debate. In fact, later this month, Abbott and I are jointly appearing to launch a new book to which we’ve both contributed. Abbott’s right to contribute to the national political discourse did not end when he lost his seat. The bottom line with Murdoch’s recent attacks on Turnbull, Paul Keating and myself is that it is a new version of conservative cancel culture. Murdoch and Morrison routinely attack the political left for attempting to “cancel” the voices of those whom they disapprove. Which is precisely what they are now doing in relation to former prime ministers who do not share their world view. These conservatives bemoan “cancel culture” but they have turned it into an art form. By anyone’s measure, Morrison leads one of the most incompetent governments in living memory. It is mired in allegations of corruption, internally riven, contemptuous of public trust, abusive of taxpayer funds, and reckless in the prosecution of our country’s national security and international relations. The fact that former Liberal leaders, such as Turnbull and John Hewson, are among its strongest critics speaks volumes. On the core questions of our time – including our national security, our economic security, and our climate security – it is therefore the responsibility of every Australian citizen to engage as fully and freely as they can. Democracy isn’t just something that happens in polling booths every three years. It is a rolling national conversation that should include as many Australians as possible. On Sky News on Sunday, Alexander Downer said that by attacking Morrison, Turnbull looked mean spirited and bitter, and accused us both of “playing out an act of vengeance”. The political strategy behind this confected outrage from Murdoch, Downer and other conservatives is clear. They know Turnbull’s criticisms of Morrison’s duplicitous character are devastatingly effective because they confirm what voters already know about the prime minister. If it wasn’t effective, they wouldn’t bother. But rather than debate the substance of the criticism, instead they seek to delegitimise the critics. The tactic has been pioneered by the Murdoch empire over the past few years in the debate about Murdoch’s abuse of his media monopoly. Former prime ministers who keep quiet have been showered with soft coverage, praising them for their great dignity. Whereas those who continue to exercise their free speech in shining a light on Murdoch’s Liberal party protection racket get the opposite treatment. It’s pretty simple really. Downer’s deployment of this Murdochesque language on Sunday, followed by Barnaby Joyce the next day, suggests this strategy is migrating from the government’s media wing to its political wing. Expect to see other politicians intervening between now and the election, tarring former prime ministers as “embittered”, “aggrieved” or otherwise unwilling to “let go”. These are the standard Murdoch memes that have been deployed against Turnbull and myself whenever either of us have dared attack Murdoch as a cancer on democracy. But if Murdoch, Morrison or his political camp think this strategy will drive me into silence, I have disappointing news to report. It won’t. I was fully engaged in national debates on foreign policy, the economy, climate, health, education and reconciliation long before I became prime minister. And I expect to be fully engaged in them for many years to come. It is ridiculous to expect that politicians who leave parliament will abandon the causes and values that drove them to seek public office in the first place. To do so would only reinforce in Australians’ minds the view that political leaders are amoral, self-interested and obsessed with wielding power for its own sake. It would be especially galling for the public who supported them. Those individuals who were urged to become engaged in supporting them – either through their vote, their money or their time as a volunteer – would discover that their MP never believed in grassroots politics after all. Good political leaders seek election because it is a powerful platform to pursue the causes that they have long championed outside the parliament. They know from experience that political change can emerge from any corner of public life – not just political parties, but also through unions, business, community organisations and the media. It makes sense for Downer to think of politics only through the exclusive prism of parliamentary life. The heir to a conservative political dynasty, he felt entitled to a seat in parliament as his birthright, regardless of what he might do with it. So when he retired, what causes could he pursue? Downer would take a lobbying job with China’s Huawei, using his credibility as a former foreign minister to attack the Labor government’s national security decision to exclude them from the national broadband network. Then, like an English aristocrat handing off his polo mallet for the next chukka, Downer twice tried to install his own heir in his old seat. As for Joyce’s credentials to enter this debate, the less said the better. So deep, for example, were his principles on opposing carbon neutrality that he decided to cash them in in one giant lot to keep his job as deputy PM. There is great danger in the view that only serving politicians have a place in our public square. We should not reduce our democracy to a kind of partisan gladiatorial combat where two sides enter the arena and the Australian people simply watch on in horror. It is a recipe for further alienating the public from the government that they are supposed to run. I don’t see our democracy as a political plaything preserved for Morrison, the Murdoch monopoly and their mates behind the scenes. They cherish the notion of “quiet Australians” because listening to hard truths is inconvenient. My view is different. If we value our democratic rights, we should all be very noisy indeed.A new commitment from NAB to limit funding for oil and gas projects is full of loopholes and will allow the bank to continue lending to fossil fuel businesses, environmental activists say. The bank on Tuesday said it would cap its lending to oil and gas at US$2.4bn – a figure that NAB’s chief executive, Ross McEwan, said the bank was currently “a couple of hundred million below”. NAB said it would reduce its exposure from 2026 in line with the International Energy Agency’s net zero by 2050 roadmap. It will only directly finance new gas extraction projects in Australia “where it plays a role in underpinning national energy security” and will not directly finance gas projects outside the country, the bank said in a new policy released alongside its 2021 financial results. The bank said it would also continue to lend to integrated liquefied natural gas projects in Australia, Papua New Guinea and elsewhere under the new cap. Jack Bertolus, a campaigner at activist investor group Market Forces, said NAB’s new commitment was “really disappointing” and contained “tonnes and tonnes of loopholes and room for the bank to continue as usual”. “The IEA’s report provides clear red lines around the projects that can’t proceed under that scenario and the policy doesn’t reflect that whatsoever,” he said. “NAB should withdraw its commitment to net zero by 2050 until or unless it can put in place some meaningful commitment that would align it with that outcome.” He said the pledge allowed NAB to continue funding oil and gas indirectly through general corporate lending that was not tied to a specific project, as well as allowing new projects to be directly funded “under the loosely defined guise of national interest”. “It’s basically NAB allowing itself to continue to fund the fossil fuel sector,” he said. “It’s just cover, it’s a cynical greenwashing exercise.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning McEwan said NAB was the first big bank to commit to reducing oil and gas lending. “We’ll start moving very quickly to spending more time and energy on the renewable sector as we have committed to do so,” he said. He said the bank was using the US$2.4bn figure, which is the average exposure over the past three years, because business had been disrupted by the Covid-19 pandemic. “We have no intention of being involved in any greenwashing whatsoever, our intent is to participate in helping Australia to get into a much better position from a carbon emission perspective,” he said. McEwan also defended NAB’s decision to continue funding the Port of Newcastle, which is dependent on coal exports, when ANZ pulled out in February. He pointed to reports that the port could be part of a green hydrogen project. “If people hadn’t backed that port, I don’t think you’d be in this position,” he said. “So I think it’s certainly vindicated those who did get involved in helping Port of Newcastle make that transition to a better place.” The port also wants to reduce its dependence on coal by building a container terminal, something that is currently uncommercial due to an agreement the NSW government struck with two ports it sold off, Port Botany and Port Kembla, that imposes a penalty if a significant amount of containers flows through Newcastle. NAB’s cash earnings for the year were up 38.6% to $6.56bn.The rappers Travis Scott and Drake have been sued for having “incited mayhem” after eight people were killed and dozens injured in a crush during a Texas concert, a law firm has confirmed. Thomas J Henry Law tweeted a story published by the Daily Mail on the lawsuit, confirming on Sunday that it had filed “one of the first lawsuits in Travis Scott Astroworld festival tragedy”. The plaintiff is 23-year-old Kristian Paredes, who was one of those “severely injured” at the concert on 5 November. Another lawsuit was filed in the state court of Houston on behalf of a man injured in the crush. Attorneys for Manuel Souza sued Scott, the concert organisers Live Nation and others, claiming they were responsible. In a tweet posted on Saturday, Scott said he was “absolutely devastated by what took place”. He pledged to work “together with the Houston community to heal and support the families in need”. About 50,000 people were in the audience at NRG Park in Houston when the crowd started pushing towards the stage as Scott was performing, triggering chaotic scenes. The incident also resulted in 25 people being taken to hospital and more than 300 others treated at the scene for minor injuries. Paredes, a Texas resident who is also suing Live Nation and the venue, “felt an immediate push” at the front of the general admission section as Scott got on stage, the complaint says. “The crowd became chaotic and a stampede began. Many begged security guards hired by Live Nation Entertainment for help, but were ignored.” The lawsuit, filed in Harris county court in Houston, claims Scott “had incited mayhem and chaos at prior events” and “defendants knew or should have known of [Scott’s] prior conduct”. It accuses the Canadian rapper Drake, who joined Scott’s headline set, of contributing to causing the surge towards the stage. “As Drake came onstage alongside Travis Scott he helped incite the crowd even though he knew of Travis Scott’s prior conduct,” the complaint says. He continued to perform even as the “crowd became out of control” and the “crowd mayhem continued”, it adds. Details emerge about those who died The lawsuit comes as details about those who died continue to emerge. On Monday, authorities released the names of the dead, comprising victims between the ages of 14 and 27 and from Texas, Illinois and Washington, according to Harris county authorities. The victims include Franco Patino, 21, who was working toward a mechanical engineering technology degree. His father, Julio Patino, described Franco in an interview with the Associated Press as a charismatic, energetic leader who was active in his community and intent on helping people with disabilities. Jacob “Jake” Jurinek, 20, was a junior at Southern Illinois University Carbondale, where he was “pursuing his passion for art and media”, his family said in a statement on Sunday. He was just short of his 21st birthday. Madison Dubiski, 23, was described by former classmates as “the life of the party”, while Brianna Rodriguez, 16, a student at Heights high school in Houston, was described by her family as “beautiful” and “vibrant”. John Hilgert, 14, a Memorial high school ninth grader, was the youngest of those who died. Mourners began tying green ribbons around trees at the school over the weekend in his memory. He was at the concert with his classmate Robby Hendrix, whose mother, Tracy Faulkner, spoke with the Houston Chronicle. The boys had hoped to get a good spot to watch the show. “Everything about that night was a tragedy,” Faulkner told the newspaper. “John was a good student and athlete and so polite. He was the sweetest and smartest young man.” Survivors described seeing people squeezed against one another and many struggling to breathe. Scott, who launched the Astroworld music festival in 2018, reportedly halted his act several times when he saw fans in distress near the stage. Authorities in Texas launched a criminal investigation into the tragedy, involving homicide and narcotics detectives. Houston’s police chief said on Monday he had met with Scott before the rapper’s performance on Friday about safety concerns but did not elaborate about what, specifically, had concerned him. Houston police and fire department investigators have said they would review video taken by Live Nation, a concert promoter, as well as dozens of clips from people at the show that were widely shared on social media. Investigators also planned to speak with Live Nation representatives, Scott and concertgoers. Live Nation said in a statement on Monday that it had provided authorities with all footage from surveillance cameras at the festival, and that it had paused removing equipment at the request of investigators who were walking the grounds. The promoter said full refunds would be offered to all attendees. Scott’s scheduled appearance at the Day N Vegas Festival in Las Vegas this weekend was canceled, according to a representative. Scott, who founded the Astroworld festival, said he would cover funeral costs for the victims. Agence France-Presse contributed to this reportNew Zealand’s parliament is on high alert after thousands of anti-vaccination mandate protesters, some threatening violence, gathered in Wellington and across the country. As of early Tuesday, about 2,000 people had gathered in central Wellington, and almost all the gates and entrance ways to parliament had been shut off. According to Stuff,the Speaker of the house, Trevor Mallard, said it was the biggest increase in parliamentary security he had seen since his election in 1984. In the initial stages of the protests across the country, there were attacks on both police and reporters. At the border with Auckland, which has been shut for weeks due to the Covid outbreak there, a police officer was bitten by a protester. Police said in a statement that about 50 protesters had arrived at the border, and blocked traffic for an hour. “The actions of protesters required our staff to physically intervene to move them off the road. In the process one of our officers has been bitten by an as yet unidentified protester. Actions like this are totally avoidable and poses unnecessary risk to our staff who are simply trying do their part in preventing the spread of Covid-19,” police said in a statement. According to Stuff, one of the country’s largest news organisations, one of their photographers was grabbed and pushed by protesters in Wellington yelling anti-media abuse. Tuesday’s protests appeared to consist of a few thousand people, an unusually large one for New Zealand, whose government has enjoyed extremely high levels of public support for its Covid pandemic response. The prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said that: “What we saw today was not representative of the vast bulk of New Zealanders.” Some of the tenor of protesters’ signs and slogans had violent undertones, and echoed the Capitol riot in Washington in January – demonstrating some of the growing connections between New Zealand’s anti-vaccine mandate movement and overseas factions through social media. A number of protesters waved large Trump flags, signs saying “we will drain the swamp” or “media treason” with a series of swastikas, or placards referencing a coming “Nuremberg trial” and depicting a noose. Some took the peculiar step of throwing tennis balls on to the parliamentary forecourt, tagged with slogans urging violence against Ardern. Also present in the crowds were tino rangatiratanga and United Tribes of New Zealand flags, both of which are symbolic of Māori sovereignty movements. A speaker on parliament grounds said he hoped Ardern was scared, and said: “If you do decide to ignore us, you do so at your peril.” He made a series of demands including revoking workplace vaccination mandates and removing all other Covid safety restrictions. In October, the government released a new “traffic light” system for Covid management, including a legal framework for vaccination mandates that could affect around 40% of the workforce. The new rules, which begin at 90% vaccination, would loosen almost all restrictions for the fully vaccinated, but require vaccination certificates for many businesses and for workers in public-facing roles like eduction, nursing, and hospitality. In a working paper released on Tuesday, research institute Te Pūnaha Matatini said it had observed “a sharp increase in the popularity and intensity of Covid-19-specific disinformation and other forms of ‘dangerous speech’ and disinformation, related to far-right ideologies” since the Delta outbreak and level 4 lockdown began in August. They also noted “a shift in reception to the Covid-19 vaccine from vaccine hesitancy to vaccine resistance”. Online communities both spreading and being exposed to online Covid misinformation were often exposed to a hodge-podge of other conspiratorial claims, the researchers said. That may account for some of the mixed messaging at Tuesday’s protests, which blended QAnon narratives, Christian slogans, messages about freedom, exclusion and “apartheid” and Covid-specific concerns. The researchers – while not writing specifically about today’s protest movement – concluded their findings “point to a broader threat: that Covid-19 and vaccination are being used as a kind of Trojan horse for norm-setting and norm-entrenchment of far-right ideologies in Aotearoa New Zealand … [including] anti-Māori sentiment, anti LGBTQIA+, conservative ideals around family and family structure, misogyny, and anti immigration”. Opposition National party leader Judith Collins said her MPs would not be meeting with the protesters, and that she had never seen the level of security restrictions currently in place. “This is very much an anti-vaccination protest and we don’t really want to be seen with it,” Collins said.It is an architectural curiosity that attracts admirers from around the world, an asymmetric stack of identical concrete boxes in a neighbourhood dominated by the gleaming glass edifices of corporate Japan. But after occupying a corner of Tokyo’s Ginza district for almost half a century, the Nakagin Capsule Tower faces an uncertain future. When it was built in 1972, Nakagin was the capital’s only example of the metabolism architectural movement, which fused ideas about megastructures with those of organic biological growth, and a physical expression of Japan’s postwar economic and cultural revival. Its designer, the celebrated architect Kisho Kurokawa, envisioned its 140 self-contained prefabricated capsules as pieds-à-terre for professionals who wanted to avoid long weekday commutes to their suburban homes. With an area of 10 square metres, each capsule came with a unit bathroom, a Sony Trinitron TV, a reel-to-reel cassette/radio, a rotary dial phone and a large circular window through which generations of residents have viewed Tokyo’s ever-changing cityscape. In keeping with its metabolism roots, Kurokawa, who died in 2007, had intended for the capsules to be removed and replaced every 25 years. But almost half a century on, time has caught up with the structure, now shrouded in netting to keep dislodged rust and concrete from falling on to passersby. The few remaining residents are now having to accept that their homes and office spaces will soon disappear, amid reports that the building could be demolished next spring. Preserving Nakagin in its current form has proved impossible, says Tatsuyuki Maeda, representative of the Nakagin Capsule Tower Building Preservation and Regeneration Project, as he shows the Guardian around one of the 15 rooms he has bought over the past 12 years. “We want the capsules to survive, although in a different form, to keep the metabolism idea alive,” says Maeda, 54, who started leasing some of his rooms and conducting guided tours a decade ago to raise money to preserve the 13-storey building. “This isn’t just a place where people live and work. It inspires people to be creative and innovative.” About 40 people have moved out since March, when the management company and capsule owners decided to sell the plot, leaving just 20 tenants – a small but eclectic band that includes an architect, a DJ, a film producer and Maeda, who works in advertising. “There are a few people who have said they never want to leave, but they’ll have to get used to the idea,” he says. Plans to remove and replace the capsules were torn up due to the high cost, logistical challenges and concern about the large quantities of asbestos inside the building. Time has not been kind to the structure, which has not had hot running water for more than a decade and, critically, does not meet Japan’s strict earthquake-resistance regulations. Nakagin’s future appeared to have been secured when an overseas investor showed an interest in buying the entire building. But negotiations ended when the coronavirus pandemic prevented investors from travelling to Japan to view the property, according to Maeda, who lives nearby with his family but spends occasional nights at Nakagin. The capsules’ survival hinges on Maeda’s project to disassemble them, remove the asbestos and donate them to museums, art galleries and other institutions in Japan and overseas – a proposal that is at least in keeping with Kurokawa’s architectural philosophy. The preservation group has received inquiries from museums in the US, Britain, Germany, France and Poland hoping to play their part in protecting the legacy of Japan’s short-lived experiment with metabolism. “Europeans understand the need to preserve buildings like this, whereas Japan is still guided by a pull-down-and-rebuild mentality,” says Maeda, who resolved to buy a Nakagin capsule while gazing at the building from his old workplace. Before the pandemic, people from all over the world flocked to this corner of Ginza to photograph its most famous architectural landmark. Foreign visitors regularly outnumbered Japanese admirers on guided tours, and fashion houses have used its retro backdrop for photoshoots. Celebrity visitors include Hugh Jackman – Nakagin’s exterior appeared in the 2013 film The Wolverine – Francis Ford Coppola and Keanu Reeves. “I’ve always thought the capsules would look perfect on a small island, in the middle of a forest or even on the seabed,” says Maeda, who adds that he will spend a few nights at Nakagin until the capsules’ fate is decided. “In Japan you can live in an apartment for years without even seeing your neighbours. But here everyone is friendly and ready to help each other out. We are a real community.” • This article was amended on 12 November 2021 to add further detail to the caption of the second photo.A seriously ill 66-year-old widow has taken legal action in a bid to stop Gerry Harvey evicting her from the home she shared with her late husband, a longtime friend of the billionaire retailer. In documents filed with the NSW supreme court, Peggy Luker alleges Harvey promised her and her husband, Garry Dent, that the home would be transferred to them as the result of property development work he did, but this never happened. Luker has lived at the house, in Kurrajong, about 75km north-west of Sydney, for about a decade. According to court documents, it is part of a property development put together by Harvey and Dent – a subdivision of 100 acres (40ha) of land that Harvey owned. Dent died in 2017 and Harvey gave a eulogy at his funeral, documents tendered in court and first reported by Nine Entertainment newspapers show. The house belongs to G Harvey Nominees, a trustee company controlled by Harvey, which, according to documents tendered in court, wrote to Luker in June last year demanding she vacate the premises by 20 August 2020. Through her solicitor, Christopher Crawley, Luker has told the court she is entitled to the house in return for the work she and her husband did on the broader property development. “My client advises me that Gerry promised her and the deceased that the home in which she lives … would be transferred to them,” Crawley said in an affidavit filed with the court. He said Dent had been a property developer prior to becoming bankrupt and a friend of Harvey’s for about 50 years. Harvey asked Dent for help with the Kurrajong subdivision in the early 2000s, he said. He alleged Harvey changed the deal twice but eventually agreed to build them a house on “one of the cheapest blocks” of the subdivision as payment for Dent’s work. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Whilst Gerry paid for the costs of the house construction, the deceased and my client built and designed the house to their own specifications, including things that were important to my client who had failing health,” Crawley said in his affidavit. He said Harvey rang Luker on either the day her husband died or the day after “at length asking her a lot of personal questions, how much money she had, my parents, family etc and what the deceased had in the bank”. “She was surprised but not thinking anything sinister let it go,” Crawley said. However, in a phone conversation two weeks later Harvey allegedly said the deal was “nonsense”, according to Crawley. “He said my client was not his responsibility and she was to move out and get the pension.” He said that in July Luker found out her body had rejected a kidney transplant and “skin cancers have been popping out all over her body”. Crawley declined to comment or put Guardian Australia in contact with his client. Harvey declined to comment when contacted by Guardian Australia other than saying: “It’s going to mediation so we’ll wait and see what happens then.” The case is set for a mediation hearing on 22 November.Alec Baldwin has urged film and TV productions to hire police officers to monitor weapons and ensure guns used in filming are safe in the wake of the fatal shooting during filming of the western movie Rust. Baldwin accidentally shot and killed the cinematographer Halyna Hutchins on 21 October after being told the gun he was rehearsing with on the film set in New Mexico was “cold”, or safe to use, according to the Santa Fe county sheriff’s office. “Every film/TV set that uses guns, fake or otherwise, should have a police officer on set, hired by the production, to specifically monitor weapons safety,” the actor posted to Twitter on Monday. The account has since been made private, but the message was also placed on the actor’s Instagram account. Authorities are trying to determine how a real bullet could have wound up in the gun that was handed to Baldwin. Attorneys for Hannah Gutierrez-Reed, the Rust armorer who oversaw weapons on the set, said she believed she had loaded it with dummy rounds that were incapable of firing. They said she had done her best to ensure safety on set and blamed other factors as a result of which “the production set became unsafe”. The incident has renewed calls for better safety practices on sets with regard to the use of weapons, and producers and crew members have been weighing whether new steps should be taken to prevent a similar tragedy in the future. Some have called for banning real guns from movie and TV sets altogether. The actor Dwayne Johnson has said that his future productions would only use rubber guns during filming. A day after the shooting, Baldwin spoke about his “shock and sadness regarding the accident that took the life of Halyna Hutchins, a wife, mother and deeply admired colleague of ours”. “I’m fully cooperating with the police investigation to address how this tragedy occurred and I am in touch with her husband, offering my support to him and his family. My heart is broken for her husband, their son, and all who knew and loved Halyna.” The gun Baldwin used was one of three that the armorer had set on a cart outside the building where a scene was being rehearsed, according to court records. The film’s assistant director, Dave Halls, took a gun off a cart and handed it to Baldwin, indicating that the weapon was safe by yelling “cold gun”, court papers said. But, unknown to Halls, it was loaded with live rounds, according to the records. Affidavits subsequently released paint a picture of a dysfunctional and feuding set, where five crew members reportedly walked out over pay and working conditions a few hours before the fatal shooting occurred. Lawyers representing the crew member in charge of weapons blamed the producers for an “unsafe” set. It was also later revealed Halls was the subject of an internal complaint on a previous movie. Maggie Goll, a prop maker and licensed pyrotechnician, said she had raised concerns about Hall’s conduct in relation to safety issues on set with the executive producers of Hulu’s Into the Dark TV series in 2019. He has yet to comment and has retained counsel. According to an additional affidavit released last month, Halls admitted to investigators that he “should have checked all” the rounds in the gun before handing it to Baldwin, who was also a producer on the movie, but had not done so. However, Goll was quick to clarify that she did not believe the situation was about Halls. “It’s in no way one person’s fault,” she said, adding that there were larger issues about the wellbeing of crew that had to be addressed. “It’s a bigger conversation about safety on set and what we are trying to achieve with that culture.” The shooting has increased public scrutiny over an often overlooked corner of the film industry in which critics say the pursuit of profit can lead to unsafe working conditions.New South Wales will allow courts to break unfair settlements forced on child sexual abuse survivors by churches and other institutions and will allow them to bypass gag orders preventing them from speaking out publicly. New laws, passed on Tuesday, give NSW courts the power to set aside unfair historic settlement agreements for sexual and serious physical abuse. Survivors groups have welcomed the legislation, saying it will help survivors who faced immense legal barriers and felt forced into accepting pitiful settlements. Until a wave of reform triggered by the child abuse royal commission, survivors of abuse were unable to sue for historic claims that fell outside the statutory time limit, despite a wealth of research showing delays in reporting were common. Survivors also faced what the NSW attorney general, Mark Speakman, describes as a series of “legal technicalities” shielding institutions from civil cases. NSW, like other states, introduced reforms in 2016 and 2018 to seek to remove legal barriers to justice for abuse survivors, acting on the royal commission’s recommendations. But it is now going further by giving the courts the power to overturn any settlement deemed to be unfair made prior to these reforms. “We are righting the wrongs of the past to ensure survivors can access the civil justice they deserve and be properly compensated for the appalling mistreatment they suffered as children,” Speakman said. The Civil Liability Amendment (Child Abuse) Act 2021 was introduced in March and passed on Tuesday. It allows the courts to set aside affected agreements if it is “just and reasonable to do so”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Survivors who seek to have settlements set aside will not be held to have breached gag orders previously made with churches and other institutions. This protection will be given even if survivors are ultimately unsuccessful in having their settlements set aside. The change will potentially open up a raft of cases to public scrutiny which have previously been hidden by the non-disclosure agreements. NSW is not alone in introducing such laws. Similar reforms have been made in Queensland, Victoria, Tasmania, Western Australia and the Northern Territory. But the NSW law differs significantly in that it allows courts to set aside settlement agreements “for claims that were either impacted by the expiry of the limitation period or where an organisation was not incorporated and there was therefore no proper defendant to the cause of action, or both, if just and reasonable to do so”. “By doing so, this bill ensures it is clear to survivors, their representatives, potential defendants and the courts the types of settlements that are covered by the reforms,” the NSW upper house MP Natalie Ward said earlier this year, when introducing the bill. Child abuse campaigners have welcomed the new laws as “critical”. The Bravehearts chief executive, Alison Geale, said the laws would give survivors “the opportunity to escape these unfair deals and access the justice they have been denied”. “For too long, survivors of child abuse have felt trapped in unjust agreements with powerful institutions,” she said. “These settlements would often include signed deeds, which prevented survivors from taking further civil action against the perpetrators.”Scott Morrison has deflected accusations of hypocrisy and denied he attacked electric vehicles before the 2019 federal election when he said Labor would “end the weekend”, as he unveiled the government’s new clean car policy. The government on Tuesday ruled out subsidising the expansion of electric and hybrid vehicles through rebates or tax breaks, and said it expected only 30% of new sales to be EVs by 2030 – a date by which a growing number of countries plan to ban the sale of new petrol and diesel cars. The “future fuels and vehicles strategy” instead includes $178m of new funding, mostly for new EV and hydrogen refuelling infrastructure and to help businesses set up charging stations for fleets. It said the government would “co-invest with industry” to install an estimated 50,000 smart chargers in homes. Under questioning at a press conference in Melbourne, Morrison denied he had criticised EV technology before the last election. At the time, he said battery-powered cars would not “tow your trailer”. “It’s not going to tow your boat. It’s not going to get you out to your favourite camping spot with your family.” He also questioned how much EV charging stations would cost, and whether someone who owned an EV and lived in an apartment was “going to run the extension cord down from your fourth-floor window”. On Tuesday, Morrison claimed his criticism had been limited to Labor’s then-policy, not the technology itself. He said he did not regret saying EVs would “end the weekend”. “I don’t have a problem with electric vehicles, [I] have a problem with governments telling people what to do and what vehicles they should drive and where they should drive them, which is what [former opposition leader] Bill Shorten’s plan was,” Morrison said at Toyota’s hydrogen centre in suburban Altona. “I’m not going to put up the price of petrol [for] families and make them buy electric vehicles, and walk away from the things they have. That is not the Liberal way and the Nationals way.” The Shorten-era Labor policy was not to tell people what vehicle they should drive, require anyone to buy an EV or put up the price of petrol. It included a non-binding target of 50% new car sales being EVs by 2030 and the promise of a vehicle emissions standard to reduce the average carbon pollution of the national car fleet. Morrison stressed the government would not “be forcing Australians out of the car they want to drive or penalising those who can least afford it through bans or taxes”. “Just as Australians have taken their own decision to embrace rooftop solar at the highest rate in the world, when new vehicle technologies are cost-competitive, Australians will embrace them too,” he said. The expansion of rooftop solar – which, according to the Clean Energy Council, has now led to 3m systems being installed across the country – was encouraged for more than a decade through federal and state incentives and subsidies. The government vehicle strategy suggests its approach will have only a limited impact as a climate policy. It is projected to cut greenhouse gas emissions by just 8m tonnes – less than 2% of the national annual total – over the next 14 years. Transport emissions are nearly 20% of the national total, were increasing rapidly before Covid-19 lockdowns and are projected to rebound in the years ahead. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, said the future policy was “another pamphlet, rather than a serious announcement”. He said a Labor government would make EVs cheaper by removing import and fringe benefits tax. “I think people will look at Scott Morrison today and this announcement and just shake their head and say, ‘What’s changed?’,” he said. “This is a guy who says he’s about new technology. He’s resisted it.” The energy and emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, said the government’s strategy of helping install charging infrastructure, rather than phasing out fossil fuel cars, was about helping motorists “embrace the increasing range of technologies available to keep them moving in an informed and fair way”. Taylor claimed credit for the number of low emissions vehicle models available in Australia increasing by 20% over the past eight months, but did not explain how the government’s policy had contributed to this. Car manufacturers across the globe have released a wave of new EV models as governments have announced emissions limits for passenger cars and future bans on fossil fuel cars. Industry representatives say Australians have fewer options than comparable countries due to a lack of policy support. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Taylor said voluntary adoption was “the right pathway for reducing transport emissions over the long term”. “Stringent standards, bans or regressive taxes will limit choice and increase the upfront costs of cars for Australians,” he said. The chief executive of the Electric Vehicle Council, Behyad Jafari, said the government’s strategy addressed only “roughly 5% of the electric vehicle issue”. He said it ruled out the two “most important and efficient measures” to encourage EV uptake – fuel efficiency standards that would require cars to become cleaner over time, and rebates. He said EVs were a “monumental opportunity” for Australia that could cut emissions while “creating an innovative industry in manufacturing, technology and services”. “It’s disappointing that, against the overwhelming advice of the industry and experts, the government continues to peddle its false line that doing nothing increases choice,” Jafari said. “For a strategy that has taken years to write, this leaves much to be desired.” A study has suggested future uptake of EVs will be driven by state policies. ClimateWorks Australia, a thinktank connected to Monash University, found promised state and territory action had set a de facto national target for 2030 of at least 30% of new cars being electric. The two biggest states, New South Wales and Victoria, are aiming for EVs to make up 50% of new sales by the end of the decade. The Australian Automobile Association said the government strategy included some welcome measures, but fell short of delivering the policies needed to drive uptake of clean cars. “Australia is a small player in the global marketplace and we need national policies that actively incentivise car brands to sell additional low emissions cars into Australia, providing Australian consumers with increased choice,” managing director Michael Bradley said. Taylor said “many Australians” were choosing new technology vehicles, citing Electric Vehicle Council data that 8,688 battery and plug-in hybrid vehicles were sold in the first half of 2021, an increase on last year. EVs were just 0.75% of new car sales in Australia last year, compared with 10.2% in Europe and 15% in the UK. They are nearly 80% of new sales in Norway. Norway and South Korea have announced a ban on new petrol and diesel car sales from 2025, followed by a list of countries – including the UK, Germany, India and Israel – in 2030. Japan, China and California will phase out new fossil fuel vehicle sales in 2035. The Morrison government had announced plans for a national EV strategy before the last election, but changed direction after attacking Labor’s plan. It has rejected introducing fuel efficiency standards, which would involve setting a target to lower the average emissions from the national vehicle fleet, despite a departmental analysis in December 2016 finding the benefits in savings on fuel and reduced emissions would outweigh the costs under all scenarios examined.A plucky migrating godwit that captured New Zealand’s attention after it was forced to make a dramatic U-turn back to Alaska after 33 hours of non-stop flight has finally touched down in the country. Every year, the Eastern bar-tailed godwits, or kuaka in Māori, make one of the longest avian migration flights in the world, travelling from their breeding ground in the Arctic, across the Pacific, to New Zealand. About 80,000 godwits arrive in New Zealand each year, and move into harbours and estuaries across the two islands. Typically, the flocks are welcomed in September, sometimes to the sound of Cathedral bells. This year, a female godwit, identified as 4BYWW by the bands on her legs, was confirmed as having made the longest flight ever recorded by a land bird. She travelled non-stop from Alaska to New Zealand, a journey of 12,200km that took eight days and 12 hours at an average speed of 59km/h. But one unlucky godwit, an adult male known as 4BWRB, was forced to take a large U-turn over the Pacific Ocean, finishing up back at its Alaska take-off point after 57 hours of constant flight. 4BWRB took off from tidal flats in Alaska’s Yukon-Kuskokwim delta on 11 September before encountering strong winds 2,000km into his journey and turning back after 33 hours of outward bound flight, the Department of Conservation reported. It spent 11 days back in Alaska before giving the journey another try. It made it to New Caledonia, then spent five weeks resting before taking off again – destination New Zealand. In a feat of stunning perseverance, it arrived in the North Island’s Firth of Thames just after midnight on Tuesday morning. The manager of the Pūkorokoro Miranda Shorebird Centre, Keith Woodley, said the unlucky 4BWRB – which also had to stop in New Caledonia last year – had failed to do the non-stop flight three times in the past year. “So I mean, you wouldn’t want it to buy you a Lotto ticket. But now it’s back here, it’s got time to recover, it’s got time to do the feather moult and time to get all the preparations on track.” Woodley has a particular fondness for the extraordinary efforts godwits go to before migration. They replace all their feathers to ready themselves for the next migratory flight and undergo physiological changes to enable them to store fat more efficiently. Over the next few days he will be out scouring the estuary to try to spot 4BRWB and “welcome him back”. The Pūkorokoro Miranda Naturalists’ Trust was formed in 1975 and built its centre in 1990 to promote awareness of coastal ecology and shorebirds. Most of the godwits fitted with tracking devices are caught in Pūkorokoro, with the trust’s help. 4BWRB is one of 20 godwits fitted with radio transmitters. Monitoring the species helps scientists to assess the impact of weather on ultra-long-distance migration in real time, and to understand how migrating godwits adapt to changing weather. Woodley said climate change was a problem for godwits “at every point of the compass”. In New Zealand, sea level rise is reducing habitats and foraging grounds; in Alaska, rising temperatures are changing the breeding environment and arrival of insects, which the godwit relies on for food. Unpredictable weather conditions across both hemispheres are affecting their flights. “Everywhere you look, these birds are likely to be affected by climate change,” Woodley said.Residents of a Chinese city bordering Russia have been offered major cash rewards for tips on the continuing Delta outbreak, with local officials declaring a “people’s war” on the virus. Authorities announced the 100,000 yuan ($15,640) rewards for residents in Heihe, in the north-eastern Heilongjiang Province, as its total tally of cases in this outbreak reached 240. “It is hoped that the general public could actively cooperate with the tracing of the virus and provide clues to the probe,” the declaration said. According to state media, officials have urged people in the border city to immediately report any instances of illegal hunting, animal smuggling, or people crossing the border to fish. It also warned of severe penalties for people who intentionally conceal relevant information. China’s health commission reported another 62 locally transmitted symptomatic cases on Monday, and 43 on Tuesday, adding to the more than 940 cases recorded in at least 20 provinces nationally since October, in the country’s worst outbreak since Wuhan in early 2020. The government is committed to a Covid Zero strategy, and is deploying an escalating array of measures in its attempts to eliminate the virus from the community again. Henan province authorities have said they will “catch and kill” the virus within a week, with provincial party secretary Lou Yangsheng vowing to expand lockdowns and contact tracing as necessary. Authorities in Chengdu have expanded tracing measures and orders, reportedly identifying some people if their mobile phones transmitted through the same cell tower in a 14 day period. The measure, dubbed “spacial-temporal overlap”, classifies someone as a close contact if the phone signal was within 800 square metres of a case for more than 10 minutes, or if both parties spent at least 30 hours in the identified area over the two week period. The method saw authorities order about 82,000 people who had visited a massive shopping complex to get tested and then self-isolate. Video footage purported to show some people climbing over fences to escape the mandatory testing requirement. Earlier this month authorities locked down Shanghai Disneyland and tested all guests inside after a previous visitor was diagnosed with the illness. With the outbreak continuing, health officials have called for an acceleration of booster shots and vaccinations to children. Wang Qinghua, chief immunologist of the Chinese Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said it was previously thought children were largely unaffected by Covid-19, but the situation had changed as the virus mutated. “We have seen increased infections in children, with the rates of severe illness and mortality surpassing influenza in some countries … and the hospitalisation rate for children is now more than 10 times higher than earlier this year,” he said, according to state media. According to the Global Times, health authorities have set a target of vaccinating all eligible children aged 3 to 11 before the end of the year. More than 3.5m doses have been delivered to the age group so far, according to government data. Vaccinations are voluntary in China. • This article was amended on 9 November 2021 to correct the spelling of Heihe in the text and subheading.Canada geese, wigeon, teal and shovelers are swimming and feeding in the pools. I stand underneath the nearby trees, behind a hedge, the cover allowing me to watch the birds from just a few metres away, and listen to their constant contact calls of soft whistles and honks. Male shovelers are dipping their glistening green heads into the water and sweeping their wide bills from side to side. Two Canada geese act as sentinels, watching warily from raised ground while others feed. Near them, two Egyptian geese – the descendants of escaped birds, now breeding in the wild – are becoming agitated and start to shriek loudly. Thinking it’s my presence that’s disturbed them, I slink away to the next hide. A flock of redwings lands in the trees alongside an open field. The small thrushes, recent arrivals from northern Scandinavia and Russia, flutter among the branches, flashing the orangey patches on their flanks and calling softly. As I enter the hide, I hear another call – a kestrel’s prolonged, high-pitched “yikkering” – coming from somewhere above the roof. I sit down and look out through the windows. I don’t have to wait long. The kestrel flies low, in front of the hide, and lands on a large, round mound of earth which had been dug up during the work to clear the water channels on the reserve. I watch the little male falcon, its grey head and russet-brown back marked with black arrowhead shapes. It looks down intently at the dark turf at its feet. Suddenly, it hops from foot to foot down the side of the mound and lunges. It flicks up its hooked beak and swallows a large black beetle. It continues to hunt in this way for about 15 minutes, before bounding back on top of the mound. It turns its head round in sharp movements, bobbing its head up and down – scanning its surroundings. It’s thought that these bobbing movements enable the bird to create a three-dimensional picture of the landscape, usually before flight. The kestrel launches into the air and flaps back over the hide, out of view. I hear its yikkering call again.White British people diagnosed with brain tumours are more likely to die within 12 months than patients from other ethnic groups, a study suggests. The research is the first of its kind to examine the impact of ethnicity on brain tumour survival. The results are being presented today at the National Cancer Research Institute (NCRI) festival. Hiba Wanis, of the Centre for Cancer, Society and Public Health at King’s College London, found that while brain tumours were diagnosed more often in white British people, at the same time, the one-year survival rate was lower than for patients of other ethnicities. She analysed data from 24,319 adult patients living in England diagnosed with a malignant primary brain tumour between 2012 and 2017. The risk of death was calculated for ethnic categories including white British; any other white (includes any other white background and white Irish); other ethnic (includes all mixed ethnic groups and any other ethnic groups); Indian; Pakistani; Bangladeshi; Chinese; black African; and black Caribbean patients, up to one year after diagnoses. Patients in England categorised as “other ethnic” were 30% less likely to die within a year than white British people, the research found. Patients from three other ethnic categories also had a decreased risk of death – 16% for Indian, 17% for other white and 19% for unknown. Researchers hope the findings will help doctors provide relevant and accurate information on a patient’s prognosis, and also allow patients to understand why they could be at a higher or lower risk of survival than other groups of people. “Brain tumours are under-researched compared with other cancers, and until now, no study has investigated the impact of a person’s ethnicity on brain tumour survival using information on patients in the whole of England,” said Wanis. While the results show a correlation between ethnicity and survival rates, Wanis cautioned that other factors may also play a role. “It is probably too early to speculate on what may lie behind these differences, but a number of factors may be involved. These include how early people ask their doctors about symptoms, how early in the disease a diagnosis is made, better reporting, lifestyle and cultural factors, deprivation, tumour characteristics and behaviour, and treatment options.” Michael Jenkinson, the chair of the NCRI Brain Group and professor of neurosurgery and surgical trials at the University of Liverpool, who was not involved with the research, said: “This new study is not only the first to investigate the impact of ethnicity on brain tumour survival but also the first to consider the different types of brain tumours across patients in England. “As the quantity and quality of data has significantly improved in recent years, the researchers have been able to carry out a detailed analysis, and the results help to fill in the gaps in what is currently an under-researched area of cancer. “However, further research is needed to consider other factors that may play a role in these differences, such as a patient’s lifestyle and how early they received their diagnosis. Once explored further, the findings could be vital for doctors to provide appropriate information to patients on their prognosis.”Corners of the Alucast factory in the Black Country would be familiar to metalworkers several centuries ago. Workers pour molten aluminium at 720C into steel moulds. The cooling metal is then quickly pressed into shape before being sanded down into parts for gas-guzzling British sports cars. Yet for all its traditional West Midlands manufacturing roots, Alucast is finding a role for itself in a fast-growing new industry: electric cars. It needs to make the switch fast. The UK will ban the sale of all petrol and diesel cars by 2035, and other big car markets are following suit. The accelerated end of the internal combustion engine surprised and delighted environmental activists and has proven politically popular. Yet it has thrown into sharp relief the peril facing workers in the fossil fuel economy, who risk being left behind in the energy transition. Nowhere is the challenge more acute than in the West Midlands, the traditional heart of British carmaking, home to companies from Jaguar Land Rover to Aston Martin, as well as an army of suppliers. The region hosts a third of all British car production and a 46,500-strong factory workforce – nearly a third of the UK total, according to the West Midlands Combined Authority. New battery-powered technology will change the structure of the whole industry. Electric cars are mechanically simpler, with fewer moving parts, and carmakers are looking to bring more work in house. “There is the potential to maintain a viable [UK] automotive industry, but it probably won’t employ as many people,” said David Bailey, a professor of business economics at the University of Birmingham. The whole car industry – from the biggest brands to the smallest suppliers – has been forced to re-examine business fundamentals, and in some cases look for new ways of using their products. For Alucast, that has meant bidding for work making parts such as battery casings. It has also invested millions of pounds in more precise computer-assisted machining, and is trying to persuade carmakers to use more lightweight aluminium rather than steel. “They need lightweight components because the battery is so heavy, so what they’re trying to do is take out weight all the time,” said Tony Sartorius, Alucast’s chairman. Yet in any transition of the enormity and speed facing carmakers, there will be losers. The West Midlands already has its fair share of companies that failed to keep up. Longbridge, the former home of British Leyland and its successor MG Rover, now houses a Marks &amp; Spencer and flats named after its once-famous Austin cars. The Jaguar Land Rover factory at Castle Bromwich made Spitfires during the second world war, but its mass production days will end in 2025 – although Jaguar will still use the site for specialist operations. GKN’s Erdington factory in Birmingham can now be added to that list. The venerable company traces its history back to 1759 in a south Wales ironworks. GKN has big electric car ambitions, with plans to grow at twice the rate of the market, a top executive trumpeted in an August interview. But those plans do not involve the UK, where it will close its last plant next year. Some work will instead go to lower-wage Poland. The promise to invest elsewhere provoked anger among Midlands employees about to be made redundant. “We’re a proud British company with a huge heritage and they’re picking on their British factory,” said one worker, who asked not to be named. The Erdington closure decision came only three years after the hostile takeover of GKN by Melrose, a FTSE 100 private equity outfit,provoking fury in the Midlands. Simon Peckham, Melrose’s chief executive, said he understood the frustrations of the workers at Erdington, but argued that the factory was loss-making and that investment would create a “white elephant” in the West Midlands. That is strongly disputed by unions and local politicians. A former senior GKN executive said there were no plans to shut the factory before it was taken over. “All sorts of promises were made about a bright future,” said Jack Dromey, the Labour MP for Birmingham Erdington. “Three years later those promises have been betrayed.” The GKN factory made drive shafts for petrol and diesel vehicles. Unions and experts including Bailey believed the plant could have had a viable future. However, everyone acknowledges that many suppliers are hamstrung by carmakers’ uncertainty over future requirements. “The [carmakers] have got to finally make their mind up as to where they locate and invest,” said Dromey. “I understand the enormous pressures on them, but here we are in 2021, with 2030 not that far away.” Des Quinn, national officer at Unite, a union representing workers in many automotive factories, said the Automotive Council – a committee made up of car executives and government officials – should help map out what the industry needs so that suppliers can go ahead and invest in moving to the newer technology. “I can only see distress if government doesn’t get the industry sat down and talking about what it needs to do,” Quinn said. Bailey suggests there is some comfort to be taken from the failure of MG Rover in 2005, one of the UK automotive industry’s most bleak chapters. Before it collapsed, the government’s Manufacturing Advisory Service (MAS) and regional development agencies helped suppliers to diversify into areas like premium cars, aerospace and even medical technology. 12,000 supply chain jobs were saved, according to Bailey’s research. Austerity put paid to that support. The Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government scrapped the MAS and the regional agencies, replacing them with public-private local enterprise partnerships (LEPs). Those replacements have been underfunded, Bailey said. Batteries – by far the most expensive parts of electric vehicles – will be crucial to the fate of Britain’s car industry. Britishvolt, a startup, is hoping to raise money for a so-called gigafactory in Blyth, near Northumberland, while China’s Envision will expand a plant in Sunderland beside Nissan’s car factory. Yet the West Midlands is still waiting for a battery factory that would give its tens of thousands of workers hope for the future. Such is the concern that Coventry’s politicians have pre-emptively applied for gigafactory planning permission despite lacking an investor. However, local energy infrastructure may need expensive upgrades, according to a person who has assessed the site. The developers insist the energy supply will be more than adequate, and that several foreign companies are discussing possible investments. Andy Street, the former John Lewis boss who is now the Conservative mayor of the West Midlands Combined Authority, said that the site can be “operational ASAP once a commercial negotiation between supplier and customer concludes”. Waiting for the customer – almost certainly Jaguar Land Rover – to decide may not be an option for suppliers, who risk being left behind if they do not move quickly. Brandauer, based in Birmingham’s Newtown, is closing in on its 160th birthday. Yet bosses at the precision metal stamping company, which employs 60 people, realised about five years ago that they needed to start targeting the next generation of cars, or faced losing a large chunk of their business. It has now branched out into metal lamination, producing plates that are being used in hydrogen fuel cells, a technology that could fuel zero-emission lorries. The new customers have helped it to its best year of new business on record. “It’s not too late,” said Rowan Crozier, Brandauer’s chief executive. “It’s never too late, [but] it’s certainly time to start thinking about how you’re going to transition. The demand isn’t here yet, but it’s coming.”One night in the early 1990s, at a dinner party at his home in Paris, Stéphane Bourgoin, an author and bookseller then of no particular renown, began to hold forth on the matter of serial killing. The topic was, at the time, quite novel. As a cultural trope, the string of mysterious homicides had of course been a fixture around the world since at least the time of Jack the Ripper, and the French more specifically had been acquainted with the idea since as early as the 15th century, when the nobleman Gilles de Rais was found to have kidnapped, tortured and ritualistically murdered nearly 150 young children. But these people had not been understood as “serial killers”. That phrase, and the notion that such criminals were a breed apart, impelled by a special, sexualised depravity, really entered into the popular imagination only in the 1970s, and then mostly in the US, where the FBI had established a unit of so-called “profilers” to catch them. The serial killer was not yet a cultural vogue in France, much less the cliche it was already becoming elsewhere. Bourgoin’s guests were barely familiar with the concept at all. They listened, as millions of other French-speakers would listen in the decades to come, horrified, nauseated and rapt. Bourgoin told his invitees of the FBI programme, of the traits of the typical killer, and of some of the more awful American specimens. “We were utterly captivated,” Carol Kehringer, who was among Bourgoin’s guests that night, recalled recently. Kehringer was then in her 20s, starting out as a television producer. “I started asking him all sorts of questions,” she said, “and the more he spoke, the more I thought to myself: ‘We’ve got to do a film!’” Bourgoin was a friend of Kehringer’s parents, and Kehringer had known him since she was a child. She was fond of him, but also found him to be “a bit out of sync”, she said, “always in his own little world”. Bourgoin ran Au Troisième Oeil – “The Third Eye” – a tiny secondhand bookshop specialising in mysteries and crime. He fit the part. His frame was slight and boyish, but he had grown rather doughy by his late 30s, with a pot belly and a pallid complexion that suggested, along with his spectacles, a sedentary life in the half-light of the margins. Before the bookshop, he had been an assistant on the sets of a few minor pornographic movies. He spoke in a small, satiny voice; there was something vaguely spectral about him. Yet he tended to grow quite animated – blue eyes shimmering, his speech breathy and fervent, a mischievous smile spreading over his lips – when discussing his pet interests. These skewed sharply toward the bizarre and, increasingly, the gruesome. Bourgoin was a lover of cinema, and the walls of his apartment were lined with an immense collection of VHS cassettes. Among these was a hand-labelled series of recorded newscasts, showing all manner of accidents and natural disasters. He kept a trove of photographs of cadavers in various states of mutilation, which he liked to show around, and also delighted in telling the story of his mother’s first husband, a German who had been decapitated by the Nazis. “He was a charming young man,” a friend from that period told me, “who had an extreme attraction to the macabre.” Yet Kehringer also knew him to be what she called a “walking library”, with an encyclopaedic knowledge of his preferred subjects, and that evening, for every question she asked about serial killers, Bourgoin offered an extensive response. Before leaving the dinner, she asked him to write up a pitch for a documentary, and soon enough they were at work together on a film. In the fall of 1991, Bourgoin, Kehringer and a small production team flew to the US for the shoot. They began in Quantico, Virginia, with the FBI’s serial crime unit. The head of the unit was a renowned psychological profiler named John Douglas. Douglas was a consultant on the Hollywood adaptation of The Silence of the Lambs – the story’s protagonist, Clarice Starling, is a profiling trainee – and the film had been released earlier in the year to great acclaim. The chance to speak to a minor French film crew did not seem to fill Douglas with awe. “The impression I got was that we were more or less wasting his time,” Olivier Raffet, the cameraman, told me. While Raffet set up his equipment in Douglas’s office, however, Bourgoin began chatting with the profiler about a case from decades earlier. Douglas said something to the effect of, “The suspect was arrested in October of ’48, in such-and-such city,” Raffet recalled. “And Stéphane said: ‘Yes, but I believe it was November, not October, and it wasn’t that city but the little town next door called so-and-so.’ And the guy was completely blown away. And he said: ‘Yes, I believe you’re right.’ And from that moment on, his attitude toward us changed completely.” The FBI shoot went exceptionally well. Thirty years later, it remains an all-time favourite for Kehringer. The crew traveled to Florida, where arrangements had been made to interview two convicted killers, Gerard Schaefer and Ottis Toole. Kehringer was wary of the risk of sensationalism, and did not want the men to simply narrate their crimes. “We wanted to know if, over time, these killers had come to understand the harm they’d done,” Kehringer said. “If they’d questioned themselves.” She and Bourgoin composed the questions together, but she was too spooked to attend the interviews herself, and the next day Bourgoin and Raffet drove to the prison without her. Schaefer, a former sheriff’s deputy with a distressing smirk, was believed to have killed at least 34 women. Toole had once claimed participation in more than 100 murders, some cannibalistic. In subsequent years, Bourgoin would often describe the paralysing horror he’d experienced in the presence of these men. By Kehringer’s recollection, however, he emerged from the prison euphoric. “He was extremely excited, literally jubilant,” she told me. She reviewed the tapes, and very quickly realised he had not conducted the interviews according to plan. Bourgoin had Toole describe his murders in detail. “Whoever cut the person’s throat would fuck the person, and then let an animal fuck them, too,” Toole explained. “And they would have a big feast – they would cook the person and cook the animal.” For the meeting with Schaefer, Bourgoin brought along several copies of Killer Fiction, a book of semi-autobiographical murder tales the killer had written, for him to sign. Afterward, he and Schaefer posed together for a photograph, each with his arm around the other’s shoulder, beaming. Kehringer was appalled, and angry. But Bourgoin apologised, and assured her that he would keep to the prearranged questions with the third and final killer. The crew flew to California, to meet Edmund Kemper. Kemper, who stood nearly seven feet tall, had killed his paternal grandparents as a young man and later murdered eight women, including his mother. He once remarked that, when he saw an attractive woman, “One side of me says, ‘Wow, what an attractive chick. I’d like to talk to her, date her. The other side says, ‘I wonder how her head would look on a stick.’” (Bret Easton Ellis quoted the line in his novel American Psycho.) Yet Kemper was thought to have grown exceptionally introspective and regretful. He could provide the analysis Kehringer wanted. After the interview, Kehringer reviewed the tape. Bourgoin had asked Kemper about various violent incidents from his childhood, about the details of his killings, about the particulars of his monstrous fantasy life. “What were those fantasies?” Bourgoin inquired. “What were they?” Kemper replied, almost taken aback. “Possessing the severed heads of women.” The documentary went forward, but Kehringer stopped speaking to Bourgoin. “I saw Stéphane change,” she told me. His interest in serial murder was evidently more compulsive than mere curiosity. “When he had the killers in front of him, it was as if he was sitting across from his idols.” Bourgoin, she concluded, was in fact a fan. * * * Serial killers seem to exert a special pull on the modern imagination. The sex and gore have much to do with it, of course, as does the prospect that the normal-looking lives of normal-looking people might conceal a monstrousness beyond comprehension. The serial killer plays upon our nervous instinct that, beneath the surface of everyday life, society is rapidly unravelling. By the late 1960s, amid a vast and mysterious explosion in violence, this unravelling seemed to have accelerated beyond the point of control. Between 1960 and 1980, annual killings in the US climbed from about 9,000 to more than 23,000. For a time, many believed that serial killers might be to blame, stalking the new interstate highways, preying upon a new class of independent, unprotected young women. By the 1980s, with the encouragement of the FBI, the American news media had begun to speak of an “epidemic” of serial murder, one that claimed thousands of lives each year. After pushing this theory for several years, however, the bureau quietly withdrew its claims: serial killers are now thought to account for less than 1% of homicides. (The actual causes of the late-century rise in killing remain a matter of debate.) But the figure of the serial killer – “natural born celebrities”, as the scholar David Schmid has put it – had by then established itself as a conduit for the anxieties of the era. A culture – articles, books, films, innumerable television reports – had sprung up around it. Bourgoin’s documentary translated this culture into French, importing it for an audience with similar preoccupations about modernity and a longstanding mix of fascination, revulsion and envy – not unlike what most people feel toward serial killers – toward the US. It was among the first major French reports on serial murder, and Bourgoin parlayed it into a new career. He worked with remarkable speed. Within about a year of the film’s initial TV broadcast in 1992, he had published books on the American murderers Albert DeSalvo (the “Boston Strangler”) and Jeffrey Dahmer, a monograph on Jack the Ripper, and Serial Killers, an encyclopaedic treatment that established him as the uncontested French authority on the phenomenon. (The title was in English, and it is a lasting reminder of the provenance of the concept that the French are, even now, just as likely to refer to “serial killers” by their English-language name as by the French translation, tueurs en série.) In Le Monde, a reviewer remarked that Bourgoin had approached his subject – “these new ‘stars’ of crime” – with “the precision of the entomologist”, which may have been a generous way of saying that Serial Killers was a dense anthology of names, dates and grisly details, with no narration or analysis to speak of, the work of a hoarder of murder trivia. And yet it was a hit. Since 1993, through numerous editions, the book is said to have sold over a million copies. Bourgoin was prolific, if, after a time, repetitive. He wrote The Black Book of Serial Killers, 100 Years of Serial Killers and The Serial Killers are Among Us. In Who Killed the Black Dahlia? he claimed to have solved one of the most infamous American murders of the 20th century. (It was his second full-length book on the case.) By 2015 – the year of the second edition of 999 Years of Serial Killers and at least four other titles – he had met with no fewer than 77 serial killers, he said, and had furnished the FBI with thousands of hours of film from those interviews. By way of thanks, the bureau had trained him as an independent investigator, he said, and he had obtained confessions from murderers around the world. “I have a certain gift for getting them to talk,” he once told Libération. In France, he was invited to lecture for magistrates, the judicial police and the Gendarmerie Nationale. He had become a celebrity in his own right, “the world’s top serial killer expert”, in the estimation of one French TV host. He was a fixture of the evening talk shows, and on the radio; after murders, attacks and other violent crimes, the newspapers invited him to expound the culprit’s motivations. He made dozens of TV specials. Bourgoin never developed a comprehensive theory of the serial killer, but an enigma that remains unsolved is an enigma that keeps its fascination, and no one seemed to hold his equivocations against him. His talks and conferences sold out across France; at book signings, fans queued for hours. Bourgoin was an unusually glamourless sort of star, and seemed to go most places wearing the same ironic murder-themed T-shirts favoured by his fans. One typical model featured the face of Dahmer, a cannibal who murdered at least 17 people, along with the slogan “So many people, so many recipes.” Bourgoin signed his books “With my bloodiest regards.” His monomania for serial killing did not meet everyone’s definition of good taste, and from the start of his career, Bourgoin was often asked to explain his fixation. Typically, he would tell the story of his wife. When the documentary maker Frédéric Tonolli first met Bourgoin in the late 1990s, he told him rather bluntly that he thought he was a morbid voyeur. “Yes, but Frédo,” Bourgoin said, Tonolli recalled recently, “my wife was murdered. That’s why I started: I had to know why.” Tonolli was stunned. “It was still morbid,” he told me. “But there was love in it, and that’s something else.” He went on to direct one of Bourgoin’s early films. Around the turn of the century, Bourgoin began speaking publicly of his wife’s death, and it quickly became the tragedy by which he was known. While living in the US in the 1970s, he would explain, he had married a woman named Eileen. In the summer of 1976, he returned to their Los Angeles apartment to find she had been raped, her throat slit, her body dismembered. Two years later, the police informed him that Eileen’s killer had been apprehended, and that the man had confessed to numerous other murders. Until then, Bourgoin had never encountered the term “serial killer”. No one was able to convincingly explain to him how a human being could be capable of such horrors. He combed libraries in the US and in France, but found nothing, and realised that if he was to make sense of the evil that had claimed his wife, he would need to do it on his own. * * * In 1991, when he was 15 years old, a man I will call Charles read an article in his mother’s Paris Match magazine about Jeffrey Dahmer. Dahmer, a mixer in a chocolate factory, had been arrested a few weeks earlier. In his apartment, police had found seven human skulls, four severed heads, three torsos dissolving in a vat of acid, and another torso in the freezer. Charles was captivated. The following year, in a supermarket, he came upon Bourgoin’s book on the case. “Like everyone who’s interested in the serial killer milieu,” Charles told me, “we all started with Bourgoin.” Charles followed Bourgoin closely, and with admiration. In his 20s, on a whim, he wrote to the author to ask his opinion of a book on the killer Ted Bundy. Bourgoin responded with his phone number, and an offer to talk whenever Charles liked. “I was over the moon,” he recalled. “But I never called him. I didn’t want to act like just some fan.” Bourgoin was generally known for being friendly and accessible, but he treated some of his admirers with a disdain that is not unusual in the realm of offbeat fandoms. He seemed to wish to make clear that their obsession with serial murder, unlike his own, was inauthentic, overblown, illicit – that he was, in essence, the real fan. In an updated edition of Serial Killers, he lamented the world’s “infatuation” with serial killers. “I’ve lost count of the crazies – in their overwhelming majority, young women – who call or write to me,” Bourgoin wrote, “with appalling requests.” On Facebook, where he maintained a following of many tens of thousands, he was known for sparring with anyone who appeared to question his expertise. Charles, who works for the French military and has asked to remain anonymous, does not think of himself as a serial murder aficionado, or at least not an obsessive. “Sometimes, on the online groups, I see things that are shocking,” he told me. “When you say, ‘My favourite serial killer is,’ for instance, ‘Richard Ramirez’” – the “Night Stalker” – “ – how can you say you have a ‘favourite’ serial killer?” His own interest is in the psychology of serial killing, he said. In 30 years of study he confessed that he has made no sense of it at all, but he continues to pore over the finer points of various killings in search of some sort of epiphany. About 10 years ago, absorbed in these details, Charles began to notice what he thought were discrepancies in some of Bourgoin’s pronouncements. His work tended to cover the same crimes over and over again, but the specifics, especially as they related to his own interactions with the killers, had a tendency to drift. Sometimes, Bourgoin said he had interviewed Edmund Kemper only briefly; elsewhere, he claimed to have spent hundreds of hours with him. Bourgoin spoke of meeting 77 killers, but Charles could find video recordings only of the interviews with Kemper, Schaefer, Toole and four or five others. The language of some of Bourgoin’s books struck him as markedly similar to the works of various more obscure English-language writers. But plenty of media figures self-aggrandise, he reasoned, and some play a bit loose with the facts, and plagiarism is not, to many French people, an especially troubling offence. Charles was disappointed, but kept his observations to himself. In 2019, however, he was browsing one of the various murder-related Facebook groups to which he belonged, and came upon a post about Bourgoin. It was a link to a recent television interview, in which Bourgoin recounted the usual episodes: his “300 hours” with Kemper, the murder of Eileen. He wore his Dahmer T-shirt. To Charles’s surprise, sceptical comments began appearing beneath the post, and the page’s administrator soon created a new, smaller group to discuss the doubts that had been raised. Everyone came with their particular misgivings. One member, a middle-aged bookshop employee named Anne-Sophie Bec, was troubled by Bourgoin’s online behaviour. In one Facebook post, Bourgoin claimed to have once lived next door to Stephen King, the American author; in another, he claimed to have been given Gerard Schaefer’s mortal remains – Schaefer was murdered by a fellow prisoner in 1995 – and offered to give away bits of the body to any interested fans. “There were things where you’d say to yourself, ‘Wait, is he joking?’” Bec said. “But he didn’t seem like he was joking.” Another member of the group, a thirtysomething Belgian named Sven Coquelin, had questions about the story of Eileen. “He says that, in order to spare her family, and out of respect, he doesn’t want to give her last name,” Coquelin, who works in logistics at a company that manufactures heat-resistant concrete for crematoria, told me. “And at the same time, he recounts these horrible details.” There was some jockeying over who would lead this new group of doubters. At one point, Charles insulted the administrator and was ejected from the group. Bec, Coquelin and five others chose to follow him out, and together they formed a new group, which, in winking reference to Bourgoin’s old bookshop, they called “4ème Oeil Corporation”. The members of 4ème Oeil did not know one another personally, and were spread around the globe – some in France and Belgium, Bec near Montreal, another member in South America – but they began to coordinate a joint investigation of Bourgoin. Initially, their ambitions were modest. “The thing is,” Charles told me, “when we really got going and started to look around, every time we went looking for something, we’d find something.” They began to feel betrayed. “The more we dug, the more new problems we found,” said Coquelin, “and the more new lies.” * * * The 4ème Oeil group began with the story of Eileen. Over the years, they found, Bourgoin had variously described her as a companion, a fiancee, or his wife, but was more consistent in his description of her murder. It had occurred in Los Angeles, in 1976; the culprit, who had also killed a dozen other women, was apprehended in California in 1978. In 2019, Bourgoin told an interviewer that the killer was still awaiting execution. The California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation maintains a public list of the hundreds of prisoners on death row, as does the Los Angeles Times; none of these inmates had murdered a woman under the circumstances Bourgoin described. The group tried a different approach. In a TV appearance, Bourgoin had once shown an old photograph of himself and Eileen, an attractive young blonde woman with an upturned nose and distinctively square front teeth. The group began looking for any victims of known California serial killers who resembled her. Once again, they found no one. They widened the scope of their investigation, and enlisted the help of some of America’s most notorious killers. Charles wrote to about 30 murderers Bourgoin claimed to have met, asking if they had any recollection of the Frenchman. Those who said they did came exclusively from the small handful of killers whose meetings had been recorded on film. No one else who replied remembered Bourgoin at all. (Dennis Rader, the BTK killer – for “bind-torture-kill”– sent his “no” response on paper that seemed to have been perfumed. “I wrote back just to be polite,” Charles said.) Bourgoin claimed to have interviewed David Berkowitz, the “Son of Sam”, who had said at his trial that his killings had been mandated by the demon inhabiting a neighbour’s dog. Bourgoin said that he’d confronted Berkowitz about the story of the dog, and that Berkowitz admitted to him that he’d made it up so as to appear insane. Berkowitz, who has been imprisoned since 1977, said through an intermediary that he did not recall Bourgoin. Nor was there any trace of the interview Bourgoin claimed to have had with the cult leader Charles Manson. In an interview with Le Parisien in 2017, after Manson’s death, Bourgoin said he had met him “in the early 80s” in prison, where Manson “climbed up and sat on the back of a chair, in order to dominate me physically”. The administrator of Manson’s official website, a disciple known as Gray Wolf, told 4ème Oeil he could find no evidence of such an encounter. The Berkowitz and Manson anecdotes, the group realised, both strongly resembled experiences recounted by John Douglas – the FBI profiler Bourgoin had interviewed 30 years earlier – in his 1995 memoir Mindhunter. (The book was all but unknown in France until being adapted as a Netflix series; both anecdotes appeared in it.) Charles wrote to Douglas, who, to the great thrill of 4ème Oeil, responded. “Stephane Bourgogne [sic] is delusional and an imposter,” Douglas wrote. “It looks like Bourgoin became an ‘expert’ by reading books … mine in particulars [sic].” The group began rewatching Bourgoin’s old TV appearances, listening to his interviews, rereading his books. The investigation took months, and nearly all their free time. “I’d get home from work, take a shower, and go straight online,” Charles said. “My wife was pissed.” Coquelin’s partner nearly left him in exasperation; another group member’s did. But they seemed unable to stop. During one conversation with Coquelin, I said I presumed that 4ème Oeil’s investigation had been propelled, at least in part, by a love of the search. “Not especially,” he said. “We really did it out of disgust.” They found borrowings and misrepresentations everywhere. Bourgoin’s early monograph on Dahmer appeared to be heavily plagiarised, as did a 1998 book on Kemper. Who Killed the Black Dahlia?, in which Bourgoin claimed to identify the murderer, was essentially a rehashing of an American book from 1994. (The FBI still lists the case as unsolved.) In 1999, Bourgoin had travelled to South Africa to film a documentary on Micki Pistorius, a profiler of some renown. During the shoot, Pistorius gave Bourgoin a copy of the manuscript of her soon-to-be-published autobiography, Catch Me a Killer. After Bourgoin returned to France, he and Pistorius spoke occasionally by phone, and at the conclusion of one call, just before hanging up, Bourgoin said, “By the way, I wrote a book about you.” “I was shocked,” Pistorius told me by email. At the time, Bourgoin insisted that the book was based solely on his experiences with her in South Africa, and Pistorius, whose French was too rudimentary to read the book herself, took him at his word. In reality, 4ème Oeil discovered, significant portions were lifted wholesale from Catch Me a Killer. The group alerted Pistorius to claims Bourgoin had been making. In one radio interview, Bourgoin had told the story of discovering, alongside Pistorius, a serial killer’s “private cemetery”, full of exposed corpses. “The police helicopters arrived,” he recounted, “but they landed too close to the bodies. And the draft from the rotor blades sent bits of decomposing body and maggots flying everywhere. And I, her, and another cop were covered in it.” In another interview, Bourgoin claimed to have obtained the confession of the killer Stewart Wilken, whose case Pistorius had worked on. “I chose a room that was quite small, claustrophobic, without windows,” he said. “I asked the investigators for photos of their young children, and I covered the walls with the photos, which he looked at constantly. And I could feel that he was beginning to crack.” Wilken eventually confessed to the murders of numerous children. Bourgoin’s claims were preposterous, Pistorius said. The helicopter incident was real, but she had experienced it alone; Wilken’s confession had been obtained – under conditions much like those Bourgoin described, but a full two years before Bourgoin had visited South Africa – by a South African detective. “Under no circumstances whatsoever would the South African Police Service require the ‘help’ of an author who has no training in investigation and has never been a member of a police force to interrogate a suspect,” Pistorius wrote to me. Bourgoin’s inventions seemed to have grown more extravagant over the years. “What he would do in general was to add himself to a story after the fact,” Bec said. It was perhaps predictable that it should be his own fans who first noticed this tendency. “Without his work, we never would have got interested in serial killers in the first place,” Coquelin said. “It’s ironic. In a way it’s thanks to his own work that we ended up catching him. When we learned the real stories, we realised the stories he’d been telling were made up.” * * * In the autumn of 2019, 4ème Oeil began contacting French media outlets and presenters. “They didn’t take us seriously,” Charles recalled. “Because after all, this was Stéphane Bourgoin.” After a few months of unsuccessful efforts, 4ème Oeil decided to publish their findings on their own, in a series of long, detailed and notably angry video compilations, under the title Serial Mytho. (“Mytho” is short, in French, for “mythomaniac”.) No one in the group had any video-making experience to speak of; they posted them to YouTube without fanfare. “We’re not going to kid ourselves, the videos were pretty awful,” Charles said. “We don’t even know how people found them.” Within the community of francophone crime aficionados, the videos took off. “A lot of people were pissed off,” Charles recalled. Bourgoin fans sent insults, and occasional threats of legal action. Some seemed to be under the impression that their hero had merely plagiarised a passage here and there, which seemed forgivable; some reproached the debunkers for going after a man whose own wife had been murdered. Other viewers, more willing to accept the content of the videos, treated 4ème Oeil as folk heroes. And others still, more conspiracy-minded, concluded that Bourgoin was not merely a fabulist but a serial killer. Etienne Jallieu, a pseudonym Bourgoin sometimes used, was a near-anagram of the words “J’ai tué Eileen”: “I killed Eileen.” (“Complete garbage,” Coquelin said. “He didn’t kill Eileen, given that Eileen didn’t exist.”) After a period of near-silence, in February 2020 Bourgoin announced on Facebook that, in order to devote himself “to the most important project of my life”, he would be closing his page. (He offered no details about this project.) “Furthermore,” he wrote, he had for several weeks been the victim of a “campaign of cyber-harassment and hatred” that put him in mind of the Vichy period, “when informers sent anonymous letters to denounce their neighbours to Pétain’s regime”. He did not address the claims in the videos specifically, but he did make an extensive show of his credentials, in the form of a series of rhetorical questions. “Have all these accusers and informers met even one single serial killer?” he asked. Had they organised “international conferences”, or been invited to appear on “several hundred” television shows? Had they sold out theatres in 26 cities on their 2019 speaking tour? “Of course not,” he said. The media began to take notice. Tony Le Pennec, a journalist for the online outlet Arrêt sur Images, asked Bourgoin about his interview with Charles Manson. Bourgoin said he’d spoken with Manson for only 10 or 15 minutes, and that he “couldn’t help it” if his experience – with Manson perched on the back of a chair – resembled that of Douglas, the profiler. Le Pennec then asked about the confession Bourgoin claimed to have obtained from Stewart Wilken in South Africa. Bourgoin said he and a detective had both questioned Wilken, but that it had been the detective, and not himself, who thought to cover the walls of the interrogation room with photographs of children. Le Pennec asked why Bourgoin had previously claimed otherwise. “All of a sudden,” Le Pennec wrote, in April 2020, “Bourgoin remembered that he had urgent work to finish.” Bourgoin stopped giving interviews, and succeeded, briefly, in having 4ème Oeil’s videos removed from YouTube, for alleged copyright violations. But the media covered the allegations nonetheless: Le Progrès, Le Dauphiné Libéré, France Inter, Le Monde. Around this time, the journalist Emilie Lanez, of Paris Match, contacted Bourgoin to ask for an interview about the controversy. She had published several books, and noted to Bourgoin that they shared a publisher. “It was a bit presumptuous,” Lanez told me. “I would love to have sold as many books as him!” Bourgoin agreed to speak, and for about a week, Lanez called him every morning. They would talk for several hours, and then she would spend the afternoon making calls to confirm what Bourgoin had just told her. Bourgoin was “very sweet”, Lanez said, and when she would confront him each new day with the lies he seemed to have told the day before, he was unfailingly apologetic. “Bourgoin would say to me, ‘Yes, I’ve done a lot of exaggerating in my life – I just wanted to be loved,’” she recalled. “And then he’d get right back on the horse and make up a new story.” Over time, though, Lanez felt she was coming closer to the truth. Bourgoin admitted that he’d “borrowed” the helicopter incident from Pistorius – “I amplify things when I’m in front of an audience,” he said – and that he had never been trained by the FBI. When they came to Eileen, Bourgoin sobbed for a long time. Eileen was an embellishment of a somewhat less sympathetic story, he admitted. While living in the US in the 1970s as a young bachelor, Bourgoin had been a regular visitor to Daytona Beach, a resort town on the Florida coast. On one visit, he met a bartender and aspiring cosmetologist named Susan Bickrest, who, Bourgoin seemed to imply, made a bit of extra money as a prostitute. He’d been with her a handful of times by December 1975, when he returned to Daytona Beach, after an absence, to learn that she had been murdered. A serial killer was suspected. “I started to do some reading, I did some research, it became a passion,” he told Lanez. A few years later, in 1979, he was authorised to interview his first killer, Richard Chase, a paranoid schizophrenic who drank the blood of some of his victims. Bourgoin told Lanez: “It feels good to tell the truth.” * * * Bourgoin seemed to have hoped that the Paris Match story would somehow exonerate him. He had teased it to his fans, telling them to expect it to counter the “malicious and slanderous” claims against him. When the story appeared, he responded angrily. On Instagram, he almost immediately posted a screed about its many “untruths,” and said he had “never met” Lanez. (They spoke by phone.) Still, he acknowledged having embellished and lied, and confirmed that “Eileen” had in fact been Susan Bickrest. “I most sincerely want to apologise for the disappointment that I may have caused my readers,” he wrote. After their initial excitement, however, 4ème Oeil came to believe that Bourgoin’s confession was itself composed mostly of lies. Among other things, it seemed extremely unlikely that Bourgoin had ever met Richard Chase. It was not the first time he had made the claim, but previously he said he was introduced to Chase by the California detective who investigated Eileen’s murder, in Los Angeles. “Now that there’s no more story about his murdered wife, why would anyone have helped him to interview a serial killer in ’79?” Bec said. Both Carol Kehringer and Olivier Raffet, who worked on the 1992 documentary, said they were under the strong impression at the time that, prior to the three interviews they filmed, Bourgoin had never met a serial killer in his life. “We really had no idea how it was going to be,” Raffet said. Ahead of the shoot, Raffet had gone to see The Silence of the Lambs, and came away imagining that, as in the film, the killers they were interviewing would be held behind security glass. But there was no glass, or wall, or bars, and the men came to the interviews without restraints of any kind. “We were flabbergasted,” Raffet said. Nor, 4ème Oeil concluded, had “Eileen” been Susan Bickrest. Bickrest was indeed a real person, and the victim of a serial killer. But her murderer, Gerald Stano, was not apprehended until 1980, and did not confess to Bickrest’s death until two years later. Nor did Bickrest particularly resemble the woman in Bourgoin’s photograph of “Eileen”. (4ème Oeil believes that woman to be an adult film actress, whom Bourgoin might have known from his brief time in pornography. They and I have contacted her – she now appears to work as a real estate agent – but she has never responded.) Bourgoin seemed to have chosen Stano “simply because Stano isn’t well known in Europe,” Coquelin told me, and Bickrest because she was one of his least-known victims. “‘Eileen’ is just completely made up, from start to finish,” Coquelin said. Bourgoin’s tragic origin story seemed not to be the dramatisation of some actual experience, however banal, but pure imagining: a boyish fantasy of American horror. * * * Fantasy was Bourgoin’s first great love. Early on, he found genre cinema, and devoted himself to the category the French call fantastique, encompassing science fiction, horror and all things uncanny. Alain Schlockoff, who founded the fanzine L’Écran Fantastique in 1969, was close with Bourgoin in the early years of that decade. Bourgoin, who was not yet 20 years old, wrote frequently for the magazine. “He was friendly, he was agreeable to be with, he was intelligent,” Schlockoff told me. “I realised almost immediately that he was a fabulist.” At the time, Bourgoin was living with his parents, in a grand apartment in view of the Arc de Triomphe. Schlockoff was a frequent visitor, and enjoyed speaking with Bourgoin’s mother, a sweet, self-effacing woman who doted on her only child. Bourgoin’s more distant father, a decorated military engineer and veteran of the French Resistance, had made a fortune after the war; there were live-in servants. The young Bourgoin spent his days at the cinema, and amused himself by cheating his way in with old tickets he’d spent hours reconditioning with a razor blade and glue, a friend from that time told me. Every year, Schlockoff organized a major festival of the fantastique, and Bourgoin often worked as one of his assistants. In 1975, ahead of the festival, Schlockoff was in London, meeting with a director. The man said he would send over a copy of the film Schlockoff had asked for; Schlockoff was confused, as he had not requested a film. “He went into his office and showed me a letter, on my festival’s letterhead,” Schlockoff recalled, “signed ‘Stéphane Bourgoin.’” He returned to Paris to discover that, behind his back, Bourgoin had been organising a competing festival, to be held concurrently with his own, and had used his name and letterhead for credibility. He cut ties with Bourgoin immediately. (Bourgoin’s festival took place, but flopped.) Soon after, Bourgoin made a long trip to the US, where he hoped to make connections in the film industry, and to see as many movies as he could. “He had a fascination with the United States,” another former friend told me. “For him, ‘the movies’ meant ‘American movies’ and not much else.” The first friend happened to visit Bourgoin at home a day or two after his return to France. “He was totally exhilarated, stars in his eyes,” the man said. Bourgoin said he’d met innumerable directors, producers and actors; he’d brought back two suitcases full of comic books and souvenirs. “He made absolutely no mention of any sort of fiancee he might have had,” the friend said, “and even less a fiancee who’d been sliced up into pieces by a serial killer.” During his time in the milieu of the fantastique, Bourgoin had befriended a fellow fan named François Guérif. Guérif owned a small Paris bookshop, Au 3ème Oeil, and by the 1980s had become a prominent editor, known for publishing translations of major British and American crime writers. Guérif hired Bourgoin to run the bookshop, and introduced him to his authors. These included the Americans Robert Bloch, whose novel Psycho (adapted for the screen by Alfred Hitchcock) was inspired by the case of the serial killer Ed Gein, and James Ellroy, whose work had similarly drawn upon the theme of serial murder. It was around this time that Bourgoin seems to have developed his own fascination with serial killing. Initially, his friends found it amusing, or at least inoffensive. But it soon grew tiresome, especially after the release of his 1992 documentary. He spoke of nothing else. The first friend told me he suspected Bourgoin had invented the story of Eileen not so much as a ploy for sympathy or notoriety, but merely so that people wouldn’t be put off by his obsessiveness. At a certain point, however, Bourgoin seemed to have lost his bearings, to have lost hold of what was true and what was not. “What’s crazy,” the friend said, “what makes me think he really went off the deep end, is that he could claim this sort of thing one-on-one with people who knew him, without anyone else around. That he could tell me the story of his murdered fiancee!” Bourgoin’s friends withdrew from him, and began to await, with a fair amount of dread, his unmasking. But his star continued to rise. “What astounded me was not so much that he told tall tales, because I knew he was that way, but rather that everyone swallowed them whole,” the other friend said. “It was the unseriousness, not to say the sheer idiocy, of the media.” The indulgence of the publishers, the newspapers, the television stations and even the police might have been more forgivable if Bourgoin’s work had been more insightful, offered more than morbid titillation, the first friend said. “But there was never, ever, ever the slightest beginning of a hint of a shadow of analysis, of reflection,” he said. “And today, people are saying, ‘He’s an impostor! He tricked us!’ Well, folks, you yourselves should be mortified. And you should be thinking, ‘We really were idiots!’ Because he wasn’t actually any good at all.” * * * Quietly, Bourgoin was dropped by his publishers and producers. His new graphic novel, about the French serial killer Michel Fourniret, was taken off the shelves. Plans for a television series based upon his life were cancelled. Still, in the past year Bourgoin has been invited to a handful of small literary festivals, and maintains a core group of fans – he has about 10,000 followers on Instagram – who appear not to have heard the accusations against him, or not to believe them, or not to care. In November, an expanded version of The Ogre of Santa Cruz, his book about Kemper, will be released. It appears to have been self-published. The listed publishing house, Editions Nicaise, has never released another book; its registered address is a Paris coworking and mailbox space. I wrote to Bourgoin last year, asking if he’d be willing to speak. I didn’t expect that he would, and indeed he never responded. After a time, though, I decided to try him on an old number I’d been given, mostly as a pro forma exercise, to be able to say that I’d attempted but failed to interview him. To my surprise, he answered. His voice was kindly and disarming, and, after informing me apologetically that he was no longer speaking with journalists, he immediately proceeded to tell me about his case. “I went too far,” he said. “It’s my fault, after all! I recognise that.” He had not met 77 serial killers, he acknowledged, but rather about 30, and some of them only briefly. Still, 30 struck him as a reasonably impressive total, all things considered. “My accomplishments might have been enough on their own, without my additions,” he reflected. He had had himself psychoanalysed; the trouble was, of course, with his parents. He had also begun a census of all known French serial killers, and was in the midst of expanding his book on Kemper. “I love to write!” he told me. Bourgoin agreed to speak again, sometime in the next few weeks. I called and emailed several times to arrange a date, but he never responded. The reversal was frustrating, but I also found it reasonable of him to be silent, and no doubt wise. And yet, after a time, Bourgoin sent me an email. In English, he wrote that he was in the hospital “for lots of exams and 2 operations (nothing to do with Covid)”, and would be unavailable to speak for several weeks. He made a point of noting that he would not be disclosing his hospitalisation publicly, but also specified that, with the assistance of his “friends &amp; associates”, his social media accounts would continue to publish as usual. He attached a selfie taken standing in front of what appeared to be a hospital bed. The photograph had a realistically hasty look to it; Bourgoin’s pale face, which bore an uncharacteristically solemn expression, filled only the bottom right-hand corner. Yet someone had taken the time to alter the filename to read “HOPITAL SB.jpg”; according to the timestamp, the photograph had in fact been taken a month-and-a-half prior. Just two days before his email to me, on Instagram, Bourgoin had posted a photograph of what appeared to be his computer, inside what appeared to be his home, with a caption that read, “One more week of intense work and I’ll have finished writing a new version of my book on Ed Kemper.” Though it has not traditionally been regarded as a condition unto itself, pathological lying has long been an object of psychiatric inquiry. In the literature, it is known as pseudologia fantastica. One commonly cited definition, from the early 20th century, describes it as “falsification entirely disproportionate to any discernible end in view”. Helene Deutsch, an early psychoanalyst, described pathological lies as “daydreams communicated as reality”. The pathological liar, or “pseudologue”, is not a con artist, in the sense that, whatever the consequences of his lies may be, his intent is not malice. The lying is an end in itself. Scholars disagree as to whether or not the pseudologue can be said to be responsible for his fantastical claims. Crucially, however, he is not delusional. When confronted with his inventions, the pathological liar is able to perceive, if not necessarily admit, their falsity. He knows he is lying, though most of the time he seems able to put this knowledge completely out of mind. Serial killers have been known to be among the most prolific pseudologues, and all serial killers lie about their crimes. Bourgoin was once asked, in a television report, about this propensity for deception. Elsewhere in the segment, he implied that he was in the midst of helping to solve a series of murders, and claimed that he had extracted “confessions” from Schaefer, Toole and Kemper when he interviewed them. He was presented as a “profiler”. Bourgoin was seated behind a large desk in a sombre room, and looked up earnestly at his interviewer, whom he addressed in a regretful tone. “Very often, serial killers are extremely manipulative,” he said. “Most of the time, whatever remorse they claim to have isn’t sincere. It’s part of their habit of lies. These are confirmed liars, since their earliest childhood.” I have watched this moment, and rewound and watched it again, a number of times. Often I think I detect a glimmer of recognition in Bourgoin’s eyes, but it is instantaneously suppressed, or shunted aside, giving way to a blank and slightly quizzical stare. More than anything, he appears to be astonished. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Panorama: Online Pimps Exposed 8.30pm, BBC One Has the move of sex workers from the streets to the internet made them any safer? That’s the question being investigated by Bronagh Munro, who reports that most sex workers now meet their customers through online sites. Examining how the internet has transformed the sex industry, Munro looks at the online pimps who traffic vulnerable women for sex and the high-profile website that’s helping them cash in. Hollie Richardson The Great British Bake Off 8pm, Channel 4 It’s free-from week – the show’s newest and perhaps most feared category. Jürgen and co must create a dairy-free signature bake, tackle a vegan technical and deliver a gluten-free showstopper. Cue at least one soggy-bottom-induced breakdown. HR Insecure 9pm, Sky Comedy The final season of this beloved comedy continues with a spotlight on newly single Lawrence, who is now a new dad. Insecure excels at showing two sides of a story, and it’s never been truer as we watch Lawrence and his ex Condola navigate parenthood across different cities and friends. Henry Wong Murder Island 9.15pm, Channel 4 The Great British Bump Off reaches its final episode with only one team of wannabe detectives left. That means the £50,000 prize is within reach but the pair still need to collar the “real” killer from two remaining suspects. In any case, closure awaits for those who have stuck with this uneven reality show/crime drama hybrid. Graeme Virtue What We Do in the Shadows 10.05pm, BBC Two Matt Berry, Kayvan Novak and Natasia Demetriou’s bitingly good vampire comedy continues. Tonight, Nadja and Nandor work on a power-sharing deal, and a forbidden artefact is used to help Nandor court a health club employee. HR Stath Lets Flats 10.15pm, Channel 4 “This is my first beer of the night. I’ve had it for three hours!” Stath and pals are out on the town and the chat-up lines are flowing. As ever, Jamie Demetriou is a whirlwind of magnificently unselfconscious hilarity – and for extra comic effect, Julia Davis is in brutal form as Carole’s casually vicious sister. Phil HarrisonOne minute, he’s sitting in a fast-food restaurant in a three-piece suit, twirling his moustache and miming popping a glock to the sounds of Polo G and Lil Tjay. The next, he’s standing at a traffic intersection, extolling the virtues of protected bicycle lanes. This is Mr Barricade, the social media persona of California traffic engineer Vignesh Swaminathan, who introduces niche topics with succinct panache to audiences that might never have stopped to consider the radius of a curb or the racial history of pedestrian crossings. His strangely alluring cocktail of dad dancing and traffic chat has garnered more than 30m likes. Or maybe it’s all thanks to that magnificent moustache. The worlds of architecture, design and urbanism on TikTok can be confusing places to the uninitiated. Users swerve between educational explainer videos, interior design advice, and “Hey guys, here’s a cool building I found on the internet” monologues, along with thoughtful criticism and unbridled ranting. Plus there’s oodles of property porn to sate your Through the Keyhole desires. At one end of the spectrum are the gilt-edged estate agent influencers, like Beverly Hills-based Aaron Grushow, who promises behind-the-scenes tours of “LA’s most incredible homes”. Watching these sun-kissed clips of gaudy McMansions elicits less envy than horror at the grotesque tastes of Hollywood’s bajillionaires. Such homes are neatly skewered by the likes of Zillow Gone Wild, which revels in the weirdest and wildest corners of the real estate listings site. The disembodied head of Samir Mezrahi floats around the screen, offering deadpan commentary on the owners’ curious interior design choices. One day it might be an innocuous Pennsylvania house that turns out to have its own wrestling ring. The next, it’s a home with a secret underground cave. A personal favourite was the house with a staircase that had carpet running up just one side – because, as Mezrahi surmises, “sometimes you wanna be cosy, and sometimes you’re all business”. There are plenty of practical how-to accounts that seem to tap into the inexhaustible Marie Kondo market for compulsive organising. Marvel at how feng shui expert Cliff Tan manages to fit a family of six into a 13x13ft room, or turns a narrow loft space into a compact home office. His ingenious solution for a cupboard-sized bedroom has racked up almost 6m views – no doubt useful for fitting out Britain’s rabbit hutch homes. Elsewhere, you can tour the architecture of video games and memes (and fast food reviews) with Sssscavvvv, or wonder at the mysteries revealed by Design Secrets, explaining why Pringles are shaped the way they are, why barns are red, or why vintage cartoon characters all had neck collars. TikTok’s selfie monologuing format has also spawned a range of young critics, perhaps none as enthusiastically outraged as Louisatalksbuildings, whose passionate hatred of New York’s 432 Park Avenue made her an overnight sensation. More recent targets for her quick-fire ridicule include London’s Marble Arch mound. For a deeper dive, there are a number of local historians, such as Chicago’s Shermann Dilla Thomas, AKA 6figga_dilla. His videos have delved into everything from the history of the street grid, to wooden-paved roads and the story behind the city’s “shit fountain”. For urbanism fans, there are plenty of accounts to unearth, one of the most popular being TalkingCities, run by Paul Stout. His introductory videos to the basics of urban design range from showcasing Japanese manhole covers to the geeky wonders of Dutch roundabout design. And for a fury-inducing window on to the sheer mindlessness of car-centric planning, none beat Pedestriandignity. His videos chart the urban landscape’s hostility to people on foot or in wheelchairs, as he wanders America’s endless verges, gutters and hard shoulders in search of that simple human requirement: a decent pavement.More than a quarter of Tory MPs have second jobs with firms whose activities range from gambling to private healthcare, making more than £4m in extra earnings in a year, Guardian analysis has found. The register of MPs’ interests shows that more than 90 out of 360 Tories have extra jobs on top of their work in parliament, compared with three from Labour. They are overwhelmingly older and 86% are men. The highest earners were all former cabinet ministers. The row over sleaze, including “egregious lobbying” by the veteran backbencher Owen Paterson on behalf of companies that paid him over £100,000 a year, has focused attention on moonlighting by MPs. On Monday Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, rejected the idea of banning second jobs, saying it could stop some MPs getting experience of the outside world. They must understand, however, that “in performing their parliamentary duties they are expected to act in the public interest”, he said. The highest earner is Andrew Mitchell, the MP for Sutton Coldfield, who made £182,600 for 34.5 days’ work in a variety of financial advisory roles, with firms including Investec and EY. Geoffrey Cox, the former attorney general, is making around £1m a year as a barrister, while Chris Grayling, the former transport secretary, is earning £100,000 a year from Hutchison Ports Europe, the register shows. John Redwood, a former Welsh secretary, is earning more than £230,000 working for an investment advisory company, Charles Stanley, and a private equity firm, while Alun Cairns, a former Welsh secretary, acts as adviser to a Wales-based global diagnostics company, BBI, with all his consultancy roles bringing in a total of £60,000. Liam Fox, a former trade secretary, has a £10,000 contract with WorldPR, a Panama-based PR company for advice on business and international politics, while Julian Smith, the former chief whip, is making about £144,000 a year from advisory roles with marine, renewables and hydrogen firms. Although ministers are not supposed to have second jobs, some have managed to hold on to them in currently unpaid capacities. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the House of Commons, remains an unpaid partner in Somerset Capital Management LLP, an investment management firm. Alister Jack, the Scottish secretary, is also still an unpaid director of Atlantic Solway Holdings, an investment company in the sport fishing sector. Two Tories have jobs linked to the gambling industry: Laurence Robertson, Tory MP for Tewkesbury, gets £24,000 a year to be a parliamentary adviser to the Betting and Gaming Council, while Philip Davies, the MP for Shipley, is paid £16,660 by GVC Holdings, owner of Coral and Ladbrokes, plus £12,000 a year by the National Pawnbroking Association. The Guardian reported on Sunday that more than 30 MPs have jobs that could be considered direct political consultancy, which could face a clampdown. However, dozens more have lucrative board seats and advisory council jobs that are likely to involve giving political advice. Some are also earning money through personal service companies, an arrangement that can help lower their tax bills. Paterson, the MP for North Shropshire, resigned following a furore over his lobbying rule-breaking and attempts by the prime minister to halt his 30-day suspension, which ended in a U-turn. MPs are banned from direct lobbying, but there are various loopholes, including being able to provide political advice to firms without carrying out advocacy themselves. In contrast to the high number of Tories with second jobs, few opposition party MPs moonlight. Among Labour MPs, Rosena Allin-Khan earns extra income as a doctor, Margaret Hodge has a £20,000-a-year role at Royal Holloway University and Khalid Mahmood has a £25,000 advisory job at the Policy Exchange thinktank. The analysis includes those with company directorships even if they are not directly salaried, but not those with unpaid roles at charities or thinktanks. It also did not count those who receive ad hoc payments for journalism, speaking at events, training, lectures or surveys – even though this is substantial additional income often earned as a result of an MP’s parliamentary position. It comes as research from Savanta ComRes found that almost half of UK adults oppose MPs being allowed to have a second job alongside their role in parliament, with just one in five supporting it. Labour proposed banning second jobs for MPs at the last election, although Starmer has stopped slightly short of endorsing that position. But Richard Burgon, formerly the shadow justice secretary, is tabling a new private member’s bill to parliament that would ban all second jobs, with limited exceptions for professional MPs such as nurses and doctors to carry on their work. Burgon said MPs should not be “lining their pockets by moonlighting in other roles – and it is especially outrageous that this was happening during a public health crisis”. “The job of being an MP is not only a great privilege, but it is also well paid, and it should be the full focus of anyone lucky enough to be elected as an MP. If people want to seek lucrative roles elsewhere, then no one is stopping them, but they should step down as MPs to do so,” he said. “My bill will put an end to this racket by banning MPs from having second jobs, except in limited exceptions, for example, where nurses need to work to maintain professional registrations or so a doctor can carry on serving our NHS.” • This article was amended on 9 November 2021. Geoffrey Cox is making around £1m a year as a barrister, not £1.6m as an earlier version said. This has been corrected, and as a result the overall figure given in the text for extra earnings in a year has also been revised to a total of “more than £4m”, rather than “about £5m” as previously stated. The headline has also been updated to reflect this change.For the residents of Eita, on the remote Pacific nation of Kiribati, climate change is obvious. Much of the village has drowned, and Kiribati’s president, Taneti Maamau, is seeking support to save these low-lying islands from sea level rise. But how many of the other leaders gathered in Glasgow for the Cop26 conference will feel they have experienced the effects of global heating? The answer may depend on what kind of weather they have had in recent years. Jennifer Marlon, a climate scientist at Yale University, and colleagues asked more than 13,000 US residents whether they had felt the impact of global heating. Comparing responses with climate data revealed that people who had experienced an unusually high number of hot dry days were far more likely to say they had felt the impact of global heating than those who experienced very heavy rain or snow or unusually hot – but not dry – days. These trends held true regardless of respondents’ political or socioeconomic status. Describing their findings in the Global Environmental Change journal, Marlon and her colleagues speculate that hot dry weather is more convincing because it tends to last for longer – sometimes months or years – and the economic impact is widely felt.Cleaning up politics is a stunningly simple task, glaringly obvious to anyone – except those 250 Tory MPs who voted last week to protect their own. What we need to do is take all the money out of Westminster and let parliamentarians live on their salaries as other public servants do. Just over a third of MPs took home £4.9m between them in outside earnings in the 12 months since March 2020. Ah, we’d lose high-quality people by banning extra work, they say – yet how much would those paid “consultant” MPs be missed? Running the NHS, schools, Whitehall or councils, the public sector is packed with people of far higher calibre than the current crop of ministers. They work without fame but, like the better MPs, to improve society. The recent scandal only passed as a “Westminster storm in a teacup” – the words of environment secretary George Eustice – because under Boris Johnson barely a week goes by without some new dishonesty: his government has made 43 U-turns since it came to power in December 2019, and most were disreputable. Keir Starmer, accusing the prime minister of “leading his troops through the sewer”, reaffirmed Labour’s commitment to bar MPs from directorships and consultancies; along with restrictions to stop ministers departing to companies through that corrupt revolving door. Lobbying pays good returns: compare Randox’s £8,000-a-month outlay to Owen Paterson, with government contracts worth almost £500m. (The company insists Paterson “played no role in securing any Randox contract”.) Labour is perfectly placed to run a clean-up-politics campaign, led by a former director of public prosecutions and a frontbench unlikely to be caught pilfering. Back-to-basics campaigns risk exposing a wrongdoer in the ranks, but what matters is how parties respond. Labour has called for Claudia Webbe, the Leicester East MP, to resign – having already withdrawn the whip – after her conviction of harassment against a woman. But Paterson was protected by his leader, with Nadhim Zahawi sent on to the airwaves to defend him, admitting he hadn’t even read the excoriating standards committee report. Out of wrongheaded tribalism, Labour has refused to give an independent candidate a free run in Paterson’s North Shropshire seat: there’s little chance the party’s candidate would win, so why not sidestep inevitable humiliation and help give the Tories a fright? Johnson’s polling has slid to its lowest level, his every policy indicator flashing red. But Labour fails to streak ahead. It’s time to accept that any general election victory will have to come with near-certain coalition with other progressive parties. A first step in facing that reality would be to draw up a clean-politics charter with other parties and civil society organisations. Of course the Tories would refuse to join, but how would it look if all Labour, Liberal Democrat, Green, SNP and Plaid candidates wore a clean-up politics white badge, but not the Tories? An agreed charter could commit to expunging money, honours and bribery from Westminster. Tricky cases, such as Dr Rosena Allin-Khan MP working shifts in A&amp;E, or Nadine Dorries’ phenomenal book sales are not beyond the wit of drafters to work round. Next, they should abolish political donations beyond the small sums that come from party members. If this means increasing public subsidy to political parties, it would be a worthwhile investment for taxpayers, ensuring that the few can’t buy influence: property developers have given the Tories £60m in the past decade. MP Margaret Hodge’s forthcoming report for King’s College London’s Policy Institute traces how laundered and dirty donations mean “corrupt money corrupts politics”. A charter should pledge a wide-ranging royal commission to give Britain a written constitution, now that Johnson has broken what was left of the honour and tradition supposedly glueing those unwritten conventions together. Starmer’s leadership campaign commitment to a democratic second chamber is more urgent than ever, with openDemocracy and the Sunday Times revealing the going rate for peerages: 15 of the last 16 Conservative party treasurers donated at least £3m and got the ermine. Transparency was meant to let in sunlight, the best disinfectant, but only 41% of freedom of information requests by the public are granted in full, part of a downward trend. Yet transparency isn’t enough: the National Audit Office has no power to act on its stream of shocking reports on government malfunction. It needs teeth. The current elections bill is also a travesty, giving government effective control over the independent Electoral Commission, allowing it to impose penalties on what it determines to be third-party election campaigning – say from the TUC or Black Lives Matter. Meanwhile, one backbencher told the Financial Times that some Tory MPs were informed “they would lose funding for their constituency” if they failed to vote for Paterson – flagrant corruption. A pact on a clean-politics charter isn’t the electoral alliance many of us favour, and the terms of any constitutional commission would have to be agreed by a post-election coalition. But if Johnson wants a culture war to distract from his corruption, economic failures and weakening public services, bring it on. A renamed statue or a “woke” National Trust initiative is a weak weapon compared with combating the culture of Tory snouts in the trough. Cleaning up politics is neither left- nor rightwing, when Tory wrongdoing will keep bursting into the headlines as long as Johnson stays in No 10. The standards committee chair, Chris Bryant, goes as far as to say to me that the threatened removal of independent checks and balances means “we might as well have Viktor Orbán running Britain”. The Tory barrister and politician, Quintin Hogg, famously once warned of an “elective dictatorship” and that’s Johnson’s way – stuffing every post with yes people. Labour needs to go at this hammer and tongs, not with lawyerly caution but sounding the klaxon on the corruption of democracy.Grayson Perry hasn’t, he reports apologetically, dressed up specifically for our Zoom call, but for an event he will be attending afterwards. “I wanted to look like a lady who lunched,” says Perry, who is wearing mauve silk, bright red lipstick, giant specs and Thatcherite hair. Since winning the Turner prize in 2003, Perry – with his alter ego Claire – has become one of the UK’s most recognisable and admired artists. He is known primarily for his ceramics, but his other work includes tapestries and a house in Essex. He is also a curator, writer and broadcaster – and his Channel 4 show Grayson’s Art Club, presented with his wife, the writer and psychotherapist Philippa Perry, was a lockdown highlight. Currently on tour with A Show for Normal People, Perry takes a break to answer Guardian readers’ questions on art, life and cats. How do you classify “normal” people? (Amy, London) I’m interested in those things that hover in our unconsciousnesses – class, gender, identity – until we have to think about them for whatever reason. So normal is whatever’s normal for you, until it’s not. Everybody’s got their own version that’s constructed by their background and history. If you think life is meaningless, as it says in the show’s description, you must be depressed, don’t you think? (Deirdre, London) No, I think life is meaningless, fine, so it’s our job to make meaning. I find it quite comforting that I have some sort of agency over the meaning I can put on to life. Were you from an artistic family? (Andrea, Aberdeen) No. I think I grew up in an “acultural” household – no books, no paintings, never went to an art gallery. I say that, but of course we had the TV. A lot of middle-class people still struggle to understand that television is a major cultural force. When people say “cultural” what they really mean is, “did you grew up in a middle-class cultural house?” I can’t afford a studio, work full-time and have limited time to make art. How did you get through the difficult period of needing to make a living but still being able to make work? (Will, Todmorden) I did what a lot of other people were doing – I made art on the kitchen table. I had scrappy jobs all through my 20s, like making sandwiches, being a security guard, life modelling. I went to evening classes, which gave me a place where I could make things, with all the facilities. In the early 80s, it was really cheap. Then I married someone with more money than me. Not many men take that route. My wife supported me through my 30s. I didn’t really make a living from my art until I was about 38. Since winning the Turner prize, you have become a national treasure owing to your likability, emotional intelligence and natural ability on television. This may have diluted your ability to make controversial art, viewed objectively on its own merits. Do you feel your best work may be behind you? (Pete, Edinburgh) I think my best work has been since I won the Turner prize, so I say “bollocks” to that. And “controversial” is only one tiny measure. The people who think being controversial is important are those that cling on to their punk haircut into their 60s. I became a member of the establishment a long time ago now and maybe those people who like to think of themselves as controversial might find out that they are also now members of the establishment. If you could be an artist during any century, when would it be? (Jill, Letchworth Garden City) I’m a big fan of the Northern Renaissance so I would have liked to have been in the Low Countries some time in the 1400s – Van Eyck, Bruegel and Hieronymus Bosch, and all those people painting. You didn’t have to worry about what your subject matter was going to be, because you did Christianity, so it was all about technique and getting on with it. You didn’t have to think, “what’s my art about?” Where would you say the value of art comes from? Marx argued that value comes from labour. How does that relate to art, especially your art and forms like ceramics and tapestry? (Ella, Birmingham) When I walk into one of my exhibitions, I certainly think, “Wow, there’s a lot of man hours.” Consciously or otherwise, I subscribe partly to Marx’s statement, though I wouldn’t call myself a Marxist. It’s fascinating, the idea of value in the art world, because at a certain point, it goes stratospheric and it’s ridiculous. It’s pure market economics, and value is what somebody will pay for it. For you, where does value come from? (Emine Saner) It makes my life meaningful. I love a project that gives my life a bit of motivation, and it uses up your time in a really good way. Can you explain why a pickled shark and an unmade bed are more than a pickled shark and an unmade bed? (Martin, Oxford) Well, it’s the old Duchampian thing, isn’t it? [From the 1910s onwards, Marcel Duchamp famously put his “readymades”, including a urinal, into galleries.] Art is people who point at things. I’m not fetishistically attached to the idea of handicrafts as part of the art process – Christopher Wren didn’t build St Paul’s Cathedral – if you end up with an amazing thing at the end of it. But I do question the waning power of the art gallery to add significance to anything you drag into it. I feel the art world is still very Eurocentric. Have you been interested or influenced by the art from a non-European cultural tradition? (Jolyon, Japan) I would say the art world is going through quite a phase of being non-Eurocentric. The Tate, for at least a decade, has been looking out to places which aren’t represented in its collections. Because the art world is always looking for challenge – it was one of the first areas of culture I think that really looked beyond the Eurocentric canon. I rarely look for inspiration in contemporary art, but I do look backwards and I’m an equal opportunities thief. The main influence on my ceramics at the moment is probably Islamic, Persian – there’s something about the nature of their particular refinement that I find very inspiring. I once saw you walking across Homebase car park in Walthamstow in full frock mode. Was what I witnessed art? (David, Walthamstow) It [was] very close to my old studio, but I can’t ever remember going to that Homebase in a frock. It might not have been me. Dressing up is dressing up. It might bleed into my art sometimes, but I’m very strict about my definitions about various aspects of my practice. If I dress up, it’s just dressing up for my own pleasure. I love a blank canvas, a fresh start. What about you? (Alan, Scottish Borders) I’m not a great fan of the blank canvas. I think my best work usually comes towards the end of a batch of work, when I’ve got in the zone. Work makes ideas, work comes out of work. I’m in that phase at the moment where I’m getting back into my studio practice, and I always find the first couple of pieces are a bit muddled. So I don’t like that blank canvas feeling – I like to be on the go. Artists often experience periods of doubt and low confidence. Has this ever happened to you, and how do you overcome it? (Simon, York) I think I’m addicted to periods of doubt and low confidence. I think you should worry if you don’t have them because then you’re not trying hard enough. If you’re sure that everything you’re going to do is going to be good, then what’s the point? I used to think of it as just crippling self-doubt. Now I kind of see it as a sign that I’m teetering on the edge of something new. Or troubling. Are all motives governed by self-interest? (Chris, Newcastle) I think there is probably a bit of truth in that. The phrase that is around a lot is “virtue signalling”, but we’ve evolved to virtue signal because we want to be seen as a good member of the group. If your group approves of altruistic acts, then you do altruistic acts in order to get status. How do you find Englishness in this new age of Brexit? (Hywel, Camarthen) It’s troubled because a fair proportion of the population of England don’t like to describe themselves as English, because it has bad associations for them, and there’s an opposing group who define themselves more happily as English than British. There are people who want to fit in with the mainstream, or what is seen as the “good thing”. And people who don’t, and whether they know it or not, they want to stand out, and will latch on to any cause that makes them stand out. Brexit was partly about that. I think anti-vaxxing is partly about that. I think they see a status in not being sucked into the mainstream. What do you think about gender stereotypes and how they relate to art and culture? (Misaki, Japan) As a transvestite, I’m heavily invested in gender stereotypes, because otherwise I wouldn’t have a barrier to cross. It would just be dressing. Gender is one of the deepest conditionings in our culture. When people say, “we’re going to change what it is to be a woman, a man,” I say, “great”. But it’s going to take a long time because these things are heavily ingrained in our culture. And for men to change their behaviour – they’re the ones that need to change on the whole – it’s going to take a long time, because it’s a sort of a collective enterprise that’s done mainly unconsciously. You went to an English art school at a particular time – how come you didn’t end up in a band? (Mark, Leeds) Like most of my generation, I wanted to be in a rock band. I wanted to be David Bowie. That is a yearning which I confront full on in my show. At the Albert Hall, I will have a band. Brace yourselves for this sensational debut! I would have been a fabulous rock star. Whether my voice would have been that good, I don’t know, but I would have been very good at it. How do you think art should be taught in schools? (Jane, Chichester) Often. It gets sidelined but it should be made available to those that want it. For the kids who are like me, the art room is a refuge. It wasn’t just that I enjoyed working there, it was a place where I worked out what was going on in my head, even though I didn’t know I was doing it. One of the instrumental functions of art is to work out what’s going on in our unconscious, collectively or personally. One of the essential things of having a healthy society is to have a strong cultural sector. What is life for if you don’t have culture in all of its glorious variety? How much is your art steered by a vision of what you’re aiming to create and how much is down to spontaneity? (S, Oxford) 52.5%. My visions are usually a vague, blurry golden mist at the back of my mind, a certain tone or atmosphere that I want to conjure up. During the process of making, that gradually comes into focus, with all of the inevitable disappointment. The creative process is one of controlled disappointment, because the nature of inspiration is that it’s vague. I get towards finishing a piece and it’s not exactly what I hoped it would be, but it’s good. Then what happens is, as time goes on, you look back on that piece and forget how you hoped it would be and see it for what it is. I don’t think there are many artists who have an exact idea of what they want to make, and then make it. That would be a bit depressing. I admire what a wonderful “completer” you are. Where do you get the drive and discipline to keep pushing through to the finish line? (Annabel, East Sheen) Probably some kind of ancient work ethic that I have, that as I get older and tireder is more challenging. I used to be fanatically driven, but I think I’m mellowing a bit, or at least I’m distracted. I’m thinking, I’m 61, I’ve got X number of productive years left in me, what do I want to be doing? Do I just want to be kind of churning stuff out that I think other people expect me to do? Do you abandon work? (ES) Usually nearer the beginning than the end. I used to make things, then hate them and smash them. Now I can see the tragedy unfolding early on and nip it in the bud. Eat the rich or sell them art? (Suzanne, Liverpool) Definitely sell them art. Though a few of them could be barbecued. Isn’t it obscene to spend hundreds of millions on a piece of art? (ES) Probably. But it’s better than spending it on weapons. How old is your cat? And how did you get her? (Emily, Kingston) He’s a boy, though he has had his knackers off. We got him from Battersea. They reckon he was about 18 months old, so he’d be about five? Six? I don’t know. He was found as a stray in Hackney, so he’s a hipster cat. • Grayson Perry performs A Show for Normal People at the Royal Albert Hall, London, on 22 November. Tickets are available from Fane.It’s hard to say which element of Scott Morrison’s new electric vehicle strategy is most galling. If you missed the unveiling on Tuesday, there’s not much to catch up on, given the strategy has all the substance of a Corn Thin. The Coalition’s “strategy” for electric vehicle take-up contains $178m of government spending on EV infrastructure but no new policies, just like its “Australian Way” plan to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. It rebuffs calls for vehicle emissions standards and provides no market signal to incentivise take-up – the two measures viewed by experts as the most important to drive change. But while a policy document three years in the making that is entirely bereft of substance is certainly offensive, it is nowhere near as galling as the way in which Morrison expects voters to forgive and forget the Coalition’s position on electric vehicles ahead of the 2019 election. For those who need a reminder, Morrison shamelessly claimed that Labor’s policy, which set a target of half of all new cars to be electric by 2030, would “end the weekend” and lead to apartment dwellers dangling extension cords out of their windows. “It’s not going to tow your trailer. It’s not going to tow your boat. It’s not going to get you out to your favourite camping spot with your family,” Morrison said at the time. A hyperbolic Michaelia Cash, then the small business minister, pledged to “stand by our tradies and … save their utes” from Bill Shorten’s grasp. The rhetorical absurdity was backed up by Liberal party advertising on Facebook that claimed “Labor’s car tax” would hike up the price of Australia’s favourite cars. On Tuesday, when Morrison was asked by journalists how he could “honestly spruik electric vehicles” after campaigning against them so vigorously at the last election, he suggested this very obvious statement of fact was a “Labor lie”. “But I didn’t. That is just a Labor lie. I was against Bill Shorten’s mandate policy, trying to tell people what to do with their lives, what cars they were supposed to drive and where they could drive,” Morrison said, lying about his lie with another lie. When presented with remarks he made on 2GB radio about having to “run the extension cord down from your fourth floor window” to charge a car, Morrison claimed his position had changed in line with the “massive change in the technology over the last few years”. The prime minister’s chutzpah knows no bounds. In a warm-up act for the election campaign, Morrison has been on the ground this week arguing for “choices, not mandates” and “technology not taxes”, saying Labor has a plan to force Australians to do things they don’t want to do. “I don’t have to tell them to get rid of the car they’ve got now. That’s what Labor wants to do. I’m not going to put up the price of petrol on families and make them go and buy electric vehicles,” he said. “We’re not going to tell them what to buy. We’re not going to tell them where to drive or where they can’t drive.” Ah, no. And nor will Labor. Quite a feat, really, to launch a scare campaign on Labor policies that don’t exist yet. After telling voters that government support for electric vehicles would upend their very way of life, Morrison is now hoping that he can peer under the bonnet of one and be accepted as a genuine convert. It forms part of a broader pivot on climate change policy that seeks to erase from the collective consciousness a decade of Coalition fear-mongering on the emissions reduction task that the Liberal and National parties have unapologetically and repeatedly used for political gain. Morrison is cynically relying on a disengaged electorate to try to get away with the conversion, as the government – or more accurately, the government pollsters – acknowledge that the jig is up. After a decade of inaction and denial on climate change policy, there is much catching up to do to put Australia on the path to achieving carbon neutrality. But as with Morrison’s net zero commitment, his EV strategy appears nothing more than a box-ticking exercise for a policy area that most Coalition MPs wish would go away. Heaven forbid that Morrison’s political conversion on climate policy would actually translate to doing something about it. Doing nothing, remember, is the Australian way Morrison prefers.Planning to have a baby can be one of the most exciting moments in our lives. There are many wonderful decisions to make: the right name, what colour to paint the nursery, and how many giraffe onesies a baby really needs. But before all the cute parts, there are other important choices to make. ‘I was diagnosed with infertility’ When Sarah and her husband took the first steps towards growing their family, they did everything right. They looked at their lifestyle, their mental and physical health, and increased their level of private health cover to include pregnancy and birth. They had no reason to think it wouldn’t be smooth sailing. But life is full of twists, and they hadn’t realised they were preparing for the unexpected. To Sarah’s surprise, a combination of factors meant she wasn’t able to conceive on her own. Her plan to fall pregnant naturally would have to take a detour. The upgraded hospital cover she and her husband had chosen also included assisted reproductive services, which helped them access the treatments they needed. “We went down a different fertility path of ovulation induction, which is less invasive,” she says. “When that was unsuccessful, we went down the IVF path.” Certain private hospital cover can include fertility and assisted reproduction treatments performed in a hospital, such as egg retrieval and transfer. With Medicare benefits available on many outpatient services, the combination may reduce the financial burden of making a family a possibility. Following IVF, Sarah and her husband were overjoyed to welcome their new daughter. But the process had been long and challenging, and Sarah realised she needed extra support. Having extras cover also helped her access services to assist with her recovery from pregnancy. Pregnancy and birth doesn’t always go to plan. “I saw a psychologist,” she says. “Having a portion of that cost covered by my private health insurance meant that I was happy to go in and do it. It meant that I didn’t hesitate.” Start planning as early as possible Sarah’s story is increasingly common. Dr Stuart Prosser, an obstetrician and co-founder of One for Women, helps many patients on their journeys. He encourages them to start planning well in advance, to give themselves a better chance of conceiving and having healthy pregnancies. “It’s about making sure that your health is in the best shape possible,” he says. That means making sure any medical conditions are well managed and that you’re living a healthy lifestyle. “Avoiding alcohol, eating a healthy diet, taking folate and exercising regularly are important considerations.” Prosser recommends would-be parents start planning at least 12 months in advance – and says we should be starting conversations about parenthood as early as possible. “As soon as you’re thinking about trying to have a baby,” he says, “coming to have a pre-conception chat is a really good idea.” Many people assume they’re going to get pregnant right away, but the likelihood is much lower than we may realise, Prosser says. In some cases, as in Sarah’s, intervention may be required. “Your chances of falling pregnant are somewhere between 10 and 15% per monthly [menstrual] cycle,” he says. “If you haven’t fallen pregnant in about six months, then maybe we should look a little bit closer at what’s going on.” The right cover helps prepare for the unexpected It’s a good idea to check your private health cover before you start out and make sure you have the right cover for your needs. Pippa Grant, head of health services at HBF, suggests future parents be clear about balancing their needs and budgets to get the right pregnancy and birth care. Like Sarah and Prosser, she emphasises the importance of planning ahead. It’s a good idea to check your private health cover before you start trying for a baby. “Australia is fortunate to have a really good blended system of both public and private healthcare,” she says. “Ultimately, it comes down to your individual choice, preferences and your priorities, amongst other factors to consider. If you choose to have your baby in a private hospital, you can choose your obstetrician, meaning you’re more likely to have continuity of care with your pregnancy support team – all going to plan, you will have the same midwife and the same obstetrician throughout the pregnancy and birth.” In Australia, all health funds require policyholders to have held hospital cover that includes pregnancy and birth for at least 12 months before they can claim for treatment related to this. Grant recommends also checking your policy for assisted reproductive services coverage. “We recommend planning in advance and making sure you understand what’s included on your cover and any applicable waiting periods. If you’re not sure about those details, you might call a contact centre or pop in to a branch, just to make sure that the policy cover that you’re on is going to cover you adequately.” After pregnancy, your extras policy might also cover something just as important: what you need next. “Afterwards, it’s all the everyday health services that you want to think about,” Grant says. From post-pregnancy physio to remedial massage, dietetics and psychology, extras cover can help ensure you recover well. For Sarah, the process of starting a family has created lifelong changes. “While it was long and it was hard, I think it made me a better mum,” she says. “Going through those things, becoming more self-aware and learning coping strategies meant I was really ready for it.” Now her daughter is two – and Sarah and her husband couldn’t be more thrilled with their new family. “You really appreciate it when it finally happens.” HBF offers health insurance to suit your needs. As a dedicated not-for-profit, HBF puts member needs first. Compare cover options now.Weak and outdated laws are allowing widespread money laundering in the property sector, making Australia a “destination of choice” for illicit funds and “locking many Australians out of owning their own homes”, a Senate inquiry has been told. The Senate is probing the strength of Australia’s money-laundering and counter-terrorism financing laws, and heard on Tuesday from anti-corruption group Transparency International Australia and its director, former Austrac general counsel Russell Wilson. Transparency International Australia’s chief executive, Serena Lillywhite, said Australia had become the “destination of choice” for the flow of illicit funds, particularly for “corruption-related proceeds, which too often do end up in the property market”. The group provided a list of 10 publicly-reported examples showing money laundering in the property market, from Sudan, China, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, and Russia. The examples described money laundering in property by Sudanese generals, Malaysian bankers, PNG’s political elite, and Chinese high-rollers. Lillywhite said Australia’s weak anti-money laundering regime, flaws with the corporate registry, and the lack of a beneficial ownership register all contributed to the problem. “Money laundering is not a faceless crime... it has devastating impacts, both in Australia and overseas,” she said. “It can reasonably be argued that it is driving up property prices in Australia and locking many Australians out of owning their own home.” Australia’s anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing laws have remained largely the same since they were introduced in 2006. A promised second tranche of reforms is yet to materialise. Lillywhite said she understood that lawyers, accountants and real estate agents were opposed to being covered by the laws due to the significant regulatory burden. Liberal senator Paul Scarr asked what a small conveyancing business, for example, can be expected to do to prevent money laundering. Wilson responded: “It’s as simple as doing an internet search, Senator, that should throw up whether there’s any issues associated with that individual and whether that individual satisfies the definition of being a politically-exposed person.” “It’s then a further step consulting the sanctions list available on the department of foreign affairs’s website.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Transparency International’s submission to the inquiry warned of the significant reliance of Austrac on reporting from companies to detect money laundering and financially-motivated crime. “If a reporting entity fails, (or deliberately decides not to) report threshold transactions or suspicious matter reports, the only mechanism the Austrac has to identify these offences is through the limited range of reports that it receives from the entity committing the offence,” the submission warns. The agency also collected intelligence from a “very small subset of those entities that are being used to commit or facilitate financially-motivated crime and money laundering”, the submission warned. “A significant amount of [money laundering] is now occurring in a wide variety of methods that are outside of the Austrac’s current capacity to detect,” Transparency International said.The first Malawian with albinism to become an elected MP took his seat in the new parliament on Monday, making history in the southern African country. It also marks a significant milestone in a continent where people with the hereditary lack of pigmentation in the skin, hair and eyes face severe discrimination and physical attacks. Overstone Kondowe, the 42-year-old son of a teacher, grew up in a village without any help to ease the pain in his sun-sensitive skin or glasses to aid his poor eyesight. Albinism is so stigmatised and surrounded by superstition that people with the condition live at daily risk from both random attacks and from a murderous trade in body parts, which are used in witchcraft. Many children do not go to school. Ikponwosa Ero, a former UN adviser on albinism, said she was “elated” with Kondowe’s election, which she called a “giant step forward in the protection of human rights of people with albinism in Malawi and Africa as whole”. “I congratulate Malawi for this step and for being one of the first to fund a national action plan on albinism. As that plan draws to a close, I urge the government to learn from that first edition and adopt a revised and extended plan since the attacks are still under way in the country,” she said. Despite struggling to see what was written on the blackboard, Kondowe worked his way through school and university to achieve high-level positions in both the government and in non-governmental organisations. “I might be described as an overambitious person – that’s why I had the courage to contest,” Kondowe told the Guardian at his home in the capital, Lilongwe. “But the victory is a clear demonstration that people are changing their altitudes.” Malawi and neighbouring Tanzania have a long history of people with albinism being killed for their body parts, which fetch high prices, as they are used in rituals and are believed to bring good luck. According to senior Tanzanian police officers quoted in Through Albino Eyes, a 2009 report by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, a complete set of albino body parts – including all four limbs, genitals, ears, tongue and nose – was fetching the equivalent of $75,000 (nearly £50,000). The attacks are more rampant during elections and people believe that politicians are involved. Kondowe said: “There are a lot of beliefs and myths concerning people with albinism and we’re often viewed as second-class citizens or half-humans but because of the number of programmes that we’ve put, including civil education, this time around people accepted my candidature, not looking at albinism as a barrier but they just looked at the merits. “To me, it’s a success story because I even won with a very big margin,” the new MP said. While Tanzania had a member of parliament with albinism in 2010 and Kenya had one in 2017, the two were nominated and did not win through the ballot box. Kondowe plans to work for legislation to protect all people with disability. “I understand that those who are not supporting the cause are doing so because of lack of awareness, so I will make sure I lobby more members of parliament to have awareness as well as have the spirit to put us at the centre of development,” he said. “I would make sure that the plans and budgets have something speaking to the needs and wants of persons with albinism and as well as those with disabilities.” He hopes his election has set a precedent in a country where 134,636 people are living with albinism. Charles Mailosi, 29, a teacher from Lilongwe who has albinism, said he was excited by Kondowe’s victory. “I am just happy that Malawians have trusted him with the post. This is a powerful sign that Malawians are accepting [us],” he said. “It gives me courage that I can achieve greater things in life and that people can trust me.” Kondowe, a former president of Malawi’s Association of People with Albinism (APAM), said that although attacks for body parts had been reduced, thanks to a handful of high-profile prosecutions, there was still a long way to go. “As a country, we’ve conducted six investigations and these investigations have failed to nail down the market. “I can say that we’re still on the right track because we have not given up but still continue with the investigations. It’s a criminal syndicate and it’s a hidden market and is difficult to track. “We need more expertise, time and support from communities and investigators to track,” Kondowe added. “There is going to be a time that we’re going to make a breakthrough.”Top story: MPs seeking lucrative roles ‘should step down’ Hello, Warren Murray here to bring things into focus this Tuesday morning. More than a quarter of Conservative MPs have second jobs with firms whose activities range from gambling to private healthcare, making about £5m in extra earnings in a year, Guardian analysis has found. The register of MPs’ interests shows it to be the case for more than 90 out of 360 Tories, compared with three from Labour. The row over sleaze, including “egregious lobbying” by the veteran backbencher Owen Paterson on behalf of companies that paid him over £100,000 a year, has focused attention on moonlighting by MPs. On Monday Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, rejected the idea of banning second jobs but said they must understand that “in performing their parliamentary duties they are expected to act in the public interest”. The highest earner is Andrew Mitchell, the MP for Sutton Coldfield, who made £182,600 for 34.5 days’ work in a variety of financial advisory roles, with firms including Investec and EY. Geoffrey Cox, the former attorney general, is making £1.6m a year as a barrister, while Chris Grayling, the former transport secretary, is earning £100,000 a year from Hutchison Ports Europe, the register shows. On the Labour side, Rosena Allin-Khan earns extra income as a doctor, Margaret Hodge has a £20,000-a-year role at Royal Holloway University and Khalid Mahmood has a £25,000 advisory job at the Policy Exchange thinktank. Keir Starmer has accused Boris Johnson of trying to “take down” the standards watchdog for his personal interests as Downing Street made a new bid to stop the regulator investigating the controversy around the PM’s flat refurbishment. Labour’s Richard Burgon is tabling a private member’s bill that would ban all second jobs, with limited exceptions for professionals like nurses and doctors. “The job of being an MP is not only a great privilege, but it is also well paid, and it should be the full focus of anyone lucky enough to be elected as an MP. If people want to seek lucrative roles elsewhere, then no one is stopping them, but they should step down as MPs to do so.” * * * Rolls wins nuclear funds – Rolls-Royce will move ahead with a multibillion-pound plan to roll out a new breed of mini nuclear reactors known as SMRs after securing more than £450m from the government and investors. Ministers hope they will be quicker and cheaper to roll out, compared with large-scale reactors such as the Hinkley Point C project – initially expected to cost £18bn but now slated at £23bn. Rolls-Royce has promised to “harness decades of British engineering, design and manufacturing knowhow” to roll out the first of its mini reactors which are based on a similar technology to nuclear submarines. Each of the initial run of reactors is expected to have a generation capacity of 470MW, or enough to power the equivalent of 1.3m UK homes, and cost about £2bn on average. * * * Child dies after dog attack – A 10-year-old boy has died following reports of a dog attack near Caerphilly in south Wales. Gwent police said they were called to an address in Pentwyn, Penyrheol, at about 3.55pm on Monday and confirmed the child had died at the scene. The dog was destroyed by firearms officers and no other animals were involved in the attack, the force said. Officers urged anyone with information to call 101. * * * ‘Hand gesture was everything’ – A 16-year-old girl was rescued in Kentucky after using a hand gesture described on the social media app TikTok to signal to motorists that she was in trouble. The signal – turning the palm outwards and closing the fingers around a tucked thumb – has been demonstrated by users on TikTok and by non-profit organisations as a way for a person being abused to tell someone they are in trouble without alerting the abuser. “That hand gesture was everything,” said Gilbert Acciardo from the Laurel county sheriff’s office. “Had that not been been transmitted by the young lady, had there not been someone out there that knew how to interpret what she was doing, then who knows? We might not have had a good resolution on this.” * * * ‘Other factors may play a role’ – White British people diagnosed with brain tumours are more likely to die within 12 months than patients from other ethnic groups, a study suggests. The research is being presented today at the National Cancer Research Institute (NCRI) festival. While the results show a correlation between ethnicity and survival rates, the researcher, Hiba Wanis, of King’s College London, cautioned that “other factors may play a role such as a patient’s lifestyle and how early they received their diagnosis”. * * * Sensible bedtime good for heart – As far as a healthy heart is concerned, the ideal bedtime is between 10pm and 11pm, a study suggests. It found a lower risk of developing cardiovascular disease, compared with rates among people falling asleep earlier or later at night. The study cannot prove that early or late bedtimes contribute to cardiovascular disease – but Dr David Plans from the the University of Exeter, who co-authored the study, said important cues such as exposure to morning daylight upon waking up help reset the body’s internal clock each day. If the body clock is not reset properly over a long period of time, “that misalignment of behaviours and the circadian clock increases inflammation and can impair glucose regulation, both of which can increase risk of cardiovascular disease”. Today in Focus podcast: Fully at sleaze with themselves Following the resignation of the former Conservative minister Owen Paterson, MPs have been debating changes to their disciplinary procedures and the government has been forced to defend itself against a number of allegations of “sleaze”. Lunchtime read: Now you know how tumble dryers are grown When it was built in 1972, the Nakagin Capsule Tower was Tokyo’s only example of the metabolism architectural movement. The 140 self-contained prefabricated capsules were intended by its architect, Kisho Kurokawa, to serve as pieds-à-terre for professionals who wanted to avoid long weekday commutes back and forth to suburbia. Each 10 square metre capsule had a unit bathroom, Sony Trinitron TV, reel-to-reel cassette/radio, rotary dial phone and a large circular window. Kurokawa, who died in 2007, had intended for them to be removed and replaced every 25 years. Almost half a century on, time has caught up with the structure, now shrouded in netting to keep dislodged rust and concrete from falling on to passersby. The few remaining residents are having to accept their homes and office spaces will soon disappear, amid reports the capsule tower could be demolished next spring. Sport Azeem Rafiq has settled his employment tribunal case with Yorkshire amid praise and an apology from Kamlesh Patel, the new chair of the club, for lifting the lid on the racism he encountered while a player at Headingley. The England rugby union head coach, Eddie Jones, has received criticism after claiming that Emma Raducanu has been burdened by “distractions” that have affected her form on the court. In an interview with the Guardian, the Olympic champion Nicola Adams has revealed she kept a hammer under her bed during her violent childhood, and opened up about the inequality and sexism she overcame in boxing. Two of Britain’s leading sprinters, Adam Gemili and Daryll Neita, are locked in a standoff with UK Athletics after so far staying loyal to their American coach, Rana Reider, who is facing a SafeSport US investigation. Frank Lampard has held talks with Norwich City as the club’s search for a new manager goes on. The Welsh Rugby Union have handed a lifetime stadium ban to the supporter who ran on to the pitch during last Saturday’s defeat by South Africa. England have suffered their second major injury blow at the T20 World Cup after confirmation that Jason Roy has torn a calf muscle and will play no further part in the tournament. Mercedes believe they still have a chance of securing Lewis Hamilton’s eighth world championship and have vowed to keep fighting. And Dylan Alcott, who became the first man in any form of tennis to earn the calendar year golden slam earlier this year, has called time on his career and will retire after next year’s Australian Open. Business Asian shares have followed Wall Street higher in early trade. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan was up 0.3% early in the day. The Nikkei and China’s CSI300 rose while Australian shares fell. The Hang Seng index opened up 0.65%. This morning the FTSE is showing lower ahead of the open, while the pound is worth $1.356 and €1.168 at time of writing. The papers The Guardian’s print splash today is “Johnson is leading the Tory party ‘through the sewers’, says Starmer”. The front page of the Express today is, on perennial past form, frankly astonishing and should tell Boris Johnson something: “Just say sorry for the mess, prime minister”. Much is rightly made of the PM skipping a sleaze debate in the Commons to make a hospital visit during which he didn’t wear a mask. The Mirror summarises: “No apology, no shame, no respect &amp; no mask”. “Anger as PM skips sleaze showdown” says the Times while the Metro says “I’m a prime minister, get me out of here!”. The i has “PM refuses to apologise for trying to tear up sleaze rules”. The Mail has a story about the sonorous Geoffrey Cox QC MP and tax havens. Less of that sort of thing on the front of the Telegraph where the lead is “11,600 caught Covid in hospital and died”. The Financial Times has “Central bankers pose rates puzzle with divergent slants on inflation” – here’s a Guardian angle on those puzzlingly divergent slants. Of chief concern for the Sun is the latest Strictly goings-on. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendSingapore will no longer pay the Covid-19 medical bills for people “unvaccinated by choice”, the government said, as the country grapples with a surge in cases. The government currently covers the full Covid medical costs for all Singaporeans, as well as permanent residents and long-term visa holders, unless they test positive soon after returning home from overseas. However from 8 December, the government said it will “begin charging Covid-19 patients who are unvaccinated by choice”. It said unvaccinated people “make up a sizeable majority of those who require intensive in-patient care and disproportionately contribute to the strain on our healthcare resources”. Covid-related medical bills will still be paid for people who aren’t eligible for a vaccine. The government will also foot the bill for individuals who are partially vaccinated until 31 December, giving them time to get a second dose. Singapore has among the highest coverage rates in the world, with 85% of the population fully vaccinated. Yet the city state is struggling with rising Covid infections and last month warned its healthcare system was at risk of being “overwhelmed” by surging cases. It came a day after the country expanded quarantine-free travel as part of a shift in its approach to dealing with the pandemic. The prime minister, Lee Hsien Loong, previously said the global business hub could not remain closed indefinitely, and Singapore has moved from a zero-tolerance strategy with lockdowns and closed borders to living with Covid-19. A spike in infections after the relaxation of some restrictions prompted the island to pause further reopening in late October. Social curbs were extended for around a month in order to contain the spread of Covid and ease the pressure on the healthcare system. On 8 November, the country reported 2,470 new cases and 14 deaths. The ministry of heath said 67 Covid cases were critically ill in intensive care. • This article was amended on 10 November 2021. Singapore has vaccinated 85% of the population, not 85% of the eligible population, as an earlier version said.In The Archers, violence is delivered symbolically through the medium of baked goods. This month, it was Jennifer’s pavlova that established her primacy in Ambridge’s feminine pecking order – putting her sister, Lilian, in her place as she demanded, and got, promotion from producing starters to puddings for the annual harvest supper. Vince, in the meantime, chose a pear frangipane as his weapon of choice against young Ben Archer, newly entangled with Vince’s daughter Beth: the abattoir owner faked anaphylactic shock from a nut allergy and made a fool of the poor lad right in the thick of Les Soeurs Heureuses, Borchester’s fine-dining establishment. Still, Vince should have chosen another battlefield, since the restaurant is hallowed Archer moral high ground: it’s where Jill Archer had her anti-food-waste activism moment in 2017, when she was arrested for chucking a homemade flapjack at one of the soeurs themselves (symbolic violence, in this case, actualised). Beth in turn decided to try to impress Jill with a 91st-birthday cake, and went all Bake Off season 12 on her, concocting something sculptural with spun sugar: just as well it got squished, really, as Jill is more a farmhouse fruitcake kind of girl. It turns out that Bert Fry’s verses – or “interminable dirges” as Russ cruelly put it – were, in the end, all too terminable. Poor Bert, locally renowned for his prowess in the flower and produce show, hasn’t been the same since there’s been no Joe Grundy to loathe, nor, indeed, since he lost his beloved wife, Freda – swept away, Maggie Tulliver-like, by the 2015 Borsetshire floods. His final performance was at the harvest supper: an epic poem containing, according to Russ’s hostile review, at least five minutes on cutting his toenails, and a lengthy section closely describing a trip to the pharmacist. This radical, rhyming-couplet autofiction, I predict, will soon be hailed as Borsetshire’s answer to Karl-Ove Knausgård’s My Struggle, and Bert’s posthumous renown will outlive his fragile frame. Lucky for Bert’s housemate, Rex Fairbrother, that Trevor, Bert’s son, has offered to give him all of his father’s manuscripts. There was a remarkable episode when Trevor asked Rex to scour Bert’s bedroom for a photograph, a birth certificate, a book and a cricket scorecard. For a delirious moment it seemed these objects were of momentous significance – I don’t know, clues to the whereabouts of Anglo-Saxon treasure buried on Brookfield’s land, like the hoard Eddie was so fruitlessly metal-detecting for earlier in the year. Nothing so exciting, alas. The old farm labourer had expired peacefully at his table in The Bull. It is, surely, how we’d all want to go. Rest in poetry and produce, dear Bert.I had a big meal to cook a couple of days ago but my oven was broken, so I was doing it all at my mother’s. Her place is full of ovens. Even her wee microwave has a conventional function more reliable than any range cooker. She also has a regular oven, and a spare oven that she uses as a cupboard. It’s not because she’s rich, it’s just because she’s old. These things accumulate. She also has more rolls of Sellotape than I could count. What I noticed, over eight hours, was that if I were as impractical, as naive and as irretrievably stupid as her helpful advice suggests she thinks I am, I would definitely be dead by now. “You know with your oven,” she began, “if it’s not igniting, but you leave the gas on, that could result in an explosion.” Well, yes. “Would you like the number of a gas engineer?” No, no, I’d just like to release gas into my kitchen and see what happens. “That knife you’re using …” Mmmm? “It’s extremely sharp. Try to make sure your fingers aren’t directly underneath it.” But I’m 48 years old, and I still have all my fingers! How would I have got here, not knowing to keep them away from knives? “Has that chicken been refrigerated? Because there’s quite a serious disease you can get, it’s called salmonella.” Huh, who knew? “Did I ever tell you about rice poisoning?” So many times. “Trays coming directly out of the oven can be quite hot.” OK. “Are you keeping an eye on your cholesterol?” Well, this is dinner for 13. It’s not all for me. But thanks. I got hit by a car when I was a kid, and after that I was allowed to go and see my friend across the road, but I couldn’t cross back over until my mum came out to get me. One time, she forgot. After about 20 minutes, a stranger offered to cross me over, but I wasn’t technically allowed to talk to strangers, either, and we were both caught in this conundrum which neither my child ingenuity nor his adult wisdom could crack, until my mum finally remembered where I was. To look on the bright side, at least I am now trusted to cross a road.Throughout the 2021 United Nations climate change conference, the Guardian will be publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. Daharu Isah in Gusau, Nigeria I knew farming through my father, as a child. I worked closely with him, alongside my siblings, in his rice, soya bean and maize fields at Gidan Kado, a farming community on the outskirts of Gusau, the capital city of Zamfara state, north-west Nigeria. When I was a child, I had big dreams of being a farmer. I felt I would take after my father and improve his standards when he retired. In those days, the farms had enough rain, were even waterlogged occasionally. There were labyrinths of streams that survived till the dry season, when our farms needed irrigation. There were pastures, too, for the sheep and cattle, enough for pastoralists. My eyes have seen strange changes to these conditions. The rains came sparingly; the streams have all dried up. As a farmer, knowing the possible patterns of the weather is crucial. It guided my farming, planning and planting. Today, however, I have lost that control and certainty regarding the weather. In fact, the weather keeps playing tricks on me and other farmers. This year, for example, I might incur a huge loss on my rice farm because the rain abruptly stopped a month ago, instead of in November. The rice hasn’t matured. I don’t speak for myself alone: other farmers suffer, too, and a lot of my friends have left farming. The streams around the farms have vanished, so I can’t do irrigation. In fact, not all portions of my farms are arable. Some have become so dry and hardened that they can’t support the growth of any crops. The yield of this farm has dropped by more than 50%, from producing more than 40 bags to fewer than 20. This is not a small matter. My resilience is running out. My labours in the farms are increasingly unrewarded owing to low yield. My feeling is that almighty God is punishing humanity through climate change because of our attitude towards him. When man disobeys God, there will be calamity, and climate change is one of those calamities. If we can come to him in repentance, he will reverse climate change. For now, I have embraced new solutions. I have increased the use of fertilisers and pesticide to cut down on losses. Yet fertilisers and pesticides have not solved all the problems. Crop yields have continued to decline. There may not be food for the world in the future, with this pattern and this defeat. I am contemplating quitting farming already, because my income is rarely enough to cover my family’s living costs.“If you walked around Sanità 15 years ago with your camera on your shoulder like that it would’ve been stolen,” says local shopkeeper Antonio Vitozzi, pointing at my battered Nikon. More than likely I would’ve been nowhere near this neighbourhood back then. Riven by urban decay and high unemployment, Naples’ poorest district used to be a dangerous place where the Camorra held sway. It wasn’t just Italians afraid to come here but Neapolitans too. Not these days, though. Sanità has undergone a quite miraculous transformation thanks to La Paranza, a cooperative of idealistic young friends who began running guided tours to Italy’s finest catacombs in the early 2000s. At the time, the only access to the catacombs was granted by the Catholic church for academic study. Today, after significant restoration funded by La Paranza, the catacombs, alongside Vesuvius, Pompeii and Herculaneum, are a must-see Neapolitan attraction, and tourism to Sanità has inspired new guesthouses, restaurants and employment. In its 15th year, the cooperative is launching a new above-ground walking tour this December called Luce (light), featuring specially commissioned contemporary art in neighbourhood churches. Sanità lies north of Naples’ historic centre. The walk there takes me along via Santa Theresa degli Scalzi, a long, straight road running towards the 18th-century Bourbon palace of Capodimonte. En route, I cross a towering bridge built in 1806, which came to symbolise the neighbourhood’s decline, because its construction saw this once affluent suburb slowly bypassed by merchants and dignitaries who could travel more directly between historic Naples and Capodimonte. San Gennaro’s catacomb is found near a sugar-white church, a 1960s replica of St Peter’s in Rome. It’s here that Cooperativa La Paranza began guided tours to Naples’ two most important catacombs, Gennaro and Gaudioso – the only way to see either. Enzo Porzio, 36, one of La Paranza’s founders, tells me that by 2019 the catacomb tours were attracting 160,000 visitors a year. As a teenager with poor employment prospects, Enzo and his neighbourhood friends in Sanità were galvanised by the arrival of a progressive clergyman, Antonio Loffredo. “We were young when Father Loffredo permitted us to start tours in the catacombs,” he says. “At this time, we were asking ourselves what we could do as adults: should we leave Naples to work, or do something to help our community? There was much prejudice against Sanità.” After several years spent guiding as volunteers, making money only from tips, they established La Paranza in 2006 to formally launch paid tours. “As tourists came, the project started to change the neighbourhood. The Camorra’s influence weakened. We created a new environment for arts, theatre, culture and archaeology to flourish. From a no-hope neighbourhood, local people saw new opportunities.” The cooperative now employs 40 guides and in 2014 was a founder member of the San Gennaro Community Foundation, which finances social enterprises across the neighbourhood. Guided tours to the catacombs last an hour. I’m led underground into San Gennaro’s by Antonio Iaccarino, who now trains youngsters joining the project. Gennaro is Naples’ patron saint. Beheaded for his Christian beliefs in AD305, his remains were brought to Naples in the fifth century and his catacomb became a pilgrimage site. His bones were stolen and taken to Benevento 400 years later, before being returned to Naples in 1491. His sainthood was reaffirmed in 1631 when the parading of his relics were said to have halted an eruption of Vesuvius that threatened Naples. Carved from Naples’ soft volcanic tuff, this catacomb dates to the second century and expanded once Gennaro was interred here. Entering the upper level, I feel lilliputian strolling through a forest of toadstools – the rounded stems of tuff supporting the ceiling of the Basilica Adjecto, where pilgrims once shuffled past empty tombs cut into the walls and arcosolia with sumptuous murals for the wealthy elite. All bones were removed in the 1960s to a nearby ossuary. One ornate mural depicts a sixth-century dignitary, Theotecnus, with his wife and daughter, who died aged two years and 10 months. “He would’ve been rich, because the mural was altered throughout as the family died,” says Antonio. San Gennaro’s own tomb is marked by a crosier, or bishop’s crook. It was rediscovered in 1973, long after the catacomb had fallen out of use. The catacomb’s exit purposefully directs visitors towards downtown Sanità, where I’m immediately struck by its authentic intensity. Little shops and tenements fill every space. The lights twinkle on votive shrines. Conversations are suspended mid-air, shouted between balconies of buildings adorned with murals, graffiti, and often piles of rubbish. Sanità’s centrepiece is a colossal Dominican basilica, Maria della Sanità, built in 1610, which physically fuses with the brick uprights of the overhead bridge. The basilica’s side chapel hosts La Paranza’s first ever accommodation, Casa del Monacone (doubles from €50 B&amp;B). The six rooms are so popular I couldn’t get a bed. “Sixteen years ago, when this opened people asked, ‘Who would want to stay overnight in Sanità?’,” shrugs Giuseppe Iaccarino, its manager. “But now Sanità has several hundred Airbnb. It helps locals get by renting rooms out and tourists to stay longer and spend more money,” says the young entrepreneur, soon to open his own restaurant. One trader benefiting from increased visitors is Antonio Vitozzi. His family butcher’s began in 1823. “Who would’ve thought a few years back I’d be selling fancy meat at €50 a kilo – locals just didn’t have the money. Now people from the posher parts of Naples come here to shop,” he says. He invites me to his Friday steak night. I haven’t the heart to tell him I’m vegan. But it’s the reduction in violent crime that’s aided Sanità’s reputational change. Antonio points me towards a memorial to 17-year-old Genny Cesarano, a lifelike depiction of the teenager adorned by the letters S.A.N (saint). He was murdered in 2015 during a drive-by Camorra shooting. “Things had been getting better, so the community was shocked by this. Next day, 5,000 of us came onto the streets to demonstrate [that] we’d fight to maintain the gains we’re making,” he adds. Subsequently, Camorra activity in Sanità withered away. Those gains include impressive developments of the arts. Funded by the community foundation, La Paranza is now hiring three more guides for its new walking tour, Luce, featuring commissioned contemporary artworks by renowned artists in Sanità’s poorest subdistrict, Cristallini. It will feature pieces in deconsecrated churches, the tour beginning at Sant’Aspreno ai Crociferi, where maverick Italian artist Jago will install a sculpture entitled Pieta. One piece, Veiled Boy, is already installed in San Severo Church: a touching frieze of a child covered by a translucent shroud laid out on a tomb. The child’s face is frozen in anguish. “Jago was influenced by the image of a migrant boy’s body washed up on the coastline,” says Antonio. Elsewhere, the local youth orchestra, Sanità Ensemble, practises in San Severo, and I meet budding actor, 24-year-old Ciro Burzo, at Teatro Sanità – another church gifted by Father Loffredo. Rehearsals are under way for La Rosa del mio Giardino, a play about Dalí’s love letters. “I’m a kid of Sanità,” says Burzo. “There seemed only one way out of here, to be good at football, and I wasn’t. The arrival of the theatre came about because visitors needed night-time entertainment. It’s changed my life, my self-belief,” he says. Back on the tour, I return underground into San Gaudioso’s catacomb, which shouldn’t be missed. This Carthaginian bishop was forced into exile by the Vandals, settled in Naples and died around AD450. The catacomb is entered through a portal cut into the majolica-tiled floor of the basilica. It dates back to the fourth century and possesses outstanding ancient frescoes, although it’s the later 17th-century ambulatory that’s unforgettable. Here, the tomb walls portray the dead – once wealthy patrons of the basilica above – as skeletons, with a void where their heads would’ve been, which once hosted their actual skulls. It reminds me of a danse macabre. The female murals wear skirts and one epitaph translates: “Beauty is not immortal, time takes everything”. “In Naples we have a weird cult worship of purgatory. People revere the bones of the nameless dead, the pezzentelle, to help them depart purgatory for heaven, but in return expect their grace and favour. It’s like buying a lottery ticket,” laughs Antonio. “But in 1969 Cardinal Ursi deemed it idolatrous and such sites of reverence were closed. The skulls at this catacomb were cut out. But the cult still continues in Naples.” Another Neapolitan church, Purgatorio ad Arco, maintains shelves of skulls in its crypt. But I end my stay at Naples Cathedral, visiting the reliquary of Gennaro, a baroque chapel housing a bone fragment of his. Two sealed ampoules of his blood are kept beneath the duomo’s altar and produced three times yearly to be declared miraculous when they liquefy from their solid state. Yet San Gennaro’s true miracle is how his presence in death has helped foster the resurrection of Sanità. Guided tours cost €9 for a combined ticket to the catacombs of Saints Gennaro and Gaudioso, catacombedinapoli.comThe German word Herkunft can mean origin, ancestry or provenance. Any one of these could have functioned adequately as the English title of Saša Stanišić’s prize-winning third novel, but translator Damion Searls’s choice – Where You Come From – conveys a sense of the multiplicity that is intrinsic to this often brilliant novel. Where you come from is a fact, an undeniable series of branches on a family tree; but somehow I couldn’t help but read the words in an interrogable manner, imagining someone, possibly armed, demanding to know someone’s ethnic background. Stanišić was 14 when the Bosnian war began in 1992, and escaped to Germany with his mother soon afterwards. His father joined them six months later, thinner and with a scar on his face they never discussed. In his previous two novels, Before the Feast and How the Soldier Repairs the Gramophone, he mined his family history and his own biography in a freewheeling narrative style that incorporated jokes, asides, repetition, diversions, digressions and pop-cultural references that pointed to a sense of gleeful improvisation; Where You Come From feels more honed and considered, more in control of its material. It is, at least at first, almost straightforward. The last line of the first chapter reads: “It is March 7, 2018, in Višegrad, Bosnia-Herzegovina. Grandmother is eighty-seven years old and eleven years old.” Which is perhaps the heart of the novel: a sense that appearance, reality, the past and the present are in a constant state of flux. This is presented in an autofictional framework but, unlike the biographical work of, say, Karl Ove Knausgaard, Ali Smith or Olivia Laing, this is less an excavation of the mundane, a walk in dirty laundry, but more an examination of mundanity in the aftermath of a cataclysmic event. In the chapter titled Lambs, he writes of a family feast, the roasting of a lamb, a minor infraction involving a football, of watching his mother and her friend tipsily talking by the fire. It is, as so many of these remembrances are, wonderfully alive, vital in its depiction of family life. Then Stanišić adds a coda: two years later, dozens of Muslim women are raped and killed at the same spot. “Hardly any memory,” he notes, “is just personal; almost every one comes with a postscript, a footnote, of perpetrators and victims and atrocities that took place there.” It is perhaps why, when he meets with friends from the old days, they “talk almost exclusively about [their] current lives. Talking about the past would take calm and time and above all the courage to ask questions.” And also perhaps why, in 2018, he has begun to question his grandmother, Katrina, who has quickly slid into dementia, for fear that those memories will die with her. It is a refractive prism, this deep delve into the past, so often leading to altered or misleading truths from established facts. A beautifully distilled scene in which his father chases away a snake in a graveyard is later debunked as rubbish by the very hero of the story. (This is told as a series of WhatsApp messages, the last of which is an all too familiar, yet no less heartbreaking, diminuendo.) The fallibility of memory is a well-worn trope, but Stanišić’s understanding of how memory can affect the contours of the present is consistently surprising. For all the hatred that stirred the Bosnian war, the overwhelming, sometimes overheated, sense in Where You Come From is love: a kinship and communion that yolks entire generations. Characters always seem to be on their best behaviour and this can lead to the novel feeling sentimental at times, a touch ignorant of the dirt under the characters’ fingernails. If there are antagonists here, they are memory and time: two faceless enemies these characters cannot outrun. The book’s conclusion, though, is a bravura, sustained and singular piece of writing that bursts with wit, heart and empathy. Tricksy as an extended Choose Your Own Adventure section might appear, it brings the novel together as a totality, delivering multiple endings, all of which land deftly in Damion Searls’s excellent translation. Stuart Evers’s most recent novel is The Blind Light (Picador) • Where You Come From by Saša Stanišić, translated by Damion Searls, is published by Jonathan Cape (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA reminder: don’t trust an email or WhatsApp message from a friend asking for a short-term loan. We are increasingly seeing reports from people who have been duped into sending money after seemingly being contacted by a friend. Fraudsters are hacking into people’s email systems and, having read previous correspondence, sending victims a series of chatty emails asking about a mutual friend. The emails and WhatsApp messages are designed to persuade the receiver that the person is who they say they are. A few hours later comes a plausible request for a short-term loan. It might be that they are stuck abroad, have been robbed, or their car has broken down. The way to protect yourself is straightforward – don’t send any money after receiving such a request without talking to the person first and establishing that they really need a loan. If they start making excuses as to why they can’t talk to you, be doubly suspicious. The same is true of sending companies money. Just because you were expecting to send a firm some money, don’t automatically assume that the email request is genuine – if it’s a significant sum, always phone first. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.Everything in the bedroom is white including a white crucifix on a white wall. A holy man sits on the corner of a bed, trousers off, legs open. “You need to confess everything,” he says, gripping a young boy’s arm to pull him closer. “The Catholic church has been very good to you, to your mother, to your brother and sister. “You don’t want that to all go away, do you? So tell me, what else have you done wrong? What about when you think of girls? What do you do when you think of girls? If you can’t tell me, then you can show me. Show me what you do when you have impure thoughts.” The disturbing scene, with its sinister music, is interrupted by a roar of “cut!” It comes from Ed Gavagan, on whose childhood memories this narrative was based. Later, discovering that the criminal case against his alleged abuser has been dropped, Gavagan vents his frustration by smashing up the all-white set with a sledgehammer. This is one vignette from Procession, a haunting documentary that follows six men making short films inspired by their childhood trauma of being sexually abused by Catholic clergy and priests. The Netflix movie shows the group from Kansas City working through their experiences as a collective by scripting, directing and acting fictional scenes based on their memories and dreams. They dig into the rituals, culture and hierarchies of the church that silenced them. Director Robert Greene’s inspiration was not Spotlight, the Oscar-winning film about a church sex abuse scandal in Boston, but an August 2018 press conference with four men who spoke of being abused as boys by Catholic priests and called for grand jury-style investigations. “I saw this news conference and I totally fell in love with these guys and I almost couldn’t believe how moved I was by them,” he says via Zoom from home in Columbia, Missouri. Greene and a producer made contact with the men’s lawyer, Rebecca Randles, and proposed their radical idea for the film. She then approached the men with it. Greene, 45, recalls: “Of course they were skeptical coming in. They were full of doubt. It’s the most distrustful group of people for a very good reason. But I don’t mind that. In fact, I celebrate that a little bit because you don’t do this kind of work without a considerable amount of doubt. “You have to honor the risk being taken by honoring the doubt and the worry and the concern, so that worry and concern helped us build the metaphorical room that we would work in. But importantly, they always knew that in that room, there were always doors. They always had ways out. They never had to do anything. “The first meeting that you see in the film, I was upfront with them: ‘Look, this could be it. We could just talk about this and maybe we decide it’s not worth doing it and move on. You may think I’m not serious – how could a film-maker say that? – but I’m dead serious.’ Part of the point of that first meeting was to decide, do we want to do this at all?” Procession is not based on drama therapy but clearly influenced by its ideas. The six, including a location scout and interior designer, saw the potential to confront long buried parts of themselves. They took on roles in each other’s stories and used the same young actor, Terrick Trobough, to play themselves in every segment. Greene, making his seventh feature documentary, explains: “You make art for therapeutic reasons. That idea pretty much made sense to everybody on a basic level. They might say it’s weird but these are guys that Rebecca put into the room. She picked the guys that she thought could get something out of it and actually make it happen and could get through it safely. “The way she put it is: these are all guys who had their voice taken away at some point in the process so for those guys, it makes a lot of sense that, ‘Hey, we’re going to make something together,’ as an antidote to what happened to them. In that first meeting, Ed starts talking about, ‘It’s showtime, folks’, and everyone got it.” None of the men regretted that choice – one describes feeling a transition from victim to survivor – although raw emotions often surfaced. Greene admits: “Every single step along the way was difficult. In fact, every step remains difficult even today, when we’re talking about the film coming out or screenings that we’re going to. “None of this is easy but it’s a testament to the overall idea and the process of the film that there was never a ‘Hey, stop recording,’ because the camera being a part of it was instrumental in why they were doing things.” It had never been Greene’s intention to take the men back to the locations where the sexual abuse took place. But Gavagan asked to return to Cheyenne, Wyoming, to revive a childhood memory of a bell he used to ring. He steps inside the church for the first time in more than 30 years. Greene says: “You see it in the film and he rings this bell and he’s immediately brought back to his childhood in a way that is incredibly cathartic and those other guys saw it and they told the other guys and the ball started rolling. “Ed knew that he would have not done that without the guys and without the camera. Once we all realized with the guys and the camera, we’re almost invincible, that’s how we went into it. It was almost like, what else can we do? Because we started seeing results.” This is also a story of justice delayed and denied. Although four of the men received settlements from civil lawsuits, none of the accused priests was charged with a crime. Earlier this year the Vatican cleared the man who allegedly preyed on Gavagan, Bishop Joseph Hart of Cheyenne, Wyoming of multiple allegations that he sexually abused minors and teenagers. To Greene, it was a pattern in which police departments are cowed by the church, courts force survivors to relive their story over and over and not even a written promise from the Pope can pierce the inertia. As the project went on, what did he observe about the legacy of abuse in these men’s lives? “These guys, to varying degrees, consider themselves the lucky ones,” he says. “They are alive and it’s that simple. That’s a really good way to frame what the experience of living with this trauma is like. It’s just the fact that being alive is considered lucky. They didn’t end up on drugs or they didn’t end up suicidal. Many of them dealt with suicidal thoughts their whole lives and sometimes they didn’t even know why. “What you see in the film is six very different men who are in six very different places in their lives. But the common thing is this awful feeling will not go away. This feeling of shame, this feeling of being disconnected from your your childhood self.” He adds: “The thing to know about this abuse is not just being sexually abused in such a tender age, it’s being abused by an entire belief system. The Catholic church indoctrinates believers into a worldview which is demonstrated by these rituals and symbols and so it’s a level of abuse that is just very difficult to comprehend. There’s no fixing that. There’s no giving back to these guys what was taken from them. All we could hope to do is move forward.” Procession is out in cinemas on 12 November and available on Netflix on 19 November In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalIn Nigeria, oil has been more of a curse than a blessing. Weak institutions of state and poor governance in managing the vast revenues have led the country to fail to realise its full potential in a textbook example of what academics know as the “resource curse”. First coined by Prof Richard Auty in 1994, the term refers to the inability of nations to use their windfall wealth to improve their population’s lot and bolster their economies. The rich natural resources bring corruption and poverty to a nation, rather than positive economic development and, counterintuitively, these countries end up with lower growth and development than those without natural resources. The subject of extensive research, the resource curse, or “paradox of plenty”, points to an inverse relationship where wealth brings a detrimental impact. Nigeria – the largest oil producer in Africa, the sixth-largest global exporter, holds the tenth-largest proven oil reserve in the world – is arguably such a “cursed” nation. Dependent on their natural resource exports, these countries have on average, lower growth rates, lower levels of human development, and more inequality and poverty. They also have been found to have worse institutions and more conflict than resource-poor economies. It arises predominantly due to poor political governance and weak institutions, coming from the distinct phenomena around oil exploitation rather than possession – and is shaped by the multinationals, national and foreign governments, the foreign financiers and investors, alongside the structures of states and private actors in oil exporting countries. Resource wealth can have a devastating impact. Oil-exporting nations such as Nigeria, Venezuela, Angola and DRC have seen livelihoods and economies devastated, but there have been many countries throughout history, such as Norway, Canada and Botswana who have bucked the curse through strong state management and institutions that can stand against corruption. This is crucial, because the key thing the resource curse is indicative of is corruption: a global phenomenon that is the single greatest obstacle to economic and social development, significantly so in less-developed countries. Worldwide, an estimated $2tn is siphoned away annually by corruption. This amount could eradicate poverty, educate all the world’s children, cure malaria and bridge the global infrastructure gap. As defined by Transparency International, corruption is an “abuse of entrusted power for personal or private gain.” In 1996, the World Bank’s then president James D Wolfensohn called it a cancer and challenged all countries to strive for transparency and accountability to combat the pernicious impact of corruption on society, defining the consequences as redirecting resources from the poor to the wealthy, inflating business costs, discouraging foreign direct investment (FDI), draining public expenditure, misdirecting aid and undermining equitable national development. Corruption erodes the integrity of people and institutions. A synthesis of social, political and economic forces, it disempowers sovereign states, undermines democratic institutions and contributes to instability fuelled by the distrust and resentment of citizens. It attacks democracy by distorting electoral processes, perverting the rule of law and building new bureaucratic hurdles whose only reason for existing is to solicit bribes. Numerous reasons are behind corruption – self-interest, fear, greed and desire for power – but its consequences are always the same, enduring and deleterious. To absorb an influx of petro-dollars is a complex issue for any nation. Countries with these windfalls struggle to responsibly process the excess liquidity. Often they initiate large, capital-intensive projects without meaningful due diligence or feasibility studies, sacrificing wise investment. Expenditure on lesser prioritised projects takes precedence. They accelerate existing projects accompanied by lavish expenditure. Then, faced with rising inflation as a result of unmatched productivity, they race to absorb the liquidity and therefore relax financial discipline and propriety. The combined effect of these factors leads to the appreciation of the currency, which hastens the worsening performance of the economy and renders the non-oil sectors uncompetitive as exchange rates soar. This particular phenomenon, sometimes known as the “Dutch disease”, resulted in the near demise of the non-oil sectors in the Netherlands. Studies have shown that following an oil boom, an imbalance results as the non-oil sectors are left underdeveloped. As demand rises for capital and labour, the booming oil sector draws away those same factors from essential but less-lucrative sectors, such as agriculture, leaving them enfeebled. The windfall, having created a concomitant abundance and ensuing vast revenues, higher wages, and better returns on investments, leads to administrations finding themselves in new territory. Incompetence and inexperience in managing state finances creates higher incentives to attract corruption. Newfound wealth creates expectations by citizens and demands for resources increase, not just from state bodies but also from civil society. The middle class demands more social spending, unions demand higher wages for the same jobs, and the unemployed demand the creation of jobs. Bureaucracies are formed and quickly become ineffective or incompetent, contributing to accumulating foreign debt and operating at trade deficits. An economic trap or “rentier state” evolves. The state earns most or all its total revenue from the rents paid by foreign individuals, companies or governments. This leads to non-oil sectors shrinking, inflation spiralling, imports increasing in quantity and costs, more expenditure on political vanity projects, subsidies and welfare programmes to counter increased cost of living and the depletion of foreign exchange. With astute management and determination other countries have beaten the resource curse and steered their economies to success. So far, Nigeria has failed in much of its population’s eyes. Whether it is fated to become a failed state, only time will tell. Kenneth Mohammed, MA Corruption and Governance, The Centre for the Study of Corruption at the University of Sussex, is a senior adviser at Intelligent SanctuaryGeorge Cox knows how Erling Haaland feels, having spent the previous night watching Borussia Dortmund get ripped apart at the Johan Cruyff Arena. The defender’s Fortuna Sittard side have regularly succumbed to Ajax, including a 5-2 defeat in Amsterdam last season. Where Cox and Haaland differ is the former Brighton man scored twice. A 30-yard first-time strike too hot for André Onana to handle and a second pinged across the goalkeeper into the corner made people take notice of the impact Cox was having in the Eredivisie. “After that game, my phone had never gone so mental, it was baking hot,” Cox says. “It didn’t sink in until a day after that I had scored two against Ajax at their stadium. Still to this day people ask me about it and it will be one of those moments that will stay with me for ever.” Pitting himself against Champions League sides attracted Cox to the Netherlands in 2019. The left-back had spent time on loan at Northampton in League Two – a stark reality check after coming through the ranks at Brighton. To avoid having his development stifled in the lower leagues, Cox took the risk of moving abroad. “It was key to go somewhere I would play and that’s what mattered most,” he says. “If you go to League One, you know what it’s like, if you make one mistake you are out for six weeks, which is not good for development.” Cox’s success has not gone unnoticed back home and he came close to joining QPR in the summer, taking a tour of the training ground and working out where he would live before the deal fell through at the last minute. The 23-year-old knows the Championship or a move to another top-flight club abroad would be the ideal next step after more than 60 games developing at Fortuna. The left-back is being monitored by clubs in England, the Netherlands and elsewhere in Europe. “People are obviously telling you what needs to be better but it’s not like in England where you have four or five people screaming at you. It is very competitive but there is more of a learning process to making a mistake, whereas in England you need to ‘grow up and do this now’. For younger guys this is good and for me it’s been good but I am ready to take the next step now because I’ve gone past this stage. Younger guys who are learning get swallowed up by the lower leagues as they just can’t cope with it because if they make a mistake they’re out and cannot find a rhythm.” At Brighton, Cox trained with the first team under Chris Hughton but never featured in a competitive match. “With the manager now [Graham Potter], I think I would have suited the way he plays. If I was two or three years younger I think I would have got the chance there but I was at a point where I was needing to play games, so had to leave. Chris was really good with me, he always had me training with the first team but I just didn’t suit what he wanted from a left-back.” At Brighton heart monitoring detected an irregular beat which required surgery. If it had not been picked up during screening, Cox could have suffered a cardiac arrest while playing. With any sportsperson the news of a heart issue is concerning but the operation corrected the problem, allowing Cox to return to the game. He has made the most of the life-changing moment. “It was a life shock, it made me appreciate things a lot more, as you never know what is around the corner. It really opened me up as a person and when it opens you up as a person, then you become more open to more stuff in normal life.” Others have not been as fortunate as Cox, making each time he sees a player collapse on a pitch a stark reminder of what could have happened. “The [Christian] Eriksen one was a prime example and especially with how much was caught on TV was horrendous. It might have not got to that point but the fact they found it so early makes me very lucky.” Cox is one of a number of players to show there is a different path to the perennial one-year deals in League Two. Young players and those who are not enjoying life in the lower tiers come to Cox for advice. “Players who have gone down to League One or Two and it’s not worked out want to know what it’s like to play abroad. It is a good place for people to learn the trade.” He cites the example of PSV’s England Under-21 international Noni Madueke, who came through the youth ranks at Spurs. “It is a good place to play games and get experience against top teams. He is obviously playing in a top team but for me it is a case of wanting to prove yourself against sides like Ajax and PSV. It was the best thing to move here and it’s paid off.”My husband and I have been married for three years. He is 31 and I am 29. We have sex once every two or three days. But now we’re trying to have a baby and need to have sex for 10 consecutive days at the time of ovulation. This turns my husband off and at times it’s difficult to arouse him. He says that sex now is more of a ritual than a pleasurable experience. He says he does want a baby and he does like me. Instead, it’s some kind of internal pressure for him. As a result he cannot ejaculate on some days. Could you please guide us on how to deal with this? Being expected to ejaculate on demand is certainly a huge pressure, and many men who are trying to facilitate conception find it a turnoff. Try to soothe your own anxiety about conceiving and instead help him – and you – experience greater pleasure. Some couples seek to boost their erotic connection by approaching their lovemaking time more playfully, with games, dressing up or erotic toys. Experiment. Talk to each other about your fantasies and try something new. Simply shifting the focus from conception to pleasure and fun will make all the difference. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.I want to thank you for spending the time with me this afternoon/evening as we went through the news. Let’s do a quick recap of the big stories we saw today: Dylan Alcott, the first man in tennis history to complete the golden slam (winning all four major singles titles as well as an Olympic or Paralympic gold in one year), has announced that he will retire after the next Australian Open. An Indigenous man was shot and killed by police after a confrontation in Seven Hills in Sydney’s west. The Australian Capital Territory recorded 18 new Covid-19 cases today, NSW 224, the Northern Territory one and Victoria 1,069. Scott Morrison did a full 180 on his electric vehicle stance, announcing the government will spend an extra $250m on building Australia’s refuelling and recharging network - including putting 50,000 charging stations in homes. NSW hit the 90% Covid vaccine milestone. And that’s it for today. Thanks for being with us. Team Guardian Australia. Santa is refusing to get the vaccine ... The ABC is reporting a Santa shortage because some are refusing the vaccine. Santa manager Jessica Vatoff at photography agency Scene To Believe said they are short 60 Santas across the nation. “We have about 500 Santas, but we are short 60. So we are really opening up our recruitment, and we have actually taken on a couple of Santas in their late 20s. “You don’t have to have a beard and big belly because we can supply the belly, the beard, we can supply everything. You just need to love Christmas.” We have more on the squirt here, by my colleague Tory Shepherd. Some really nice news for Victoria tonight. Weak and outdated laws are allowing widespread money laundering in the property sector, making Australia a “destination of choice” for illicit funds and “locking many Australians out of owning their own homes”, a Senate inquiry has been told. The Senate is probing the strength of Australia’s money-laundering and counter-terrorism financing laws, and heard on Tuesday from anti-corruption group Transparency International Australia and its director, former Austrac general counsel Russell Wilson. For anyone wondering why the Liberals are being accused of flipping on electric vehicles here is the video of Michaelia Cash attacking Labor’s electric car policy during the 2019 election. “We are going to stand by our tradies and we are going to save their utes,” she said. There has been a lot of talk about electric vehicles today. My colleuge Royce Kurmelovs has a really good rundown of what the PM’s plan actually is and if it will work. In Victoria, over one thousand people are expected to rally outside parliament house this evening, to protest the state government’s proposed pandemic laws. At least three of the state’s Liberal MPs are expected to attend the protest, which is linked to the anti-mandate movement. Some of the main changes include giving the premier the power to declare a pandemic, allowing that pandemic status to be extended for up to three months at a time with no maximum time, and up to $90,500 fines and two years’ jail time for people who don’t comply with public health orders. Not so long ago Morrison said Labor’s electric vehicle policy would “end the weekend”. Now he’s spruiking his own plan, but there’s no substance to it, writes Sarah Martin. In Tasmania, Opposition leader Rebecca White has revealed a homeless young person was released from the state’s youth detention centre – and given a tent to live in over winter. “It is our understanding that a young person was exited into a situation where they didn’t have a home earlier this year and that they subsequently lived in a tent,” White said. “That is completely unacceptable for a young person to be given a tent in the middle of winter. “We know this government has a history of providing tents to young people on care and protection orders.” According to The Mercury, the centre will be replaced within three years. Anger at half-price fares! NSW Labor leader Chris Minns says the half-price fares on offer for commuters dealing with Sydney’s light-rail fallout is not good enough. “Look, it should be free,” Minns said. “At the end of the day, people that use the Inner West light rail shouldn’t be paying for the government’s mistakes. “They pay taxes, that infrastructure is in place off the back of the people of New South Wales’ hard work in terms of tax revenue, it’s completely screwed up.” The Bureau of Meteorology is busy briefing emergency agencies today, including the SES in NSW. Here’s the public message: A seriously ill 66-year-old widow has taken legal action in a bid to stop Gerry Harvey evicting her from the home she shared with her late husband, a longtime friend of the billionaire retailer. In documents filed with the NSW supreme court, Peggy Luker alleges Harvey promised her and her husband, Garry Dent, that the home would be transferred to them as the result of property development work he did, but this never happened. And that’s it for the day from Nino Bucci. He will be back live-tweeting Victoria’s IBAC hearings on Thursday - and I will make sure you get it on the blog. Just going back to Nino Bucci - he was covering Adem Somyurek’s questioning by Victoria’s Independent Broad‑based Anti‑corruption agency today. Wilson said the government is “empowering people” to be part of the emissions reductions journey. When asked how the government will choose who gets one of the 50,000 charging stations he said: “That will go through a proper process to make sure that the allocation is done to ensure that it is empowering consumers. “So those details have been worked through, but what we want to do is make sure that there is that infrastructure because there are huge consequences to seeing, particularly, electric vehicles go into the grid.” ... somehow I don’t think my rented sharehouse will be one of the 50,000. Victorian MP Tim Wilson is on Afternoon Briefing on the ABC talking about the government’s new electric vehicle plan - which involves partnering with the private sector to fund 50,000 charging stations in Australian homes. Asked about the government saying Labor’s 2019 election plan would “ruin the weekend” Wilson said: “The volume of vehicles available in the marketplace and the range of them, the cost basis in the technology has markedly improved,” he said. “You just need to talk to electric vehicle manufacturers and they will tell you how many more products in the marketplace.” Hello, half-price fares! This from the Australian Associated Press just now: Frustrated Sydney commuters forced on to replacement bus services after defects were discovered on the city’s inner-west light rail cars will be compensated with half-price fares. The NSW government on Friday revealed the L1 Dulwich Hill line could - in the “worst-case scenario” - be out of action for up to 18 months to fix significant cracking found on all 12 trams. Replacement buses have been running since last week, and are already transporting 5000 passengers a day. Transport Minister Rob Stokes on Tuesday announced passengers on those services would have their fares halved to $1.90 each way. However, Inner West Mayor Rochelle Porteous and NSW Labor have demanded the government provide free alternative transport. “This is a half price refund for a broken service,” said Labor’s transport spokesperson Jo Haylen, who is also the MP for Summer Hill. “Passengers shouldn’t have to pay for the inconvenience caused by the government’s light rail fail.” The highest proportion of vacant positions was in country areas, where listings were taking, on average, up to four months to fill, prompting protests across 13 towns and regional cities this week from Wagga to Coffs Harbour, Broken Hill and Dubbo. Almost 90% of schools in the Far West and Orana region had vacant permanent teaching positions in October, while at least 80% of schools in the Central West and Riverina had vacant positions and 67% of schools in the Richmond Tweed were hiring, new government figures showed. “The NSW Government is ignoring the advice of its own department about the critical situation we are in,” Rajendra said. Under the current payment scheme, NSW graduate teachers begin at a base rate of $72,263, rising to $87,157 after two years and peaking at a maximum of $114,720. NSW Teachers Federation president Angelo Gavrielatos said the sector was “heading into a perfect storm,” with a 25% increase in students expected over the next five years despite downward trend of completion rates and admissions. “We are barely graduating enough teachers to keep up, let alone continuing demand as a result of growing student population,” he said. “The shortages are proof that if we don’t pay teachers what they are worth, we don’t get the teachers we need.” A NSW Department of Education spokesperson said the union was in an award negotiation with the department and was “actively encouraging its members to agitate and disrupt schools across the state as part of its campaign”. In this year’s budget, the NSW government announced $124.8 million for a Teacher Supply Strategy to deliver a “sustainable pipeline” of teachings and develop a mid-career pathway into teaching. “Schools regularly have vacancies for permanent positions. These positions are normally filled by temporary teachers while active recruitment is underway, but will still appear as a permanent vacancy,” the spokesperson said. “This is normal for schools and for a system of NSW’s size. A staffing crisis hitting New South Wales schools has prompted a string of protests across the regions, following warnings the state may run out of teachers within five years. The New South Wales Teachers Federation deputy president Henry Rajendra said if the NSW government didn’t act to address shortages disproportionately impacting public schools in regional areas, country kids would “pay the price”. Department of Education briefings provided to Guardian Australia revealed as early as 2019 the state government was aware of supply challenges in the sector, and as recently as July had been warned of a “large and growing” shortage of teachers across NSW. One document released last year said the “demands and expectations” on teachers were increasing while rewards, pathways and learning opportunities weren’t providing “enough incentive” to pursue the career. “On average teacher pay has been falling relative to pay in other professions since the late 1980s and this makes it a less attractive profession for high achieving students,” the briefing read. “We cannot improve student outcomes without having a sufficient supply of high quality teachers available where and when they are needed…if we don’t address supply gaps now, we will run out of teachers in the next five years.” Supply challenges were also leading to a greater number of teachers being required to teach outside of their speciality areas. NSW public schools had the highest proportion of out of field teachers, with more than 100,000 young adults in public high schools being taught by teachers working outside their area of expertise. Rajendra blamed rising enrolments, a 30% decline in people studying teaching, unsustainable workloads and non competitive salaries for the shortages of full time and casual teachers. He said NSW state government MP’s needed to ditch a “one size fits all” salary cap in favour of a greater investment in country teachers. “Every year teachers have been asked to do more but every year their pay has fallen in comparison to other professions...if we don’t pay teachers what they are worth, we don’t get the teachers we need,” he said. It’s worth having a look at the big picture climate drivers nudging the eastern two-thirds of Australia into a pretty damp patch, as indicated by the Bureau of Meteorology’s outlook for coming months. In short, conditions to Australia’s west, south and east are all conducive to a wetter than average period ahead. The Bureau this afternoon released its updated fortnightly report on those climate drivers. To the west, cloud patterns in the eastern Indian Ocean are a sign warmer than average ocean temperatures in the region are still generating the moisture streaming across the continent now. There’s a dinky phenomenon called the Indian Ocean Dipole that gauges relative temperatures between the east and the west of that basin. Its negative phase, which has recently ended, was a big contributor to the damp spring in the south and east of the country. (During the severe drought, the positive phase primed the run-up to the 2019-20 Black Summer bushfires.) To the south is another gauge climatologists use called the Southern Annular Mode, which tracks how far north or south a westerly band of winds is blowing. This measure is in its positive phase - when that band is further north - and is forecast to remain so for the rest of 2021. Translation: expect wetter weather in eastern Australia but drier times if you’re lucky enough to live in western Tasmania. Finally, to the east, there’s a La Niña forming in the Pacific (some agencies have already declared one). The main models are anyway predicting how conditions will continue to favour such an event in coming months. In short, east to west trade winds are strengthening, bringing more moisture to Australia from the east. More on the ‘beasts to our east’ here. As the Bureau notes, though, regardless of whether La Nina thresholds do get crossed, the fact conditions are already ‘La Niña like’ raises the odds for a wetter than usual spring and summer for Australia’s east and north. In summary: there’s a good chance the floods we’re about to see in the next week won’t be the last before the summer’s out. Expect, though, a modest bushfire season. I think it’s been long enough to admit - I was into the pigeon. But on the Sesquipedalian Sea Squirt ... I am really not convinced. While we’re on sports and vaccines - the NRL confirmed today that unvaccinated players will be banned from training and playing in both Queensland and Victoria. NRL chief executive Andrew Abdo said he was not surprised that Queensland had joined Victoria in banning players. “We will adapt to and adhere to the public health orders and obviously that will mean that the very, very small group of players that choose not to be vaccinated, will have to adhere to those public health orders,” he said. “The public health order is you can’t enter the stadium unless you’ve been vaccinated, then those players won’t be able to train and play.” About 95% of players are fully vaccinated, with about 20 to 24 having not gotten the jab. The vaccination status of sports players is becoming a hot-button issue, with the Australian Open coming up. The federal government has said it’s open to having unvaccinated players come, they’ll just have to quarantine. But that’s out of sync with some of the states, including Victoria. Premier Daniel Andrews was asked about it earlier today and had some strong words: “You can’t have unvaccinated people unable to buy a ticket while unvaccinated players move their way around Melbourne Park,” Andrews said. “I don’t know why they would be let in, frankly. That is a matter for the commonwealth.” Checking in now with Nino Bucci - he is covering Adem Somyurek’s questioning by Victoria’s Independent Broad‑based Anti‑corruption agency today. NSW hit another Covid vaccine milestone today - the big 9 0. According to the federal government, the state hit 90.12% at the end of Monday. Here is a list of questions NSW police would not comment on in relation to this morning’s fatal shooting: Did the man suffer chest wounds? Was he being aggressive towards police officers? Was it just one officer who fired a shot? Are you able to clarify anything about the sex or rank of the officer-involved? Police said there were four officers in the house and would all be subject to “ongoing welfare care and attendance”. The NSW police spokesperson was asked what happens now. “Forensics will be involved but beyond that, it is a critical incident investigation that will prepare a report for the coroner. I think that is it. No more questions.” NSW police will not answer much on this. They will confirm the shooting took place inside the premises. “There were four offices inside the premises but I can’t yet confirm who fired the shot and how many shots were fired,” the police spokesperson said. NSW police are now giving an update on the shooting this morning. “Around 11.20am, Blacktown police attended an address in Bulah Way at seven Hills to search for a man wanted on an arrest warrant. “They were confronted by a 45-year-old man who was armed with a knife and an axe. Officers let out a number of shots, unfortunately, the man collapsed. “Officers used CPR but the man was unable to be revived. A critical incident investigation team has been formed and will investigate the circumstances surrounding the man’s death.” It’s pretty clear that it won’t take much rain for sodden catchments across much of eastern Australia to start flooding. As it happens, there’s already been a bit of rain in recent days, such as 113mm at Gunnedah in northern NSW in the past day or so, according to WaterNSW’s reports. WaterNSW is expecting Wednesday will bring widespread rain over the NSW northwest slopes and plains, northern tablelands of about 20-40mm, with isolated areas collecting up to 100mm. On Thursday, those in the northwest slopes and plains, northern tablelands and northern rivers regions can expect another 50mm or more of rain, with again the possibility of 100mm-plus totals. The Bureau of Meteorology predicts sizeable falls over the next eight days over a large area: They have also issued an initial and lengthy list of rivers likely to have minor to major flooding. As a result, parts of the NSW State of Emergency Service are gearing up for a “significant weather event moving from the north west of NSW to the east coast in coming days”. “The system will bring heavy rainfall and potential flooding to widespread areas of NSW,” the SES said. All SES units in the Northern Zone, for instance, will be briefed today at 6pm AEDT on the likely hazards. For now, Warragamba, Sydney’s main dam, is not expected to spill. It’s sitting at about 97% full. That dam last spilled in March, with large flooding downstream. Keepit dam is full and is among the inland NSW dams likely to spill. Wyangala, another big one, is at 99% full and is receiving about 30 billion litres a day. It will be spilling soon if it isn’t already. It looks like farmers racing to get their crops in aren’t the only ones likely to be extra busy this week. There will be a press conference in a few minutes with NSW police, after officers shot and killed a man during a confrontation in Seven Hills in Sydney’s west this morning. Dwyer said the driver then fled the crash scene before getting into a black SUV 2.5km away. “Police attempted to intercept .... the black SUV has driven at the police members and they were unable to engage further pursuit at that point,” he said. The driver is described as a Caucasian male in his 30s. Police are now undertaking a land and air search in an attempt to track him down. Dwyer said the driver was travelling above the speed limit before hitting the two workers. The driver is believed to have suffered some facial injuries. “Eyewitness accounts indicate that he was travelling at speed in the right-hand lane and at the last moment he made an attempt to avoid colliding with the ute on the road by veering left at the very last second but it was too late,” Dwyer said. In Melbourne, Victoria Police are giving an update on this morning’s hit-and-run in Carrum Downs. Police are searching for a hit-and-run driver who left one person dead and another with life-threatening injuries after hitting road workers in the city’s southeast. “It is just a callous, cold act. The act of a coward,” detective acting senior sergeant Jarrod Dwyer said. New Zealand’s parliament is on high alert after thousands of anti-vaccination mandate protesters, some threatening violence, gathered in Wellington and across the country. As of early Tuesday, about 2,000 people had gathered in central Wellington, and almost all the gates and entrances to parliament had been shut off. According to news outlet Stuff, the Speaker of the house, Trevor Mallard, said it was the biggest increase in parliamentary security he had seen since his election in 1984. This tweet from Luke, who is watching the Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of People with Disability. At the Senate inquiry into money laundering, Transparency International Australia’s chief, executive, Serena Lillywhite, has warned Australia is “highly exposed to money laundering and the flow of dirty money”. The Senate legal and constitutional affairs references committee is considering whether anti-money laundering laws should be extended to lawyers, accountants and real estate agents. Lillywhite said Australia is a “destination of choice for corruption-related proceeds” from countries such as Sudan, China, Russia and Malaysia which “too often ends up in the property market”. She said: “Money laundering is not a faceless crime. It has devastating impacts in Australia and overseas. It can reasonably be argued it is pushing up property prices in Australia and locking Australians out of owning their own home.” Lillywhite welcomed the Australian government’s introduction of director ID numbers, but wants much bigger reforms including a register of beneficial ownership. In April 2016, Kelly O’Dwyer, then assistant treasurer, said “we agree there needs to be a registry of beneficial ownership in our country”, but ahead of the 2019 election the Coalition backflipped and said it was not policy to create one. Market Forces isn’t the only environmental group left unimpressed by the cap on oil and gas lending that big bank NAB announced this morning. As we reported earlier, Market Forces said the pledge contained “tonnes and tonnes of loopholes and room for the bank to continue as usual” and amounted to greenwashing - something the bank denies. Now, community group Lock The Gate has also taken a swing, with national coordinator Carmel Flint saying: “NAB’s new policy is so vague, we doubt it will do anything to reduce the bank’s willingness to finance polluting and destructive greenfield gas and oil developments.” “They have left a huge loophole which allows them to fund new (greenfield) developments if companies claim the oil and gas is needed to meet domestic energy needs, despite companies regularly claiming that whilst sending most gas offshore.” She called on NAB to rule out lending towards projects in four oil and gas areas: Narrabri in NSW, the Lake Eyre Basin in Queensland, the NT’s Beetaloo sub-basin, and WA’s Kimberley region. “Australia is already awash with gas which we are shipping overseas - we don’t need any new development here, regardless of what gas companies claim it will be used for,” she said. Let’s link in with Nino Bucci - he is covering Adem Somyurek’s questioning by the Victoria’s Independent Broad‑based Anti‑corruption agency today. WA’s director general of health Dr David Russell-Weisz said the recommendations will strengthen the work of the hospital. “The inquiry team identified that notwithstanding the findings and recommendations improvements, PCH is an excellent hospital whose safety and quality is comparable to pH children’s Hospital across Australia.” The report will be released publicly in the coming hours and tabled in the state’s parliament. There will also be a coronial inquest into Aishwarya’s death. “I want to acknowledge Aishwarya’s parents. I spoke with them this morning because I want to apologise to them again of the tragic loss of a seven-year-old daughter. Their role in this report has been crucial,” Cook said. Cook said the inquiry makes 30 recommendations. “All 30 will be accepted and acted upon immediately and all of them will be acted upon.” In Perth, WA health minister Roger Cook is talking about the release of a report following an independent inquiry into the emergency department at Perth Children’s Hospital. The inquiry’s report comes after seven-year-old Aishwarya Aswath spent two hours waiting at the hospital on 3 April after she presented with a fever. She died minutes after she was finally seen. And in NSW – 254 people are being treated in hospital with Covid, with 42 in ICU. Almost 94% of the eligible population has received one vaccine dose, and close to 90% are fully vaccinated. An amazing number there! Let’s bounce down to Victoria where we have a breakdown of the state’s Covid numbers. There were 1,069 new cases recorded in the latest reporting period, a slight decrease compared to the previous day. Ten more people have died from the virus. There are 579 people in hospital. Of those patients, 90 are in intensive care. More than 92% of people aged 16 and over have received at least one vaccine dose in Victoria, and more than 84% are fully vaccinated. Gunner says masks are still needed in Port Darwin and Katherine inside shops, bars and all public venues. “You can exercise without a mask provided it isn’t a safe distance, but this includes the gym,” Gunner said. Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner has just spoken, confirming lockout restrictions across greater Darwin will lift at midnight. It comes after the NT recorded one new Covid case. “Some individuals have been identified as close contacts. We are doing final testing work with them now. These results will be back today and it is one reason why the lockout will lift at midnight. “All other close contacts are in isolation and all have been tested and all are negative.” Thank you, Matilda. Let’s get cracking on this afternoon’s news with Labor’s response to Scott Morrison’s announcement on electric vehicles. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese says: They’re once again not showing the leadership that’s required. Once again, Scott Morrison is following. The truth is that all of the auto manufacturers are phasing out internal combustion engines. There is a massive shift around the world to electric vehicles. Australia’s uptake last year was under 2%. In Norway, it was 70%. In the United Kingdom, it was 15% and rising. We’re falling way behind. You might remember electric vehicles were a big part of the 2019 federal election campaign – Labor went to the election with the policy that 50% of new car sales would be electric by the end of the decade. The PM warned it would “end the weekend”. With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Cait Kelly who will take you through the afternoon of news. See you all bright and early tomorrow! I want to try and goof on this old interview of Angus Taylor criticising electric cars because people would forget to plug them in to charge. But honestly, besides the huge price tag, that’s one of the biggest reasons I would hesitate to buy one. My laptop battery has already died twice while blogging today and I’m sitting right next to a power point. News Corp Australia has posted a $60.7m loss as the pandemic exacerbates ongoing upheaval throughout the media industry. The company blamed a $167m hit to advertising revenues on regional and community closures or digital transitions. More than 220 Australian newsrooms have shrunk or vanished since the start of the pandemic, while 111 have opened or expanded. The Public Interest Journalism Initiative (PIJI) collates public data for its Australian Newsroom Mapping Project. According to that data, since January 2019, News Corp Australia has had 116 “contractions”, most of which were the closure of mastheads or the cancellation of print editions. The figures show 20 News Corp newsrooms experienced growth with new websites, and it is understood an additional four News Corp websites also launched in that time. You can read the full report below: And I even missed one of his pit stops! I’m getting tired just watching the prime minister’s morning! One new Covid-19 case has been recorded in the Northern Territory. A 48-year-old man who was a close contact of a previous case has tested positive, but luckily he has been in quarantine since 5 November in the Howard Springs facility. This will not affect the lockout ending at midnight tonight. Gosh this man is packing a lot into a day! Remember yesterday when deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce said that Malcolm Turnbull and Kevin Rudd should stop publically criticising the prime minister’s dealings with France? I believe the term “dipstick” was thrown around. Well, Rudd is not all too happy about it and has jotted his thoughts down for us here at Guardian Australia. In the wake of Malcolm Turnbull’s witheringly accurate assessment of Scott Morrison’s character last week, conservative political operatives have become increasingly aggressive in demanding that former prime ministers observe “dignified” silence about the current government’s myriad failures. This, of course, is a transparent effort to shield Morrison from pointed criticism, particularly from his own side, ahead of the next federal election. It is also breathtaking in its hypocrisy. Mysteriously these political attacks by the Murdoch media and government ministers, present and former, only seem to apply to former prime ministers who dare to criticise Morrison. You can read his full opinion piece below: NSW Health have released further details on the four people infected with Covid-19 who died in the latest reporting period: Sadly, NSW Health is today reporting the deaths of four people with Covid-19 – two women and two men. One person was in their 50s, two people were in their 80s, and one person was in their 90s. Three people were from south western Sydney and one person was from Albury. Three people were not vaccinated and one person, a woman in her 80s, had received one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. A woman in her 90s was a resident at the Mercy Place aged care facility in Albury, where she acquired her infection. She was not vaccinated. There have been nine deaths linked to an outbreak at this facility. NSW Health expresses its sincere condolences to their loved ones. Speaking of the ACT, here are some details from AAP about the new, eased restrictions in place from Friday in the territory. Nightclubs can reopen and visitor limits at home will be scrapped in Canberra sooner than expected, after the ACT government brought forward the easing of Covid-19 restrictions. The changes were brought forward by two weeks due to the ACT’s high vaccination rate, which has passed 95%. From midnight on Friday, indoor and outdoor entertainment venues can host events with 100% capacity, while restrictions on cinemas and swimming pools will also be relaxed. Limits have been scrapped for visitors to the home or informal outdoor gatherings. More people will be allowed in pubs, cafes, restaurants and retail with density restrictions eased to one per 2 sq metres. Density limits will no longer apply to outdoor spaces. Nightclubs will also be able to reopen with dancing permitted, while punters will be able to drink while standing up. Organised sport can also restart in indoor settings. Face masks will only be required in high-risk settings such as aged care, hospitals, public transport and in schools. However, the government is still urging Canberrans to wear face masks in crowded settings. The measures will remain in place over the Christmas period and will be reviewed by health authorities in late January. Travel exemption requirements will remain in place for high-risk areas across the country. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded 18 new Covid-19 cases today. Touching base with Nino Bucci who is covering Adem Somyurek’s questioning by the Victoria’s Independent Broad‑based Anti‑corruption agency today. Is this a complicated pun about “bringing home the dough”? A driver is on the run after ploughing into several pedestrians in south-east Melbourne, with one person dead and another seriously injured. A red Holden was driving along Hall Road in Carrum Downs about 7.15am on Tuesday when it struck a number of people near the intersection with Lats Avenue, police said. One person, who is yet to be identified, died from their injuries at the scene, and another has been flown to hospital with life-threatening injuries. You can read the full details below: AFL legend Russell Ebert will be given a state funeral, the SA premier has just announced. There is news breaking in Sydney, where a man was shot and killed by police after a confrontation in Seven Hills in the city’s west. Here is what NSW police have said so far: About 11.20am, officers attached to Blacktown Police Area Command attended a home on Bulah Way, Seven Hills, to conduct inquiries in relation to an outstanding warrant. A [alleged] physical confrontation ensued and a man was shot by police. Officers conducted CPR until the arrival of NSW ambulance paramedics who worked on the man, but he could not be revived. A crime scene has been established and inquiries are underway. A number of residential streets have been closed with diversions in place. No further information is available at this time. OK, let’s check in with Nino Bucci who is covering Victorian Labor powerbroker Adem Somyurek’s second day of Ibac hearings: You can catch up on everything that happened yesterday below: Alcott: I am so proud, and proud of the work we have done, to be honest. Being a good tennis player is not the priority of my life. Being a good person is. Being a good advocate, community and changing perceptions for people like me so they can live lives they deserve to live and get the opportunities I have had. I am so lucky. We have all done this – my team, family, doubles partner, everybody that is a part of what we do. It is a big juggernaut but it has really changed perceptions, I hope, and I will never forget. Dylan Alcott, the first man in tennis history to complete the golden slam (winning all four major singles titles as well as an Olympic or Paralympic gold in one year), has announced that he will retire after the next Australian Open. The wheelchair tennis star is speaking now from Melbourne: Today I am announcing that the Australian Open in a couple of months will be my last tennis tournament. I’m going to get emotional talking about this. There’s no way I could finish my career a few weeks ago because the US Open was not my home. This is my home and the Australian Open changed my life. What better way to finish than in my home in front of crowds. The time has come, I feel redundant, I feel old, washed up. It’s the next generation’s turn to dominate and get the recognition they deserve. Really looking forward to getting out there and doing my thing one more time. We will see what happens. Just enjoying the moment. Lots of people resurfacing quotes from the prime minister from 2019 today: Just learnt the blog system allows me to include emojis in posts. Perfect timing. 👀 👀 👀 Changes to the National Cervical Screening Program (NCSP) mean all people eligible for cervical screening will have the choice to collect their own sample from next July. Medicare will fund self-collection of NCSP tests for everyone who is eligible for cervical screening, making it easier to participate, especially for people who screen at low rates. Self-collection will become a universal option, but those who prefer to have a screening sample collected by a doctor can continue to do so. Prof Karen Canfell, chair of the Cancer Council’s cancer screening and immunisation committee, said funding self-collection for all program participants would be a game-changer for cervical cancer elimination. Australia is already on track to be the first country in the world to eliminate cervical cancer, but by making self-collection a universal option, we should get there sooner and in a more equitable way. Currently only 52% of Australians eligible for cervical screening participate in the program, which is still well short of the 70% target recognised in the World Health Organization’s strategy for the elimination of cervical cancer. Participation is significantly lower in disadvantaged groups such as Indigenous women and other communities, and in individuals experiencing socioeconomic barriers to organised screening. A universal option to use self-collection will give these people more choice and control in the screening process. Research shows that self-collection is a safe and effective way to increase program participation, especially in the populations where we know screening rates are lower. This announcement is a huge step forward. And here is what Annastacia Palaszczuk has to say about the future easing of restrictions in Queensland, once the state reaches 80% double-dose vaccination for their 16 and overpopulation. (This is likely to be in mid-December, compared to 80% single dose, which is expected to be reached today or tomorrow.) This is a reward for the fully vaccinated and precaution for when what is the opening and as we see more cases. People can know that they can go to these places and know that they are safe. This is our next step in keeping Queenslanders say. I think people want to be able to go to a music festival or stadium or cafe and restaurant and know the people that are random are fully vaccinated and that it is safe for their family to go to these venues. It is really the time that if you are not vaccinated, go and speak to your GP about any issues you have, or your pharmacist, and please don’t get vaccinated. These rules will come in on the 17 December when we hit the 80% double dose. And to protect the vulnerable, this is very important, only vaccinated [people] will be allowed to visit our hospitals, except in emergency situations. New Zealand has recorded 125 new cases of Covid-19 in the community, across three different regions. The ministry of health says there are 117 cases in Auckland, two in Waikato and six in Northland, bringing the total number of cases in the August outbreak to 4,666. There are 79 people in hospital, including nine in intensive care. Of those in hospital, 83% are either unvaccinated or partially vaccinated. Just over 86% of the eligible population aged 12 and over have had at least one dose of the Pfizer vaccine, and 76% are fully vaccinated. Some more detail on Queensland reopening at 80% vaccination, which is is expected to come into effect sometime in mid-December. Reporter: Prime minister, you can’t really say you weren’t attacking electric vehicles just Bill Shorten’s policy. Morrison: No, I can, because it’s true. Reporter: In 2019 on 2GB you said: ‘What about all these charging stations, how much is that going to cost? I mean if you have an electric car and you live in an apartment, are you going to run the extension cord down from your fourth floor window?’ Now today you are focusing on infrastructure ,so you have to admit, it’s a fairly big conversion you have made. Morrison: Well, what we are seeing is a massive change in technology. Yes, yes a massive change ... particularly when it comes to hydrogen. Hydrogen is a big game-changer for Australians, it’s a big solution for Australia. Some years ago, when the Labor party was going to force you to go and move to a vehicle where technology had not arrived where we are at now and where it will go in the future*. They wanted to force your choice, and make taxpayers subsidise it. We just had a different view, technology is moving, it will continue to move forward. *Surely the future is the same now as it was in 2019 right? Back to the present and Morrison has doubled down, saying that he didn’t ever malign electric vehicles, only Bill Shorten’s policy. I guess you have to make up your own mind on that one. Here is Morrison: I am against Bill Shorten’s mandates trying to tell people what to do with their lives and what they could drive and where. I still don’t agree with it, and our policy takes a different approach. Labor loves interfering in your life, they love telling you what to do, they don’t like our plan because it does not tax you, does not force you to do anything. It does not pass laws that try to drive you out of any industries, it backs Australians to get this done because we know that they want to get it done. For reference here are Morrison’s comments from 2019, when speaking to Sydney radio station 2GB: I mean he reckons that 50% of the cars that we all are driving around in 10 years from now will be electric cars. But the share of the market at the moment is 0.2%. He hasn’t thought through what that means for diesel and fuel excise, that’s around about $11bn a year. What about all these charging stations, how much is that going to cost? I mean if you have an electric car and you live in an apartment, are you going to run the extension cord down from your fourth floor window? Speaking the next day: We don’t have a problem with electric vehicles ... In fact, we’ve been facilitating the development of the technologies. So look, the point about it is not whether electric vehicles are good or bad. In fact, they have a role to play, increasingly, in the vehicle fleet of Australia over the next decade. The problem here is Bill Shorten doesn’t understand his own policy. And in typical Labor fashion, they want to ram it down the necks of all Australians. So the cheapest car you can currently buy, as an electric vehicle, presently, my understanding is, including all on road costs and the rest of it, is about $45,000 to $50,000 a year. That’s the cheapest car Bill Shorten wants to make available to you to buy in the future, and I’ll tell you what – it’s not going to tow your trailer. It’s not going to tow your boat. It’s not going to get you out to your favourite camping spot with your family. Bill Shorten wants to end the weekend when it comes to his policy on electric vehicles where you’ve got Australians who love being out there in their four-wheel drives. He wants to say see you later to the SUV when it comes to the choices of Australians. And this is fundamentally the difference between us and Labor when it comes to these issues. I have no problem with the adoption of these new technologies and we facilitate it and we’re part of it. But what Bill Shorten wants to do, without seemingly even understanding what his policy does, is trying to drive people into these decisions and his policies simply don’t have the backing to explain how he will achieve the targets. Morrison has been asked if he regrets stating that electric vehicles would “end the weekend” in response to Labor’s EV election promises in 2019. I don’t think that policy was a good policy. I still don’t think it is a good policy. Labor loves to tell everybody what to do. They love telling people what to do. What cars to drive. I trust Australians that when they are presented with good options and prices, they will make good choices. I don’t have to tell them to get rid of the car they have now, that is what Labor wants to do. I’m not going to put up the price of petrol and families and make them buy electric vehicles. And walk away from the things they have. That is not the Liberal way and the Nationals way. I don’t regret opposing Bill Shorten’s policy, I oppose 45% emissions reduction by 2030 as well. So did the Australian people. I don’t have a problem with electric vehicles, [I] have a problem with governments telling people what to do and what vehicles they should drive and where they should drive them, which is what Bill Shorten’s plan was. Minister for industry, energy and emissions reduction, Angus Taylor says this announcement is the culmination of three years of planning. What we have seen today is the result of what this whole strategy is about. This plan is built on the back of the core principles. Technology, not taxes. Choices, not mandates. A portfolio of technologies, not just one. Batteries, plug-in hybrids, hydrogen vehicles, all of them are part of the mix of technologies that can bring down emissions in our economy, decarbonising our transport systems and provide better products in the process. That is the heart of the strategy. This portfolio of technologies, what we are announcing today is an extra $178m for this future brief fuels and vehicle strategy on top of the $72m we have already committed ... We expect to bring $500m total investment [which] will include private sector investments. Morrison: Australia has quite specific challenges here. We are not like many of the European countries where these vehicles come from, or parts of Asia. We will see the stations put in [around] metropolitan areas. That will be done by the private sector because it makes sense for them to do that. When you’re talking about long distances, when you’re talking trucks and ships, things like this that have to go over long distances, this is why hydrogen is so important for Australia. And why it is the fuel for Australia to enable us to achieve what we would achieve in terms of net zero by 2050. [We have] a plan that gives back to Australia instead of legislating jobs and legislating choices. Morrison: A quarter of a billion dollars has been invested in this to ensure we are doing the practical things. Taking action on climate change – it is a practical challenge. An economic challenge. It means you need to eventually have [things] in place for the hydrogen charging, just like what we’re seeing here and supporting those types of facilities. It is making sure there are smart charging facilities available to consumers. It is making sure you don’t crash the grid when everybody goes into plug in their vehicles in the future, which they will be doing more and more of in the future. It is about supporting, whether it is councils to translate their vehicles into hydrogen-powered vehicles for their waste trucks. Morrison says the new electric car funding package will be a key element of Australia’s plan to reach net-zero by 2050. Today, we are launching our future strategy and that is all about putting this technology in the hands of Australians to make the choices they want to make. We are not going to tell them what to buy or wait to drive or where they can’t drive, we aren’t going to tell them how to live their lives and interfere in their way of life, we’re not going to put their petrol prices up to make them by electric vehicles do anything like that, Australians will make their own choices. We will facilitate those by putting in place the infrastructure that enables them to make those choices into the future. Cost of electric vehicles, as Angus will tell you, that will come down as it happens with all technology. Timeframes get shorter, the cost gets cheaper and that makes it possible for more and more Australians. You don’t get people to take on new technology by forcing up their household costs on all the other things that are currently using. You do it by ensuring you have companies that are driving down the costs of their products and services to make them accessible to Australians so they can make the choices they want to make. Today, our plan, which is another key part of the overall national plan to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050, this is one of the keys building blocks. Scott Morrison says he wants Australia’s emissions reduction plan driven by free-market competition ... which, you know, has definitely worked in the past, for sure. Angus Taylor and I have just come back from overseas, Cop26, and there are a variety of responses and they all have impacts on Australia, and it’s important Australia has a clear plan to deal those. And a plan for securing Australia’s economic recovery has our pathway to net zero emissions by 2050 at its heart. And that plan is driven by technology, not taxes. It is driven by backing Australia’s choices, not putting mandates on them and telling them what to do. What we’re seeing here at Toyota and around the world, as Angus saw, and missing in our own country, is the cost of technology is coming down. The choices available to Australians and right around the world are becoming more accessible stop so our plans are all about supporting those choices. Facilitating those choices. Plugging the gaps where they needed to be plugged to ensure Australians can make the choices that they want to make. Our plans aren’t about sending a lot of taxpayers’ money to big multinationals to get costs down. They will do that themselves. They have a keen interest in doing that, just like Toyota, to make sure the product they are offering on the market for electric vehicles is competitive. What we want our emissions reduction plan driven by is that competition. The prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking now from the Toyota hydrogen car testing centre in Melbourne. Let’s hear what he has to say: Great to be with you. Exciting times because Australia is reopening. Just to see the feeling on the ground here in Melbourne is just tremendous. Looking forward to spending a few more days here as well. This is a really great time. Victoria, Melbourne in particular, has done it the hardest through the pandemic. I want to thank everybody. Melbourne in particular, are right across Victoria, because we have pushed through and it is great to see Victoria reopening, New South Wales reopening, borders reopening. The pandemic is not over yet, but we have come through this with one of the strongest economies in the world, one of the lowest fatality rates of Covid in the world, and now we are approaching one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. But the big task for us now as a country is to secure our economic recovery. This feels relevant right about now: So Scott Morrison has just arrived at Toyota’s hydrogen production and refuelling centre in Melbourne to talk about his new electric vehicle policy. (Electric vehicles and hydrogen vehicles are not at all the same, but that’s OK.) Speaking of Toyota’s hydrogen cars through, did you know I accidentally ended up trapped with one during Melbourne’s fourth lockdown, with absolutely no way to charge it? You can read all about my stressful adventure here: You know it’s nearing election season when the phrase “high-speed rail” starts getting tossed around. Don’t play with my emotions, Catherine! I’ve been stung before! Oh, I’ve been mentioning this whole Scott Morrison said that electric vehicles will “end the weekend” thing a lot this morning. If you are so inclined, you can find our original reporting on this now infamous statement from 2019 below: And here is our story from today on the Coalition’s electric vehicles strategy, which will extend funding for hydrogen and EV charging stations, but falls short of mandating targets for uptake or providing subsidies: Some bad news for unvaccinated Christmas shopper from Victoria today: The treasurer Josh Frydenberg is celebrating Australia’s economic rebound today. The weekly ANZ-Roy Morgan consumer confidence index rose 0.6%, the eighth gain in nine weeks, albeit with mixed results across the states. And National Australia Bank’s business conditions index rose six points in October to 11 index points, rising back above its long-run average and with all its components rebounding. (I don’t fully understand what this means, but it’s what Colin Brinsden from AAP reported.) NAB’s business confidence index also jumped 11 points to 21 points. Meanwhile, Deloitte’s annual retailers Christmas survey found 80% of retailers are expecting to see sales growth this holiday period, 20 percentage points higher than in 2020. More than half of respondents expect sales to bounce back rapidly post Covid-19 lockdowns, while 60% say more than half of the Christmas sales will be digital-enabled in some way. Tasmania became the first state in Australia to open a casino in 1973, and since then, it has become a place in which the gambling lobby’s influence on Australian politics is at its most bald-faced. Now, a bill about to head through Tasmania’s upper house has brought that influence into the open. The bill would mark the end of a monopoly on gambling licences in Tasmania held by Federal Group – a company owned by the Sydney-based Farrell family who are worth $564m – since it established that first casino. The Liberal state government argues the legislation will deliver an additional $8.5m a year in state revenue for essential services and community needs, at the expense of Federal Group. You can read the full report below: Pfizer vaccines for children as young as five are expected to be approved by Australia’s medicines regulator by the end of the year, AAP reports. Chief medical officer Paul Kelly indicates the green light is imminent from the Therapeutic Goods Administration on vaccinating children aged between five and 11. The TGA has received their advice from Pfizer. In terms of an application for that age group they are going through that process. That is a really important factor that will come through in the coming weeks, by the end of the year. It follows prime minister Scott Morrison stressing caution is needed on whether to approve the jab for younger children. We won’t take further steps unless there is clear medical advice that we should proceed. Seems like Scott Morrison will not be making an appearance on ABC breakfast radio during his trip to Melbourne! Here is an excerpt from Kieran Pender’s beautiful read about the struggle to rebuild for the survivors of the black summer bushfires in NSW. As the early morning sun rises over the hills of Wandella, a small hamlet of farms and rural properties near Cobargo, it is possible to momentarily overlook the devastation that tore through the area almost two years ago. Birds chirp, dairy cows roam the valley and a wet winter has left the area carpeted in verdant greenery. The national gaze has long since moved beyond Australia’s black summer bushfires, and even here at ground zero it is possible to imagine that day can be forgotten. But only for a brief moment. When the sun pokes above the adjacent ridge, it illuminates row after row of barren trees that betray the tranquillity. A potent reminder of the fire’s enduring impact, the trees are upright but still yet to recover. The same is true of those who inhabit this beautiful but now melancholy part of far-south New South Wales. For many, the long road to recovery has only just begun. As he surveys this vista from the construction site that is his home, Graeme Freedman is insistent. “I wasn’t going to be burnt off this site by a fucking bushfire,” he says. You can read the full story below: Jumping back to the unfolding drama in the New South Wales education sector for a second, with the state’s teachers’ union calling for better pay and conditions to address the teacher shortage: The NSW Teachers Federation deputy president Henry Rajendr has blamed rising enrolments, a 30% decline in people studying teaching, unsustainable workloads and non competitive salaries for the shortages of full-time and casual teachers. He said NSW state government MP’s needed to ditch a “one size fits all” salary cap in favour of a greater investment in country teachers. Every year teachers have been asked to do more but every year their pay has fallen in comparison to other professions ... If we don’t pay teachers what they are worth, we don’t get the teachers we need. Every parent in country NSW wants to be reassured that in every classroom there will be a teacher with the time and resources to meet their child’s needs. Yet the government’s inaction has seen the shortages grow and it is only going to get worse without real action. The highest proportion of vacant positions was in country areas, where vacant positions were taking, on average, up to four months to fill, prompting protests across 13 towns and regional cities this week from Wagga to Coffs Harbour, Broken Hill and Dubbo. The NSW Teachers Federation president Angelo Gavrielatos said the sector was “heading into a perfect storm”, with a 25% increase in students expected over the next five years despite downward trend of completion rates and admissions to teaching degrees. We are barely graduating enough teachers to keep up, let alone continuing demand as a result of growing student population. The government knows this, but kids are missing out and their right to a qualified teacher is being compromised. A NSW Department of Education spokesperson said the union was in an award negotiation with the department and was “actively encouraging its members to agitate and disrupt schools across the state as part of its campaign”. The NSW government has funded its first project from a $750m program to reduce emissions with a $13m grant for a company at one of the state’s biggest industrial sites in Newcastle, reports AAP’s Jack Gramenz. Commercial explosives maker Orica will use the money to install emissions reduction systems that NSW environment minister Matt Kean says are expected to cut emissions at the company’s nitric acid plants by up to 92%. It is the “first of many” projects to receive funding from the net zero industry and innovation program “which will help businesses accelerate their transition to net zero while remaining competitive and creating jobs”, Kean says. He expects the project to cut the equivalent of 567,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide per year, which is similar to the emissions of 50,000 homes. The Orica plants sit in one of the state’s biggest industrial sites at Kooragang Island in northern Newcastle. NSW parliamentary secretary for the Hunter Taylor Martin says “a small number of existing high emitting industries, including manufacturing” present one of the biggest decarbonisation opportunities in the state. The $13m grant from NSW will add to funds Orica borrowed from the Commonwealth’s Clean Energy Finance Corporation. The ACT has announced a number of restrictions will ease at 11.59pm on Thursday. These include masks no longer being required anywhere but high-risk indoor environments, school classrooms and public transport. There will no longer be any gathering limits on informal outdoor gatherings, no density limits for outdoor spaces within businesses, and eating and drinking while standing will once again be allowed. Dancing at nightclubs will be back and cinemas, theatres and outdoor venues with fixed seating will increase to 100% capacity. Huzzah! I mean technically it was “breaking” about two hours ago, but let’s let D’Ath have this one! NSW has recorded a slight bump in cases with 222 new infections in the latest reporting period. Sadly four people with Covid-19 have died. Victoria has recorded 1,069 new Covid-19 cases in the latest reporting period. Sadly 10 people infected with Covid-19 have died. About 800km north of Adelaide in the middle of the South Australia desert, an oil and gas company is working on a high-profile project to capture and store carbon dioxide. It’s claimed to be one of the world’s biggest carbon capture projects and lauded by the federal government, but what is actually going on at Moomba? Can this $220m project led by Santos really live up to the hype and will it store enough CO2 to make a difference? To find out all the answers, check out the explainer below: Kelly says rapid antigen tests are “certainly” a component of the education system’s Covid-19 plan. I have been working closely with colleagues in New South Wales, ACT and Victoria over the last few weeks to prepare for exactly the issues that have been faced and that is a rapidly moving space, in terms of how rapid antigen tests can be used in those circumstances, what is the minimum amount of disruption that can be done safely and that is important. The other important thing: two things to say about children, particularly in the primary school age group. Firstly, the TGA has received their advice from Pfizer, in terms of an application for that age group and they are going through that process, that independent process. That is a really important factor that will come through in the coming weeks, by the end of the year. The other thing is in that age group, even though the cases are in large numbers, it is a very small percentage of that age group that gets severe disease; 0.1% of the almost 40,000 children that have had Covid this year have ended up in the severe end of the spectrum in intensive care. For those few families that is difficult, but most of these cases are mild or even asymptomatic. Chief medical officer Paul Kelly has been out and about this morning chatting about how we shore up our school systems to ensure Covid-19 outbreaks disrupt learning as little as possible. Here he is chatting to ABC News Breakfast: It is wonderful to be in this reopening phase. We are one of the most vaccinated populations in the world now. Double 80% vaccinated across the nation yesterday and rapidly rising in all states, even those that are a bit behind New South Wales, Victoria and ACT. In terms of schools, we do expect school children who are essentially under the age of 12, currently unvaccinated, to be exposed to the virus. We are seeing that now in schools in those three states. The Doherty Institute modelling is clear, there are some things we can do to prevent that and respond in ways that have an important outcome, which is about keeping schools open and having kids at school, having face to face learning. The Northern Territory government is set to impose new health restrictions for 54 remote Aboriginal communities where less than 70% of the population has had one Covid-19 vaccine dose, reports Aaron Bunch from AAP. Anyone entering those communities from outside the NT, Darwin, Alice Springs and Katherine from 19 November must return a negative virus test 72 hours before entry. They’ll also need to wear a mask in public areas for seven days from Monday, with testing of symptomatic residents stepped up. The new rules were mandated after Doherty Institute modelling set a higher benchmark for remote communities and the previous 80% double dose target was extended to include people aged five to 11. It comes as a lockout of unvaccinated people in Greater Darwin is extended 24 hours until 11.59pm on Tuesday amid the NT’s first community outbreak. No new cases were recorded on Monday but health workers remain concerned after the traveller who brought the virus to the Top End confessed about the extent of her movements before she was located. Health restrictions were imposed in Greater Darwin and Katherine, 320km to the south, late on Thursday after an unvaccinated man in his 20s contracted the virus without leaving the NT. The diagnosis alarmed authorities when they realised the origin of his infection was potentially roaming about the territory. Katherine was fully locked down, along with unvaccinated people in Greater Darwin, until the source was found to be the woman who had flown to the NT from Cairns. A staffing crisis hitting New South Wales schools has prompted a string of protests across the regions, with warnings the situation is so dire the state may run out of teachers within five years. The New South Wales Teachers Federation deputy president Henry Rajendra said if the NSW government didn’t act to address shortages disproportionately impacting public schools in regional areas, country kids would “pay the price”. Department of Education briefings provided to Guardian Australia revealed as early as 2019 the state government was aware of supply challenges in the sector, and as recently as July had been warned of a “large and growing” shortage of teachers across NSW. One document released last year said the “demands and expectations” on teachers were increasing while rewards, pathways and learning opportunities weren’t providing “enough incentive” to pursue the career. The briefing read: On average teacher pay has been falling relative to pay in other professions since the late 1980s and this makes it a less attractive profession for high achieving students … We cannot improve student outcomes without having a sufficient supply of high quality teachers available where and when they are needed … if we don’t address supply gaps now, we will run out of teachers in the next five years. Oh, just in case you wanted to see how much Shorten was BEAMING during that interview: Now does former opposition leader and Labor frontbencher Bill Shorten has something to say about this electric car funding announcement from the federal government? Well, yes, of course he does. Here he is chatting to the Today show: You did hear about electric vehicles at the last election. Listen, imitation is the sincerest form of flattery in politics. It is correct that I proposed putting charging stations on the National Highway. Australia is in danger of becoming automotive third world. The rest of the world is moving towards electric vehicles. One of the big drawbacks on electric vehicles people are worried there are not enough charging stations on our roads. Labor proposed it and Mr Morrison must read my policy book at night-time for ideas and Labor is also proposing to reduce taxes on electric vehicles. I got one recently and one thing I hadn’t fully appreciated is that the cost of petrol disappears. Charging is so much cheaper. It is a cost of living benefit for Aussies. The Queensland premier has announced that once Queensland reaches the 80% single-dose vaccination milestone masks will no longer be required indoors. “That means no masks indoors including schools, cafes, pubs, clubs, hairdressers and workplaces,” Annastacia Palaszczuk posted on Twitter this morning. The premier said people will be able to put away their masks as soon as Queensland reaches the target, which could be by Wednesday. Queensland is lagging behind other eastern states in terms of vaccination rates with just 67% of its population fully vaccinated and 79% having received one dose. The state is not expected to reach 80% double dose rate until mid-December. The expansion of Afterpay and other buy-now-pay-later products into pubs and restaurants could lead to bigger debts for people already struggling financially, consumer advocates warn. Concerns were raised last week after news that pub giant Australian Venue Co had partnered with buy-now-pay-later (BNPL) monolith Afterpay to roll out the facility in the 160-plus venues it operates nationally. Afterpay and other similar products like Zip Pay and PayPal have been available in retail outlets for some time but the latest development heralds the arrival of the biggest BNPL provider into the Australian hospitality industry. Katherine Temple, the director of policy and campaigns at the Consumer Action Law Centre, said her organisation was already working with an increasing number of people struggling with BNPL debts. You can read the full report below: While we are on the topic of Labor ministers appearing in the media this morning, why don’t we have a look at what shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers had to say on ABC radio an hour or so ago? I welcome an election on the economy because an election on the economy is an election about eight long years of wage stagnation and flat living standards and weak business investment. We are not going to be taking lectures about fiscal responsibility from a treasurer and a government that wasted $38bn on a jobkeeper payment to companies that didn’t need it. Chalmers was asked also asked about the government’s new electric vehicle plan. How humiliating for a prime minister who said electric vehicles would end the weekend now trying to pretend all of a sudden, because we’re on the eve of an election, that he cares about electric vehicles. [Our] policies are tax cuts for electric vehicles ... We know that a few thousand dollars off the price of an EV will make a material difference to people being prepared to buy EVs. Voter approval of Scott Morrison is at its lowest level since before the outbreak of the pandemic, while the government’s handling of international relations has also taken a hit over the past month, the latest Guardian Essential poll suggests. After a torrid week on the international stage that saw Morrison’s feud with the French president dominating the agenda and Australia’s climate policies under the spotlight, the survey of 1,089 people tracked a six percentage point drop in the prime minister’s approval rating since October. The survey, which was taken while Morrison attended the G20 summit in Rome and the United Nations Cop26 conference in Glasgow, found 48% of those surveyed approved of the job he was doing as prime minister while 42% disapproved. This continues a gradual decline in voter satisfaction with Morrison, which has fallen from a high of 65% in February and is at its lowest level since the 41% recorded in March 2020 after the black summer bushfires. You can read the full report below: Albanese was asked if Australia can make the transition to electric cars without the subsidies and tax incentives that the prime minister has just annouced. What we would do is to eliminate the taxes, both in terms of the excise but also fringe benefits tax to make sure that companies could take up electric vehicles. That is the way a whole lot of new cars enter the system is through the take up by corporates, by local governments, state government and federal government and then you have the on sale of those cars. This government is doing nothing about reducing the cost of electric vehicles and that is a policy that we announced a year ago. In case you missed it, it seems Scott Morrison is a big electric vehicle fan now, despite once famously saying that they would end the weekend. The prime minister has announced $250m in federal “future fuels” funding (which he hopes will be matched by private investment) to install 50,000 charging stations and get 1.7 million electric vehicles on roads by 2030. But the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, isn’t going to let this policy flip slide that easily. He is speaking with ABC News Breakfast now. Another day, another pamphlet from this government. A government that, during the last election campaign, were saying electric vehicles would end the weekend, a government that had a violent opposition to the use of electric vehicles and now we would have it believe they have converted. The same government whose fuel security strategy consisted of having fuel storage in the Gulf of Mexico. The same government that has been in denial and what’s occurred here, just a couple of weeks after they released their climate pamphlet, is they are once again not showing the leadership that’s required. Scott Morrison is following. The truth is that all of the auto manufacturers are phasing out internal combustion engines. There is a shift around the world to electric vehicles. Australia’s uptake last year was under 2%. In Norway it was 70%. In the UK it was 15% and rising. We are falling behind and this is once again a government that was in denial about change, rather than shaping change in the interests of people. Good morning everyone! It’s Matilda Boseley here, ready to take you through all the most important news of Tuesday. Let’s start the day by wishing luck to the nearly 70,000 HSC students in New South Wales who will be taking their first written exam today, in less than ideal circumstances. They will be required to wear masks the entire time, will not be allowed to borrow or share equipment such as pens, pencils or calculators, and shaking hands or hugging other students is also banned. After the exams, students will be required to wipe down their chairs, and no mingling will be permitted before or after. Education minister Sarah Mitchell said the cohort “are some of the most resilient students we have ever seen”. The past 18 months have been challenging, but I know that HSC students across the state will walk into their exams [on Tuesday] determined to smash their goals. We are all behind the class of 2021 as they head towards the finish line. Written exams were pushed back by the state’s major Covid-19 outbreak this year, with major project deadlines also extended. As a result, Atars will also be published a week later than usual. OK, why don’t we jump right into the day!The bitcoin price has reached a new record high, breaking through $68,000 (£50,000), and analysts predict that the world’s best-known cryptocurrency will rise further in the coming weeks. This beats the previous record high set in late October, when bitcoin reached nearly $67,700 before falling back again when investors discovered a new cryptocurrency, shiba inu. Other cryptocurrencies have also risen to record highs, such as ethereum, which soared to $4,837. Bitcoin has always been volatile but remains the world’s largest digital currency, with a market value of more than $1.1tn. Five years ago, a single bitcoin was worth about $700. Investors are buying it because they are worried about rising inflation – as an alternative to gold, a traditional inflation hedge – and as bond yields are falling. Wilfred Daye, the head of the trading platform Securitize Capital, said: “Inflation is a major consideration for investors today, and the younger generation of investors often favours cryptocurrency as a hedge over gold. In fact, while gold has slid throughout the year, bitcoin and ethereum have more than doubled. Retail investors have played a major role in fuelling this shift and institutional investors are increasingly following suit.” Another reason behind the surge in ethereum is its recent system upgrade, he said. In January, the US investment bank JPMorgan made a bold prediction, forecasting that bitcoin could rally as high as $146,000 in the long run as it competes with gold as an alternative currency. The latest gains come after the US tech entrepreneur Jack Dorsey, the chief executive and co-founder of the payment service Square, said he was committed to making bitcoin “the native currency of the internet” and his company had no plans to expand its offerings to other cryptocurrencies. He told analysts on an earnings call last week the firm was working on a number of initiatives, such as hardware wallets to store bitcoin, and functions to allow consumers to mine for the cryptocurrency. However, the Bank of England deputy governor, Sir Jon Cunliffe, said last month that digital currencies such as bitcoin could trigger a financial meltdown unless governments stepped forward with tough regulations.Days after returning from the Cop26 climate summit, the prime minister Scott Morrison has released his long-awaited policy on electric vehicles. Morrison, who in 2019 said Labor’s EV policy would “end the weekend”, on Tuesday said his plan was “built on the back of the core principles. Technology, not taxes. Choices, not mandates”. The release of the future fuels and vehicles strategy represents the first substantive announcement from the government on electric vehicles. So here is an introductory guide to what’s in it – and what’s not. What has the government announced? Under the plan, the government says it will spend $250m – including $178m of new funding as part of a future fuels fund – to build charging stations for heavy commercial vehicles, passenger cars and households. The strategy says this investment will “deploy charging infrastructure in over 400 businesses, 50,000 households and 1,000 public charging stations”. How it will do this is not explained. Another “priority initiative” is encouraging governments and large corporates to buy EVs for business fleets. The plan states the Department of Finance is trialling battery electric vehicles in the government’s fleet of parliamentary Comcar vehicles and that hybrid vehicles make up 28% of this fleet. It says this trial will “inform the government’s future fleet purchasing decisions”. What didn’t make it in Under the plan there will be no phase-out timeline for petrol cars or targets for the take-up of zero emissions vehicles. The government says it will not introduce incentives to make it more attractive for people to buy EVs and it has ruled out introducing regulations that limit carbon dioxide emissions from vehicles. The strategy is light on key details. For instance, the government is not clear about how it defines zero emissions vehicles, and at times appears to lump hybrid vehicles with pure-battery driven electric vehicles and hydrogen-electric vehicles together. The “fleet first” strategy does not specify targets or timelines for government fleets that would encourage procurement officers to buy more EVs , and the government has only promised to “evaluate” the introduction of Euro 6 noxious emissions standards, which are part of a suite of regulations that ratchet up a vehicles engine efficiency up over time. The Australia Institute’s Audrey Quicke said the strategy “shows us more what they’re not doing than what they are”. “There’s not much new in this policy except for some charging infrastructure, which is welcome, but it’s a small piece of a thousand-piece puzzle,” he said. Will the strategy drive EV take-up? The government projects battery-electric and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles will make up 30% of new car sales by 2030, but has explicitly rejected the introduction of incentives to help people buy EVs and vehicle emissions standards to require a gradual shift to cleaner cars. It has not committed to the introduction of Euro6 standards on fuel quality. While the greater availability of charging infrastructure is necessary to allow EV expansion, there is nothing in the policy to help lower the cost of the vehicles themselves and make them more attractive to consumers. More work on this is being done by the states, but some are better than others. New South Wales has been praised for initiatives under its own electric vehicle strategy, which offers $3,000 rebates for the first 25,000 EVs sold in the state and exemptions on stamp duty. NSW and Victoria both plan for 50% of new cars sold to be EVs by 2030, while Tasmania plans for 100% of new cars by 2030. But will it cut emissions? Based on electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles making up a third of all new car sales by 2030, the government projects carbon dioxide emissions to be reduced by 8m tonnes by 2035 – less than 2% of one year of Australia’s emissions. It is not clear how this figure was reached. This is only a small dent in a large section of Australia’s national emissions. Transport is responsible for nearly 20% of national carbon pollution, and that share has grown steadily over time. How does it compare to other countries? While Morrison has stressed his government would not be “putting mandates on [Australians] and telling them what to do”, other countries have been setting dates to ban the sale of new petrol vehicles. Among the most ambitious are Norway and South Korea with plans to end the sale of new petrol and diesel cars from 2025. The UK will ban the sale of new petrol cars from 2030, and the sale of plug-in hybrid vehicles by 2035. US states like California will phase out new petrol and diesel cars by 2035, and the Biden administration wants half of all new cars sold in the US to be electric by 2030. Meanwhile China, the world’s single largest car market, has plans to end the sale of petrol and diesel passenger cars by 2035.“I like your handbag!” I say. “It was only a pound, from the pound shop,” she says. “No! I thought everything in the pound shop was £10.99. You’ve been undercharged luv, you need to go back and pay the rest!” This is an exchange I had with an audience member while I was on stage last week. Me and the woman didn’t know each other, we had a bit of a laugh, nobody was abused or attacked. It’s called banter. I know what it is because I’m a comedian: banter is my job, I do it every night. When I was a child, my mum and I were getting on a packed train at Birmingham New Street when a white woman came on board, pushed my mum off the train and said, “Get out the way you Paki bastard!” It’s been 30 years since that incident and I still feel sad and terrified every time I remember it. I remember the aggression and hatred with which it was said, and the horror not only of the word, but that nobody said anything to defend my mum. That is not banter. When the Yorkshire cricketer Gary Ballance came out and admitted to using the P-word against his teammate Azeem Rafiq, as part of the continuing row highlighting casual racism in sport and a national debate about racism in the workplace, the panel investigating said the use of the word was considered a “friendly verbal attack … in the spirit of friendly banter”. But I’m not convinced that’s true, even for comedians like me who can joke about anything they want. If I went on stage in 2021 and referred to someone by using the P-word or the N-word, the audience would turn on me. They would either walk out, tell me to get off, or if they were really polite, write a letter of complaint. They just wouldn’t stand for it. I say this, because even when I’ve made jokes about myself and my family, like “My mother wears the burqa – mainly because she doesn’t want to be seen with my dad”, many audiences find it uncomfortable to laugh. There is hesitation, a delay; it’s like they need me to give them permission to laugh nervously. White comedians say to me, “Only you can make that joke”. That’s right. But even so, people are cautious. They don’t want to be seen to be laughing at someone based on their colour or religion. It’s the same in the green rooms at comedy gigs. As comedians, we often banter with each other, make jokes and laugh at one another – but I have never heard anyone making a joke at another comedian’s expense based on their race or religion, and I am certain that if they did, they would be called out on it. It’s not always been this way, of course. In the 1970s, Bernard Manning and Jim Davidson were both racist and funny. It was acceptable then for them to use the P-word in their comedy, just like that woman on the train had, and audiences comfortably laughed along with it. Since then, however, there has been the Race Relations Act, which outlawed discrimination, and high-profile campaigns like the anti-apartheid movement, Show Racism the Red Card and Black Lives Matter. The world has changed. It has evolved. Racism is not banter. It’s racism. I am Pakistani. There are some who would say that calling me a “Paki” is an abbreviation of Pakistani. It is not. It is a racial slur that has been built on hatred, aggression and violence. It is associated with a time in history when my parents first came to this country and were abused and attacked because of the colour of their skin and where they came from. A better abbreviation might be “Stani” – that has no harmful connotations. I am from Birmingham and don’t find being called Brummie offensive either – because that truly is an abbreviation of Birmingham. There are things I say in private that I would never say in public, like how I must stop shoplifting from charity shops, and stealing sweets from the pick ’n’ mix. My friends say things to me in private as well, things about my moustache and my poor life decisions and bad haircuts. But even in private, they would never say the P-word to me – there can be no banter with a word that has such darkness attached to it, a word that is only ever used to demean and punch down. Duwayne Brooks, the friend of Stephen Lawrence who was with him on the night of his murder, said that he heard one of Lawrence’s assailants saying racial slurs before attacking him. If you think the N- and P-words are just “friendly banter”, you should ask Doreen Lawrence and the parents of others whose lives have been lost in racist attacks if they think the same. There really is nothing like British banter. We are the best at it. Along with queueing and tutting, it is a national pastime, like moaning about the weather. So what is banter? It’s the exchange of remarks in a good-humoured, teasing way. Banter might take aim at the clothes people are wearing, their hairstyle, their facial hair, their shoes. Racism should never come into it. I would be very happy to create a list for every football and cricket ground just to make that clear. Shazia Mirza is a comedian. Her latest show, Coconut, is on tour from 16 NovemberThanks to the pandemic, most of us now know what it’s like to be apart from those we love: for the rest of our lives, we’ll remember the waiting and the longing, the fear of being forgotten. Is this why I found Keum Suk Gendry-Kim’s masterly new graphic novel, The Waiting, so extremely painful to read? Perhaps. I know that I brought some of my own stuff to this, an account – half fact, half fiction – of families separated by the Korean war, tears rolling down my face as I turned its inky pages. But I won’t compare my own experiences to those of its characters – they don’t even come close – and nor do I want to take anything away from her achievement in this book, her first since the award-winning Grass (a novel about a Korean girl who becomes a “comfort woman” during the second world war). Keum takes the reader inside some of the human heart’s most inaccessible chambers, places that are all but closed to most visitors – and yet she does so almost casually, the stark economy of her drawings no guide at all to their lasting emotive power. What a talent she is. Her story (translated by Janet Hong) is told in two time frames. In 21st-century Seoul, Song Gwija, who fled her home in the north as the war broke out, only wants to see the son from whom she was separated during the long march south before she dies. Her hope rests on a Red Cross programme that every few years briefly reunites a small number of relatives; under the eye of North Korean minders, they get to spend just a single day and night together. But what chance does she have? Her name is never among those selected – and no wonder. While more than 56,000 people are still registered with the Red Cross (the same number again have since died), each reunion is capped at just 200 individuals. So far, Keum writes in a footnote, only 2,000 South Korean families have managed to meet their loved ones in North Korea. Song Gwija’s artist daughter, Jina, is often frustrated with her mother. For her generation, the war is a far-off thing; in her childhood, her traumatised parents rarely spoke of it. Most reunions are, in any case, agonising. Her mother’s neighbour, who did get lucky, barely recognised her sister when they met and all the time they were together, the clock was ticking; they would soon have to say goodbye for ever. But in a long flashback, she also reveals why her mother cannot let go. What mind could ever forget the horror of such sudden and frenzied migration, American jets turning their fire on the long caravan of weary refugees, babies left to freeze to death at the side of the road? In this chaos, Song Gwija’s separation from her husband and little son seemed to her, in the moment, to be a less desperate thing. Surely they would be reunited further down the road? Anything else was unimaginable. Only later did she feel guilty, haunted by the way her life changed in as long as it took to turn her back. Though Keum’s characters are fictional, this account is based on the experiences of her mother and perhaps this is why she is able to tell it so honestly. She knows, first hand, that people only do what they must to survive. The Waiting involves many miracles, not least its author’s brushwork, at once beautiful and forbidding. But chief among them is surely the fact that without her own mother’s tenacity and courage, it would not exist at all. The Waiting by Keum Suk Gendry-Kim is published by Drawn &amp; Quarterly (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyNearly 60 years after his career began, Rod Stewart is returning on 12 November with what he’s talking up as “by far my best album in many a year”, The Tears of Hercules – and he will answer your questions about it and anything else in his long career. Stewart, 76, has had an astonishing life, starting out as a teenage busker and aspiring footballer who ditched the beautiful game for music: “I can also get drunk and make music, and I can’t do that and play football,” he later reasoned. He was a journeyman singer and harmonica player in London’s blues and R&amp;B scenes in the mid-1960s, getting his break with the Jeff Beck Group alongside Ronnie Wood. As a mod who had heard rock’n’roll come of age as well as soul, Stewart was a cosmopolitan figure whose hoarse voice made him legitimately bluesy. All this was brought to bear on his post-Beck phase, when he fronted the Faces (previously the Small Faces) while also starting a solo career, and had hits in each mode. 1971’s Maggie May topped the US and UK charts, as did its parent album Every Picture Tells a Story, while the Faces’ Stay With Me was also a transatlantic hit. Juggling both roles couldn’t last – friction in the Faces grew, Wood was courted by the Rolling Stones, and the band split in 1975 – but Stewart consolidated his solo career, scoring major hits with the ballads Sailing, Tonight’s the Night, and his cover of The First Cut is the Deepest. He strutted through the glam and disco eras with hits like Da Ya Think I’m Sexy? and Hot Legs, and into the glossy 80s with Baby Jane. His hit rate continued even as peers faltered – only one of the 27 solo albums since Every Picture Tells a Story has missed the UK Top 10 – and he spent a successful spell doing versions of songs from the Great American Songbook across five volumes, plus albums of rock, soul and Christmas covers. He admitted in 2013, “I backed myself into an alley because there’s not much left to do except write,” and returned to original songwriting, to further success. Collaborations have been wide-ranging, from Dolly Parton to Diana Ross, Stevie Wonder to ASAP Rocky. Throughout, there have been a succession of invariably blond and statuesque partners alongside another acute passion: model railways. In 2019, he unveiled a creation 26 years in the making, a gargantuan 1,500-square foot railway based on industrial cities of 1940s America. It’s a lot to take stock of, and Stewart will take on questions ranging right across his career – post them in the comments below before noon on Friday 12 November. We will publish his answers on Friday 19 November, online and in print in the Film &amp; Music section.Meet artist Michael Kutschbach’s Sesquipedalian Sea Squirt. The somewhat strange “responsive sculpture” now graces the seaside suburb of Glenelg in Adelaide. Not since the days of Magic Mountain, which once towered over tourists like a teetering pile of guano, has Glenelg hosted such a beast. And not since Blackfriars Priory School unveiled a statue of a Catholic brother, a child, and a deeply inappropriate loaf of bread has Adelaide garnered such attention for its art. (Although a giant pigeon erected in Rundle Mall came close). The Squirt stands 3 metres tall on proud blue tripod legs, its bulbous eyes looking down on passersby. It appears to be gestating a bowling ball. Kutschbach says it’s a “generous, fun, colourful and responsive sculpture”. “Given the textures on it, it’ll be irresistible to touch. I hope it’ll come across as a very friendly, strange thing – one that arouses curiosity.” Those who cannot resist a quick fondle will be rewarded with a squirt of water, which some critics said was more of a drizzle. ABC radio listeners in Adelaide were divided. “This alleged sculpture looks like a very large poo, after bubble tea,” one said. “Nice to have bespoke art,” said another. The inspiration for the Squirt, which local mayor Amanda Wilson described as “surrealist art … intended for people to think about it”, came from the local sea squirts. Hermaphroditic sea squirts live alone, or in colonies that can number in the thousands. For hundreds of millions of years, they have been squirting water on whatever animal steps on them. The sac-like creatures have muscular holes called “siphons” – one draws water in, and the squirt filters and feeds off the plankton, then the other siphon expels the water. These squirts are threatened by the warming waters and sea level rises that come with climate change, as well as by marine pollution. The artist has not yet explained why his Squirt is called Sesquipedalian – perhaps he just didn’t have the words.The UK justice secretary, Dominic Raab, has defended the MP and former attorney general Geoffrey Cox for working for a month in the British Virgin Islands (BVI) during lockdown. Earlier this year, Cox earned more than £150,000 in his second job as a lawyer advising the Caribbean tax haven in relation to corruption charges brought by the Foreign Office. Raab, who was foreign secretary at the time, said Cox was legitimately working as long as the job was properly declared. Speaking to Times Radio, he said: “I’m not going to get dragged into what individual MPs do, but having the former attorney general – and he was hired by the government of the BVI – to advise them on how to correct and deal and address these allegations, is a legitimate thing to do as long as it’s properly declared.” He added: “I was foreign secretary that commissioned a commission of inquiry [into the BVI] given the allegations of misgovernance and very serious ones, including criminal wrongdoing.” Raab said it was important for parliamentarians, such as Cox, to have expert insights into the UK overseas territories such as the BVI. He said: “It’s quite important that parliament, which is responsible residually for some areas of our relationship with the overseas territories, has got some knowledge of what’s going on in those territories … Actually being in touch and working with our overseas territory is quite important piece of the responsibilities in the UK and indeed our parliament. The Daily Mail reported that Cox spent up to a month in the BVI working for the international law firm Withers. At the time, when he was working 4,000 miles away from his Devon constituency, Cox voted in the Commons by proxy. The Mail quoted a senior Whitehall source claiming Cox had been “pocketing hundreds of thousands of pounds to help stop the exposure of corruption in a Caribbean paradise”. Cox’s register of interests entry shows he is being paid £400,000 a year by Withers. Asked by BBC Radio 4’s Today programme whether Cox was serving the needs of his Torridge and West Devon constituency by working the equivalent of 35 hours a week on his legal work, Raab said: “It’s for the voters in any individual constituency to look at the record of their MP and decide whether they’ve got the right priorities.” Raab also insisted that Boris Johnson followed hospital rules despite being pictured on Monday without a mask at a hospital in Hexham, Northumberland. The prime minister was criticised for using the visit as an excuse to miss a Commons debate about standards following the government’s botched attempt to save Owen Paterson from suspension after he had been found guilty of paid advocacy. Raab told Times Radio said: “He [Johnson] followed the clinical rules that were applied in the settings in the hospital and it absolutely right that he was up there, as part of our strategy to not just deal with Covid but get the NHS backlog down.” He added: “In any clinical setting, you follow the rules that are applied there. I wasn’t there but my understanding is that that’s exactly what happened.” Raab also repeated the government’s position that it was mistake to try to save Paterson by trying to overhaul the standards system. He said: “I do think it’s been a mistake to conflate the individual case of an MP with the wider legitimate question which was debated by all members and all sides of the House of Commons yesterday about the due process and the question of an appeal. “I think that was a mistake that we regret, but it is right to make sure we get a process which is both robust and sustainable.”A former Victorian government minister has admitted signing off timesheets that allowed a staff member doing factional work to be paid with taxpayer funds – but Adem Somyurek has denied trying to hide that other employees were performing similar tasks. Somyurek told the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission he agreed it was wrong and he had lied when he signed a timesheet approving the payments to a casual staff member he knew was doing work on behalf of the faction at the time. The commission is investigating whether public resources were misused as part of a widespread branch stacking operation within the moderate faction of the Victorian Labor party branch. Branch stacking is not illegal but is a breach of party rules. Text messages were shown to the commission that indicated Somyurek was aware that a staffer for the faction, Salazar Youhorn, was required to sort out “member discrepancies” within the Cambodian community at the office of the MP Meng Heang Tak in July 2019. Ensuring the accuracy of member details was a central part of factional work, the commission has heard. But on the day the work was being done in Tak’s office, Somyurek signed a time sheet saying Youhorn had instead been doing a “project” in his office. The parliamentary employment timesheet, a copy of which was shown during the hearing on Tuesday, specified “payment must not be claimed for party political activities”. Somyurek agreed with a suggestion from counsel assisting the commission, Chris Carr SC, that signing the form “was a lie”. “I’m not going to be cute about it ... yeah, it’s wrong,” Somyurek said. Soon after, when Carr asked “what about that is not corruption”, Somyurek responded: “Yeah, OK.” Carr told Somyurek that Ibac had uncovered dozens and dozens of similar timesheets relating to employees signed by Somyurek with a box checked indicating other duties and then specifying “working on project”. In a separate example involving Youhorn, both Somyurek and Tak paid him for work he supposedly did for each of them on the same day in June 2020, according to two timesheets showed at the hearing. “There’s obviously a confusion,” Somyurek said. “I can’t see anything sinister in it.” Another staffer paid by Somyurek, Jacob Cripps, had given evidence to the commission he was specifically told not to show up to Somyurek’s electorate office. Carr said Cripps had given evidence the job “was effectively just a charitable thing that he would be given free money by the taxpayer because he was going through a hard time”. Cripps was paid after Somyurek signed a timesheet similar to the dozens of others uncovered by Ibac, Carr said. Somyurek vehemently denied the staffer would have been told not to show up to work or expected not to do any work. But he said the staffer was given the job because he had been sacked by another faction for switching allegiances to Somyurek’s faction. Carr also asked Somyurek about Dr Hussein Haraco, who was paid by Somyurek’s office for multiple days while working from home because of Covid-19 restrictions last year, but allegedly did not log on to his computer on those days. In a phone call intercepted by Ibac in June 2020, Somyurek told Rick Garotti, a factional ally close to Haraco, that he wanted Haraco to be careful, given that Ibac had started its investigation. He said he wanted Haraco to be careful with “everything”, including logging on, but denied a suggestion from Carr that this was because he was trying to conceal from Ibac the factional work his staffers were doing. “When Ibac goes into something they’re going to get everything,” Somyurek said on Tuesday. “You can’t hide.” The Ibac commissioner, Robert Redlich QC, responded: “I wish that was true, Mr Somyurek – you would be surprised how limiting the legislation is.” Earlier on Tuesday, Somyurek said he “lost all perspective” during a fierce factional battle and should be “condemned” for his behaviour during the period. But he reiterated that he did not sanction widespread rorting of public funds. In a recording of a March 2020 conversation played during Somyurek’s evidence, the upper house MP was told by an unidentified Labor staffer working on behalf of the faction that she suspected signatures on some membership forms had been forged. “Fuck,” Somyurek responds, before asking, “Do people check that much?” Carr asked whether this indicated Somyurek felt “no compunction” about the forgeries, to which Somyurek agreed, saying the only other possibility was that he thought the Labor staffer was being pedantic. He said that ultimately he accepted his behaviour during this period had been blinded by a factional battle with the socialist left. “I had lost all perspective, and you can condemn me in the strongest possible terms,” he said. Somyurek also agreed that earlier in the same discussion he had agreed to pay the membership fees for “Somalis”, in breach of party rules. There was a discussion during the same conversation about who would pay for the fees for members from Indian ethnic backgrounds. “I’m not trying to say this was anything pure or proper, I’m not trying to justify it,” Somyurek said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Somyurek, who indicated during his evidence that he was working on a book about his time in politics, was again told multiple times by Carr andRedlich to directly answer questions. He has made repeated mention of the difference between publicly funded staff performing factional work during part of their rostered hours, as opposed to doing full-time political work, as was uncovered during the Red Shirts scandal. Carr described this as Somyurek’s “proportionality analysis” to determining what was corrupt, saying it was his position that “as long as it’s only days here or there, there’s no corruption involved”. Somyurek also repeatedly emphasised that there simply was not enough factional work that needed to be completed that would justify the hiring of people on publicly funded salaries purely for that purpose. But Somyurek agreed with Redlich that he never told his staff “thou shalt not do factional work during working hours”, partially because he thought it was permitted under laws governing the use of parliamentary staff, and that it was common within politics. Somyurek’s evidence began on Monday when he accused the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, of dismissing his concerns about Labor’s red shirts scandal. This was a $388,000 scheme involving the misuse of parliamentary allowances to pay Labor’s political campaign staff before the 2014 election. Somyurek described the red shirts scandal to Ibac as “a gold standard rort”. He said that when he raised his concerns with Andrews, who was then opposition leader, he responded with “words to the effect ... [do] you want to win an election or not, basically”. Somyurek said he had given evidence regarding this meeting with Andrews to a parliamentary committee in 2017 or 2018. Asked about the claims on Tuesday, Andrews said Labor had made “a number of important rule changes” since the Victorian ombudsman’s investigation into the scheme. He said the party was “deeply regretful” of the red shirts affair, had already accepted responsibility for it and that he would appear before Ibac if asked to. Somyurek’s evidence continues on Thursday.The Afro-Guyanese writer John Agard has become the first poet to receive the BookTrust lifetime achievement award. Agard, who was born in Georgetown, Guyana and moved to England in 1977, has been a fixture on the curriculum since 2002 for poems including Half-Caste (“Explain yuself / wha yu mean / when yu say half-caste / yu mean when picasso / mix red an green / is a half-caste canvas?”) and Checking Out Me History. Winning the Queen’s award for poetry in 2012, he is the author of more than 50 books for children and adults. “John’s incredible words have caught the imagination of a whole generation of children,” said Diana Gerald, chief executive of the reading charity, which has given its lifetime achievement award in the past to some of the biggest names in children’s literature, from Shirley Hughes to Raymond Briggs and the late Judith Kerr. The prize is intended to celebrate the work of an author or illustrator who has made an outstanding contribution to children’s literature, with judges this year including Gerald and the authors Frank Cottrell-Boyce and Piers Torday. They singled out Agard’s “persistence and creativity in championing and challenging the language norms that too often dominate literature and the curriculum as well as his ability to connect with children today and inspire them to reach for their goals and aspirations, whatever they may be. “I’m particularly thrilled that this year’s award is going to someone who explores and experiments with different ideas and genres, showing children and adults everywhere just what language can do and demonstrating the power of an authentic voice when it comes to storytelling – important messages that children today, whatever their background, need to see, experience and have access to,” said Gerald, adding that Agard’s writing has “challenged and changed how poetry is studied and enjoyed in the classroom and demonstrated that it is a modern and relevant medium with the ability to connect with children”. Agard said it meant a lot to him to receive the prize. “I feel happy that I’ve stuck with this craft since I was a 16-year-old boy writing in a classroom in a Caribbean ex-colony. It’s not just me receiving this award, but all the people that inspired me,” he said. “People like my teacher Father Maxwell, the people who published my books, those who contributed to my journey way back in the Caribbean, and John Arlott, the legendary cricket commentator who inspired me with his words.” “Very often, poetry is marginalised, and fiction gets a high profile,” said the author. “By being the first poet, I’m excited, because I see it also as a mark of recognition for poetry. Because let us not forget that going right back in our evolutionary DNA, poetry was the medium of utterance, ecstasy, a lullaby, an incantation, so before you had things written down, there was poetry. But somewhere along the line, particularly in the western tradition, the oral was cut off from the written, and then poetry began to be perceived as something abstract and airy fairy and not about the concrete fact. But let us face it: do we want to dwell in a world of concrete facts?” Agard wrote his first poem in the sixth form, on the back of an exam paper – which he failed, although his teacher admitted it was a good poem and it went on to be published in a magazine. He taught French and Latin at O-level after he completed his education, before working as a librarian and moving to England in 1977 where he became a touring lecturer for the Commonwealth Institute to promote a better understanding of Caribbean culture. He visited 2,500 schools over the next eight years, and began to write poetry for children. “I was a teacher for a year but I never dreamed I was going to be a teacher; a librarian, but I didn’t plan to be a librarian. But that was a good grounding and a lovely experience. My mum felt poetry was a hobby, so I hesitated for a while to say I was a poet, but as time went by I took a delight in saying I was a poet – especially when I’d arrive at immigration, and they’d say ‘what do you do? I’d enjoy in a secretive, quietly humorous way saying poet, because people respond differently to you then,” said Agard. He added that he still gets “excitement from language”, and finds “joy in standing in front of people and reading a poem … I know this thing connects. This thing could touch a soul. This thing doesn’t have to be didactic; I don’t have to preach to people. My whole brain is on a tidal wave of delight.”Drake, who guested during the Travis Scott concert at Houston’s Astroworld festival where eight people died and many more were injured, has posted a statement about the incident. “I’ve spent the past few days trying to wrap my mind around this devastating tragedy,” he wrote on Instagram. “I hate resorting to this platform to express an emotion as delicate as grief but this is where I find myself. My heart is broken for the families and friends of those who lost their lives and for anyone who is suffering. I will continue to pray for all of them, and will be of service in any way I can. May God be with you all.” The Canadian rapper, one of the most popular artists globally, was named in a lawsuit filed earlier this week alongside Scott and promoters Live Nation. The lawsuit states that Drake “helped incite the crowd”, who surged forward and caused the crush that resulted in the fatalities and injuries. Drake has not commented on the claims. Scott, who founded the festival in 2018, said in a statement that he was unaware of the injuries: “Anytime I can make out anything that’s going on, ya know, I stop the show and you know, help them get the help they need. I could just not imagine the severity of the situation.” His partner Kylie Jenner said: “I want to make it clear we weren’t aware of any fatalities until the news came out after the show and in no world would have continued filming or performing.” Her sister Kim Kardashian West said Scott “cares so much about his fans and is truly devastated”. Scott has pledged refunds for all ticketholders to the festival, and said he would cover funeral costs for the victims’ families. A statement said: “Travis remains in active conversations with the city of Houston, law enforcement and local first responders to respectfully and appropriately connect with the individuals and families of those involved. These are the first of many steps Travis plans on taking as a part of his personal vow to assist those affected throughout their grieving and recovery process.” Scott has cancelled his appearance at this weekend’s Day N Vegas festival, and has been replaced by Post Malone. It has been revealed that a nine-year-old boy, Ezra Blount, is in a medically induced coma after being toppled from his father’s shoulders during the crush. He has suffered organ damage and brain swelling. His parents are taking legal advice, and other lawsuits have already been filed against Scott and the organisers.Actors will simultaneously perform three plays in three theatres as part of an “ambitious” dramatic experiment to mark the 50th anniversary of the Sheffield Crucible and its sister venues. In what is thought to be a theatrical first, the Crucible, Lyceum and Studio theatres will concurrently stage a trilogy of dramas featuring one set of characters. An actor who comes off stage in one theatre will appear within moments on stage in another theatre. Robert Hastie, the artistic director of Sheffield Theatres, is using spreadsheets and sticky notes to ensure the “the most ambitious project we have ever staged” does not result in chaos. “It’s a bit bonkers. We don’t quite know if it’s going to work. We’ve got faith in ourselves and in the people we work with, but it’s going to mean a lot of people putting on their trainers and sprinting between theatres,” Hastie said. It will be a “mental challenge and a physical endurance test” for the actors, but he hopes they will “take the idea and run with it”. The modern, brutalist Sheffield Crucible – the renowned venue for the world snooker championships as well as theatrical productions – replaced the city’s Playhouse, opening its doors 50 years ago this week. “The Playhouse was a proscenium arch theatre, that was what the audiences understood. And here was a new building that put a thrust stage in the middle of an auditorium,” said Hastie. “These days we’re really used to three-sided and four-sided spaces. But in the 1960s, when the plans for the Crucible were being drawn, there were very few theatres in this country that weren’t a traditional end-on proscenium arch. “It was a big gamble as to whether audiences would take it to their hearts. And there was a lot of resistance at first. Now if you suggested knocking it down and replacing it with something else, there’d be campaigns and demonstrations to keep it, it’s such a central part of the city’s cultural life.” The trilogy marking the half-centenary is Rock/Paper/Scissors, written by Chris Bush, an award-winning Sheffield-born playwright whose previous works include Standing at the Sky’s Edge, Hungry and The Assassination of Katie Hopkins. It tells the story of Sheffield’s oldest scissor manufacturer, and three generations who fight over the factory site. “Chris is fascinated by our relationship to the physical spaces we inherit,” said Hastie. “So in our post-industrial northern cities, what do we do with the architecture that once housed the industrial engines of the country? “That doesn’t mean the stories are unique to Sheffield, or limited to Sheffield. Like the Sheffield steel, the scissors that form the backstory of the play, we hope it’ll be something that gets picked up around the world.” Hastie wanted to ensure that the 50th anniversary “embraced all of our complex of buildings”: the modern Crucible and Studio, and the traditional Lyceum across the square. Hence the Rock/Papers/Scissors trilogy, which will have a 19-day run next summer. “The three plays exist independently of each other, each story is self-contained. But the audience will be aware of the whole project. Hopefully, that gets them a bit closer to the workings of the whole complex. It’s not just about what happens on stage.”Roger and Jim have been friends for more than 30 years. When they were younger they were in a band together, and their friendship was forged over a shared love of music and beer. Even now, despite family commitments on both sides, they manage to catch up every couple of months. “Even though he drives me mad,” says Roger. It is Jim who leaps to Roger’s mind at the mention of toxic friendships. Every time they meet, Roger says, they “tend to have the same conversation”, because Jim never listens to what he says. Roger, now in his 50s, from the West Midlands, has never told Jim how he feels. “I believe it’s passed the point of politeness now. I’d expect a reply of: ‘Why didn’t you tell me years ago that I’ve been getting on your nerves?’” Plus, Roger adds, Jim is one of only a few old friends: “It’s hard to think we would not see each other because of a few annoyances.” A toxic friend may seem oxymoronic: unlike families or colleagues, where we might be obliged to maintain ties, most friendships we opt into. Yet nearly everyone has someone in their social network that they have mixed feelings about, says Julianne Holt-Lunstad, a professor of psychology and neuroscience at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. “The distinction seems to be that there are some people who just have more than others,” she says. Holt-Lunstad began researching these “ambivalent relationships” in order to understand their impact on our health. There was already strong evidence that positive relationships have protective benefits, and that negative ones can be detrimental, “so we started thinking about those relationships that are a mix of both”. She found study participants’ interactions with these ambivalent friends was associated with increased stress and cardiovascular reactivity. Just the thought of them was enough to elevate heart rate and blood pressure. Surprisingly, blood pressure was also found to rise more in the presence of ambivalent friends than with people the subjects actively disliked. “It’s the mix of positivity and negativity,” says Holt-Lunstad. “You may not know what you’re going to get from them, or it may be, because you care about that person, that when things are negative it hurts that much more.” These are the people whom Bridget Jones likened to jellyfish, whose stinging remarks you don’t see coming but stay with you for days after. Sophie, a twentysomething Londoner, remembers one such school friend: “I would feel so drained and awful after we hung out, and it took me a really long time to put my finger on why. She would subtweet about me after we met up, saying how much she hated red lipstick during the day, for example, if I’d been wearing it earlier.” On those occasions that the friend was outright mean or rude, Sophie would call her out, “and she would then say I was too sensitive”. Sam Owen, a relationships coach and the author of Happy Relationships, says backhanded compliments can be a hallmark of a toxic friend. So can nonverbal communication that seems at odds with their words, suggesting a breakdown in trust. “The sensations you feel within your body will signpost you towards or away from the people in your life,” says Owen. If you frequently feel tense or demoralised in their presence, for instance, that may be a tip-off “that they are not truly on your team”. The question is: why might we continue to invest in friendships that we have mixed feelings about, or that may even actively make us feel bad? We can only maintain a total of 150 friendships, says Dr Robin Dunbar, a professor of evolutionary psychology at the University of Oxford, but we do not invest time or emotional closeness across them equally. In fact, his research has shown that about 60% of our total social effort goes to just 15 people, with 40% devoted to the five most important. There is “constant turnover” in those groups over your life, says Dunbar; movement towards and away from that inner circle is simply a question of time spent bonding. “It’s a series of stages where you stop and evaluate at each one, and decide whether to go on or not.” It means that people are less likely to actively sever ties with their frenemy than they are to make themselves more distant or unavailable. Sophie and her friend eventually drifted apart, at Sophie’s instigation. “I haven’t seen her for years. She occasionally sends me replies on Instagram – I always ignore them.” Other people might choose to restrict the frequency with which they see their friend – or the context. In setting out to answer why people maintain such ties at all, Holt-Lunstad had expected that the driving factors would be external; for example, you lived near each other or you had a lot of mutual friends. In fact, she was surprised to learn, they were mostly internal. A common justification was the sense of a sunk cost, says Holt-Lunstad: “They’d already invested a lot in the relationship.” For many people, it may go back to school days. Dunbar says a few close friendships forged between ages 15 and 25 do tend to be more resilient through the passing of time, because of the intensity of bonding at that age. There is a cultural tie, too: “You know you have this long, deep history of co-living and sharing experiences together; you feel this sense of obligation out of respect to that old relationship, even if you have drifted apart.” Holt-Lunstad’s research found that many participants saw turning the other cheek at their friend’s rudeness or bad behaviour – a sense of being the bigger person – as the right thing to do. How this reflected on them was also a factor, she says: “They didn’t want to be the type of person who couldn’t maintain a friendship.” Often, too, the good times really did outweigh the bad. “They would stick around because of these other really good aspects about that person.” This is a reminder of the real feeling, and sometimes real pain, at the centre of these uneasy ties. A “toxic friendship” typically indicates that a function or expectation of the relationship has been challenged, says the clinical psychologist Dr Miriam Kirmayer; for example, there has been a betrayal of trust or the investment is imbalanced. But can it be salvaged? “The heart of this is self-reflection, so: ‘Do I have a sense of what is bothering me here?’” says Kirmayer. Especially strong emotions may indicate that one of our core values (for example, punctuality) has been violated, but we often may not have communicated that clearly to our friends. “Sharing the reason why this is challenging: people are often very receptive to that, and it can be a way to find common ground.” If that doesn’t bring about the desired change, Kirmayer suggests shifting our expectations to focus on the positive contributions that our friends do make to our lives. That may require setting boundaries – for example, avoiding certain topics or activities that you know to be problematic – whether you choose to articulate them or not. “That tends to be a really helpful way to go about managing conflict because we aren’t giving up on the parts of the relationship that are working.” Kirmayer goes on: “I also find it’s very easy to recognise somebody else’s behaviour and what they have done that we see as upsetting or wrong, and it is much more difficult, obviously, to look inward. That’s not to say that I encourage people to blame themselves, but to see all relationships, including friendships, as a dynamic – our friends are responding to us in some way.” This speaks to a question that arose from Holt-Lunstad’s research, which she says warrants further inquiry: are those people who identify as having ambivalent friends realistic about relationships, or are they “expecting all benefits, and few costs”? Holt-Lunstad says her work has caused her to reflect on her own relationships. “I don’t want to be the source of ambivalence for someone else. It’s caused me to reflect on ‘What kind of friend am I? Am I supportive, am I reliable?’ We can’t change other people, but we can change ourselves. The first step is always looking inward.” Roger’s friendship with Jim is, after all, ongoing – for all his ambivalence. “I am self-aware enough to appreciate that I do things that drive him mad, too,” he says. “But maybe I do them on purpose now.” Names of case studies have been changedHungarian director and documentarist Dénes Nagy makes his feature debut with this gruelling, slow-burning drama set in the vast trackless forests of the eastern front during the second world war, a film which won him the Silver Bear for best director at this year’s Berlin film festival. This is a world of brutality and fear from which the movie averts its gaze at key moments, but the chill is unmistakable. The title appears to refer to a light which is inexorably fading. Having become one of the Axis powers, Hungary sends troops into the grim, freezing forests of Ukraine to secure the territory, keep order, establish supply lines and root out pockets of pro-Soviet “partisans”, naturally making an example of them to cow the other resentful civilians into submission. István Semetka, played by Ferenc Szabó, is a corporal with a machine-gun unit on this grim mission: a diffident, blank-faced man with the semi-official job of taking photographs, who is mocked a little by his commanding officers. They move in on a village which is, at least apparently, docile enough. But having taken food from these peasants, the Hungarian unit move on and are set upon in the forest, the villagers having evidently told partisans their movements. Almost all the officers are killed except Semetka, who gets back to the village with the other survivors, to be met by Hungarian reinforcements, led by Koleszár (László Bajkó), a friend of Semetka’s. It is Koleszár who, via his insolent sergeant-major, orders Semetka out on a spurious task searching the forest, simply in order to get his gentle old friend out of the way, so that he can get on with the job of carrying out the necessary terrible reprisals. And how does Semetka feel about this? Is he, in fact, capable of feeling anything under these inhuman conditions? Could anyone? Apart from anything else, they are crucified with hunger nearly all the time. The film begins with an eerie extended sequence in which two peasants are carrying a dead elk downriver on a raft, when the Hungarian troops order them to stop and wordlessly begin cutting it up: this elk provides almost all their protein for the rest of the film. The reprisals on both sides include a grisly form of humiliation. Two guards are punished for falling asleep on watch by being tied up with a placard around their necks; a village elder is murdered for fraternising with the Hungarian troops and punished the same way by the partisans with the placard “Traitor”. These ugly signs are almost a primitive war language, a crude declaration of meaning and identity. And there is the most dangerous label of all: “partisan”. The point is that everyone is a partisan: everyone has picked a side, and everyone can get killed for disloyalty. Semetka is loyal to the Nazis: he is hardly a hero, and though he does not witness the brutality, or in some sense chooses not to witness it, he does not dissent from it in any way, merely gratefully accepting Koleszár’s order to return to the city with wounded men. His emotions, his very consciousness, have been worn down to a mute stub. Natural Light is a reminder of the darkly inspirational potency of Elem Klimov’s 1985 war movie Come and See, surely an influence here, as it has been on Václav Marhoul’s The Painted Bird and Sergei Loznitsa’s In the Fog from 2012. Of course there is also Andrei Tarkovsky’s 1962 film Ivan’s Childhood, whose influences announce themselves in the film’s dreamlike quality and in the startling moment, like something from a Grimm fairy tale, in which Semetka sees a peasant woman buried in the underbrush in the forest, her serene face visible. Is she dead? Hiding? Or perhaps she is frozen there by supernatural forces beyond his understanding, forces of terrible malign power. • Natural Light is released on 12 November in cinemas and on Curzon Home Cinema.In the United States, there is a renewed campaign to vaccinate rural Americans due to the stark difference in Covid-19 cases and deaths among those living in less-populated areas compared with towns and cities. Rural residents are now twice as likely to die from Covid-19 as Americans in metropolitan areas. Yet rural areas tend to lag at least 10% behind metropolitan areas when it comes to vaccination – and this hesitancy is exacerbating already existing health issues. “Rural populations are older, they’re sicker and they’re poorer,” said Fred Ullrich, research analyst at the RUPRI Center for Rural Health Policy Analysis and co-author of a report on Covid’s disproportionate burden on rural communities. Residents of rural areas also tend to have lower rates of insurance, or the insurance they have doesn’t cover as much, which means they may put off seeking care until it’s too late. And they have worse access to healthcare itself – all of which can lead to worse Covid outcomes. At the same time, rural residents have some of the lowest vaccination rates and the highest opposition rates to vaccination, a September survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation found. Urban residents, in comparison, were flipped, with one of the highest vaccination rates and the least opposition to getting vaccinated. As of early October, 42.6% of rural residents were fully vaccinated, compared with 54.5% in metropolitan areas, according to an analysis by the rural-news publication the Daily Yonder. In September, rural areas saw their biggest leap in vaccinations since June before declining again in recent weeks. Even as new cases of Covid have begun falling, rural areas still have an infection rate that is 80% higher than metropolitan areas – and the death rate is still twice as high. Now, several initiatives are focused on working with rural communities to lower Covid cases and increase vaccination. The National Rural Health Association (NRHA) recently launched an initiative to address vaccine hesitancy and to recast vaccination as a community endeavor vital for being a good neighbor and keeping schools and businesses open. “In rural communities, there is a lack of trust in national and even regional sources of information,” Brock Slabach, chief operations officer of the NRHA, told the Guardian. “Local trusted leaders have more influence on the confidence of people to receive the vaccine.” This campaign is reaching out to trusted sources – including physicians, leaders in community organizations and religious leaders like priests, pastors, imams and rabbis – to help them answer questions about why the vaccine is needed. A new series of public service messages has also been launched by the Ad Council and the Covid Collaborative, relaying the stories of everyday rural Americans and their reasons for getting vaccinated. And governors are also urged to establish trust and confidence in vaccines and to clear the way for better access in rural communities. It’s also important to understand that many people have received contradictory messages about Covid and the vaccine from trusted sources, Ullrich told the Guardian. “Getting people to change their minds is very, very difficult.” There are many reasons why the pandemic has hit rural residents hard. More than 180 rural hospitals have closed since 2005, and people living in rural areas had a 20% greater death rate before the pandemic. Hospitals and medical centers were short-staffed to begin with, but burnout – and the temptation of higher pay in cities – has led to an exodus of experienced health workers. Smaller hospitals often don’t have the budget to hire expensive travel nurses. The remaining hospitals are often far away and don’t offer higher levels of care like intensive care units, but many of the larger hospitals are full and can’t accept transfers. And it’s hard for rural residents to seek early treatments like monoclonal antibodies, which are typically offered at specialized infusion centers. Other types of health access have also worsened during the pandemic, with rural residents lacking access to high-speed internet for telehealth visits and vaccine appointments. There are also disparities within the urban-rural divide. Across the US, people of color are more likely to get very sick and die from the virus than white people. But these disparities are even more pronounced in rural areas, according to a recent study. Living in a rural area as a person of color is a “double whammy”, said Kwadwo Boakye, co-author of the study. At the start of the pandemic in the US, the coronavirus was often seen as an issue facing cities. For the first four months, as major metropolitan centers like New York and Los Angeles called in refrigerated trucks to handle the overwhelming crush of deaths, the virus mainly spread in the close quarters of metropolitan areas. But by July, it was spreading in rural America, too – and when rates in cities began to decline, many rural areas continued adding new cases. By the fall, Covid was more common in rural areas than in cities. Yet “it’s hard to get rid of that earlier notion that this really was not a rural problem,” Ullrich said. “Rural is not a refuge. It’s clear that the disease has sought out every corner of the country, and it doesn’t make any difference where you live,” Ullrich said. And while cases are falling for now, “who’s to say that we won’t see yet another climb up the rollercoaster?” Ullrich compared vaccination campaigns to painting a house. “Painting the big walls is not a problem, but getting into the little nooks and crannies, finishing this, retouching up that – that always takes forever, right? It’s always that last little bit,” he said. “We got the bulk of the population vaccinated in a relatively timely fashion, but we’re down to the details now.”The protesters gathered in Glasgow for Cop26 are a diverse group – at the demonstration on Saturday I watched everybody file past – from international socialists to Scottish nationalists, healthcare workers to striking refuse workers, from indigenous activists at the very front to cycling enthusiasts at the very back. But while the groups were all very different, I was struck by the commonality of their message: they all recognise that we cannot solve the climate crisis through the same means that created it. Whether that is the extractive industries destroying indigenous lands, or the carbon-hungry transport systems that crowd out cyclists. In short, they proclaim that we cannot survive through business as usual. Sadly, those inside the conference rooms at Cop are focused on doing precisely that. Too often they are simply grafting superficial climate solutions on to the basic machinery of profit-seeking, resource-extraction and endless growth. This is exemplified by the fact that there are 503 delegates from fossil fuel companies at Cop26, two dozen more than the largest country delegation. Despite an official ban on fossil fuel companies participating directly, few in power have raised the alarm about this. In wider society, we can see this attitude in the torrent of greenwashing adverts coinciding with the conference. One recent McDonald’s spot boasts of the way the company is recycling cooking oil into truck fuel, coffee cups into greetings cards, and plastic toys into children’s playgrounds. It concludes with the slogan, “Change a little change a lot”. The problem is that it makes no mention of the fact that McDonald’s beef footprint alone constitutes 22m metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions a year. And it is simultaneously running another advert for a limited time offer of a double Big Mac. It is asking us to double our consumption of something already disastrous for planetary survival. McDonald’s advertising approach is emblematic of the way in which companies seek to continue with business as usual, by distracting us from where the real problems lie. Its adverts represent just one of many strategies by which this is accomplished. One of the most common methods is to turn the climate crisis from a systemic into an individual issue. Some defend the consumerist system by insisting that it is up to the public to change their patterns of consumption – even as companies urge us to consume ever more. George Monbiot has traced the long history of this strategy, which started in 1953 with the Keep America Beautiful campaign, funded by packaging manufacturers who sought to blame “litter bugs” – rather than the shift to plastic packaging – for environmental damage. He shows the success of such strategies, which lead the public to think that their own misbehaviour in the form of littering is the major cause of, for example, river pollution, when this is actually relatively trivial compared to the constant flow of chemicals from farming and sewage spills. He calls this approach of focusing on minimal-but-personal individual actions “micro-consumerist bollocks”, or MCB. In fact, MCB is an instance of something larger: the politicised reduction of behaviour to individual psychology. Powerful actors such as governments and corporations often blame individuals for bad choices, while avoiding calling attention to the larger societal pressures that influence their behaviour. This is something I have written about in relation to the Covid crisis: government blaming the public for breaking lockdown or not self-isolating when infected, when the real problem was the lack of government support to allow them to do so. Or ministers castigating people for mixing more socially, when the real problem was the requirement that they go back to work. By suggesting that our own fragile psychology is the problem, government seeks to deflect from the fact that its refusal to act is the real issue – the ultimate source of our failures. Exactly the same is true with regard to the climate crisis. What is vital in both crises is to understand that this is not primarily about intractable individual psychology. We must realise that the major problems derive from society-wide factors and that the solutions primarily involve changing the systems of society itself. As with Covid, we can’t expect people to improve ventilation in their rooms if they’re in a building where the windows don’t actually open; so we can’t break our dependency on gas-guzzling cars if clean and publicly accessible alternatives don’t exist. This doesn’t mean that psychology is entirely irrelevant to the climate crisis. But we must shift from an obsessive focus on individual consumer psychology to a psychology of collective action. We should ask what leads to people coming together to demand the systemic change we need, and what are the barriers to achieving this. Further, what are the forms of appeal and of organisation that will involve people in solutions rather than demoralise or alienate them? How can we organise and facilitate engagement in mass action in such a way as to make them fully democratic and inclusive spaces where everybody feels at home? Once we take that approach, we can return to the question of individual consumption and ask if there are ways of making our personal choices as a way of developing – rather than distracting from – systemic change. Perhaps we can learn from the anti-apartheid movement, which turned a consumer boycott of South African goods into an overt political act, and brought people together to put pressure on institutions to disinvest. In this way a grassroots movement of individual people gained the power to force corporate giants such as Barclays Bank to change its policies in South Africa. The bottom line is that those inside Cop26 have let us down with their focus on business as usual. Our governors have failed to act as leaders. We need to use every means we have to force change upon them. To do that, we must not ignore the micro-realities of our everyday lives and everyday choices, but rather use them as forms of movement building. Stephen Reicher is a member of the Sage subcommittee advising on behavioural science. He is a professor of psychology at the University of St Andrews, a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and an authority on crowd psychologyOn a November evening two years ago, Fabiola Campillai stepped out into the fading sunshine to head for her night shift at a food processing plant. For weeks, Chile had been racked by a wave of mass protests against social inequality, but there were few signs of demonstrators in Cinco Pinos, the quiet neighbourhood on the outskirts of Santiago where Campillai lives. “There weren’t any protests that evening. A man crossed the street in front of me to buy bread,” Campillai remembers. “And that was the last thing I ever saw.” Patricio Maturana, an officer in Chile’s Carabineros police force, fired a teargas canister at Campillai from just 50 metres away, hitting her square in the face. A study estimated that the metal cylinder would have reached temperatures of up to 200C at the moment of impact. From then on, Campillai remembers nothing. The impact shattered her skull and caused cerebrospinal fluid to leak on to her brain. It blinded her totally and irreversibly, depriving her of sight, taste and smell. Rather than helping Campillai as she lay unconscious, the officers threw more teargas, retreated down an underpass and drove away. It was left to neighbours to lift her into a car and drive to hospital. Campillai’s horrific, life-changing ordeal has made her Chile’s most recognisable victim of police brutality. After months of operations and rehabilitation, Campillai is beginning to rebuild her life in total blackness. And she is also standing as an independent candidate for Chile’s senate in elections later this month – which will also see the country elect a new president. “I will never get my eyes back,” she says, the light catching two prosthetic spheres set into her reconstructed eye sockets. “But I want to turn this tragedy into a strength and keep on fighting. Not just from the streets like before, but from the legislature – I want to be there to help change everything.” On 21 November, Campillai will be on the ballot to become one of Santiago’s five senators. She is running against a former health minister, Jaime Mañalich, who notoriously declared on television that he had “no idea” about the poverty and overcrowding in the southern districts of Santiago where Campillai was born and raised. The porch of her one-storey home doubles as a campaign headquarters while she continues her recovery alongside her husband and three children. Once a volunteer firefighter, football player and community organiser, Campillai can no longer leave the house alone or lift heavy weights, as the exertion could cause fluid to leak back into her brain. She moves around the house following the edges of a carpet on the living room floor, and clings gently to her husband’s waist when they walk around the neighbourhood. Since the protests began in October 2019, more than 400 Chileans have totally or partially lost their sight after being shot or beaten by police, and Campillai’s case is one of the most emblematic. Body-camera footage of the attack shows a police patrol huddled tightly behind riot shields facing down a quiet street, and an officer encouraging Maturana to fire. When the teargas canister strikes Campillai, another exclaims “Good shot!” Later the officers discuss the incident: “It got her, right? I think [Maturana] got her, he hit her …” It took more than eight months for the Carabineros to conclude an internal investigation and dismiss Maturana. He is under house arrest while a second investigation by public prosecutors is under way, and faces 12 years in prison. But the trial is yet to begin – even though more than 70 witnesses, officers and doctors have given evidence. A spokesperson for the Carabineros said that the force could not comment while the case was ongoing. “Neither the government nor Carabineros have ever contacted me,” says Campillai, “No help, no apology, no acknowledgment.” But while the wait for notional justice goes on, Campillai is working hard to launch a political career. “A dignified Chile would have better education, healthcare, housing and pensions,” she says, “This would make it a better place for the majority – and I want to be part of this movement.” Demands for a fairer Chile have found fertile ground as the country begins to broaden participation and include independent voices from beyond the traditional parties, such as Campillai’s. Since Chile returned to democracy after Gen Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship in 1990, only 10 independents have ever been elected to the chamber of deputies – and there has been just one independent senator. “Before, it was almost impossible to get elected as an independent,” said Kenneth Bunker, a political scientist who edits Tresquintos, a political analysis website. But a rule change for the election of the constitutional convention in May lowered barriers to participation, and 41% of the candidates were independent. “It’s very clear that when people are given a more diverse list of candidates to choose from, they are going to elect these independents – and Campillai’s story resonates with many,” said Bunker. While November’s election will be held under the old rules, legislation is moving through congress which would open up the playing field permanently. After months of operations and rehabilitation, Campillai is hoping to continue her education and return to work at the factory in a computer-based role. “Justice would mean giving back what they stole from me,” she says, “But that can never happen, however many years they make [Maturana] sit in jail. “So I’m going to make change happen myself. I want to send the message that politics is for everyone – not just the usual suspects.”After a series of historic wins across the US last week, Asian Americans will now serve as mayors and city council members in large cities including Boston, Seattle, Cincinnati and New York, signalling the rapid rise in Asian American political power. The victories mark a significant step forward for a diverse community that has seen historically low representation in political offices and in the last two years has borne the brunt of a rising tide of pandemic-driven anti-Asian sentiments. On Tuesday night, voters chose Boston city councilor Michelle Wu to serve in the city’s top political office. The 36-year-old Taiwanese American who was Boston’s first Asian American city councilor will serve as the city’s first mayor of color. “Growing up, I never ever thought that I would or could or should be involved in politics. I didn’t see anyone who looked like me in spaces of power. We are redefining what leadership looks like,” Wu told reporters. In Cincinnati, Aftab Pureval made history by defeating former Democratic Congressman David Mann, making the 39-year-old the first Asian American to hold the city’s mayoral post. The son of a Tibetan mother and Indian father, Pureval addressed a crowd saying: “Cincinnati is a place where no matter what you look like, where you’re from, or how much money you have, if you come here and work hard you can achieve your dreams.” Meanwhile in Seattle, Bruce Harrell, 63, who is of mixed heritage, is projected to become the city’s first Asian American mayor and second Black mayor. In New York City, five Asian Americans were elected to the city council, the most the council has ever had. The record-breaking group includes the first Korean Americans, first South Asian Americans and first Muslim woman to be elected to the council. Traditionally, Asian American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) mayors have been elected in places with significant Asian demographics, such as California and Hawaii. However, the recent rise in anti-Asian racism seems to have prompted a significant portion of Asian Americans to become more involved in politics. More than 9,000 anti-Asian incidents have been reported in the US since the pandemic began. “What’s different about mayoral elections is that this is a citywide office. To win at that level requires forming a broad coalition of support that’s certainly going to cross racial boundaries,” said Sara Sadhwani, an assistant professor of politics at Pomona College specializing in American and ethnic politics. Sadwhani cited the spike in anti-AAPI hate as a key factor for increased political participation, saying, “The discrimination that AAPIs faced throughout the last two years during the pandemic has galvanized them politically and we’re seeing that in terms of the people who are choosing to run for office, as well as voters on the ground. When Asian Americans feel socially excluded or discriminated against, it typically does lead to greater political activism.” The AAPI population is ethnically, linguistically and culturally diverse, but is under-represented in elected offices. AAPIs make up 6.1% of the national population. Yet, they consist of just 0.9% of elected leaders in the country, according to the Reflective Democracy Campaign. As one of the fastest growing demographics in the country, AAPIs also suffer from severe invisibility in the criminal justice sector. Southeast Asian Americans are at least three times more likely to be deported due to past criminal convictions than other immigrants. Of the 2,539 prosecutors that were elected across the country in 2020, only six were of AAPI heritage, or 0.24%. AAPIs also make up only 0.07% of county sheriffs. In March, after a 21-year old white man killed six Asian women and two others in the Atlanta area, many Asian American communities sought greater political recognition while vowing to stand against hate. Raymond Partolan, the national field director of APIAVote, a nonpartisan organization dedicated to promoting civic engagement across AAPI communities, spoke of the intensity he witnessed at rallies after the deadly shooting. “I’ve been working in the community organizing space for around the last ten years or so and I’ve never seen so much interest among AAPIs to involve themselves in the decision-making processes that happen at every level of government, and it’s truly inspiring,” said Partolan. The AAPI Victory Fund, a Super Pac that mobilizes AAPI voters and candidates, endorsed Wu and Pureval. Varun Nikore, the organization’s president, attributes their victories to a ripple effect that emerged through local community building efforts. “Getting to know your communities at that micro-local level ensures more long-term successes because you are forced to discuss kitchen table issues. This provides a roadmap for our community going forward,” Nikore said. Yet despite the celebratory attitudes towards the historic wins, some remain apprehensive towards their potential “tokenization”, fearing that traditional stereotypes may pigeonhole the incoming leaders. “I think by having the focus of [Wu] being hailed as the first female mayor of Boston, she’s being held to a greater standard than any other white man. People would be looking for her to fail rather than trying to see where she can succeed,” said Yasmin Padamsee Forbes, executive director of the Commonwealth of Massachussett’s Asian American Commission. As a result, Forbes urges people to look at what leaders like Wu and Pureval can bring to their cities and evaluate them according to how much they achieve, along with their platforms. “Whenever we have elected officials that share our racial background, it’s important for us to hold them accountable,” said Partolan, who echoed Forbes’ sentiments. “People don’t get a free pass in public office just because they share our racial background. We have to ensure that we elect people that share our values and that once they are in public office, we encourage them to move policies that are beneficial for everyone.” Nevertheless, this week’s victories still prove to be a major step forward in inclusive representation across the country. “We need thousands of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders to run for local office so that we have the future pipeline for a statewide office and then federal office in this country,” said Nikore. This article was amended on 12 November 2021. An earlier version said Bruce Harrell was 69. He is 63.English has always been a language of immigrants. Even before the Norman conquest, much lamented by Brexiters and Tolkien, the language known as “Old English” was brought to Britain by interlopers from what is now Scandinavia and Germany, and mixed haphazardly with Latin left over from the Roman occupation. There was never any indivisible sovereignty of the English tongue, proudly insulated from the wider European melting pot. But those Anglo-Saxons did have a way with words – “word” itself being one of those that has survived unchanged from the first millennium to ours. Hana Videen’s delightful thesaurus (from the Greek for “treasure-house”) of Old English is, she says, inspired by “hord-wynn” (“hoarding joy”), and organised around spheres of activity: eating and drinking, reading and writing, travelling or the natural world. There is, though, no word for “nature” in Old English: a salient reminder that those times are as alien in some ways as they are familiar in others. (Videen explains that almost nothing is known about pagan religious practices of the time, which rather vindicates Spinal Tap’s monologue about the druids: “No one knows who they were, or what they were doing.”) There was no call for a word for “nature”, one supposes, because Anglo-Saxons had not yet invented its opposite. They simply lived, like everything else, in “sceaft” – creation. Which was elf-haunted and sometimes wyrm-ravaged. As it races through colourful examples, the book does also occasionally pause to make an interesting scholarly argument. The long poem Beowulf is the classic of Old English literature – the extant works of which number altogether only around 3m words, i.e. fewer than those of the works of Dickens – and a source for many of the examples here. But Videen also asks, quite reasonably, why the villain Grendel’s mother is so often translated as having horrible claws (or, in Heaney’s version, being a “monstrous hell-bride”) when the phrase at hand (“lathum fingrum”) could, she suggests, be as fairly translated as “badass warrior”? The roots of woman-fear in literature run deep. As the author invites us to see it, though, her book is in general more like “an old photo album” than a language primer. In one of those etymological journeys full of satisfying twists, Videen explains that Old English “wes hāl” (“be well”) morphed into an alcoholic salutation (“waes hail”, cheers) and then into a name for hot spiced liquor (“wesseyl”) and then into revelry inspired by liquor, “wassailing”. Appropriately enough, then, the book is released in time for Christmas wassailing, and would make a classy gift to the commonly word-drunk. What is most striking to the modern reader, perhaps, is what strong pleasure the Anglo-Saxons evidently took in smashing words together to form compounds: devil-sickness, slaughter-mist, war-sweat. Some such forms, if deliberately metaphorical or riddling, are known as kennings (as in “beyond my ken”). So “day-candle” is the sun; “bone-locker” is the body; and a “weaver-walker” is a spider. Probably it’s too facile to suggest that such a combinatorial habit of description embodied a view of everything as more interconnected and interdependent, which it might be salutary for us moderns to recover. In which case, it’s a pleasure just to be reminded of their world-craft. • The Wordhord: Daily Life in Old English by Hana Videen is published by Profile (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.One of the rescuers who extricated an injured man from a cavern deep beneath the Brecon Beacons has argued that sitting on a sofa watching television is more dangerous than caving. The injured man, who is in his 40s, is said to be doing well after being rescued from the cave, where he was trapped for more than two days at least 300 metres beneath the surface. Steve Thomas, of South and Mid Wales Cave Rescue Team, said on Tuesday morning: “He’s doing well, he’s a strong guy. He’ll be good.” Speaking on BBC Breakfast, Thomas said cavers were very aware of the environment they explored. “It’s not a reckless thing we do,” he said. “It’s no more dangerous than anything else. I think it’s more dangerous sitting on the sofa watching the TV.” Thomas said the Ogof Ffynnon Ddu cave system, where the man was trapped was “quite complicated”, adding: “There’s about 38 miles of known surveyed passages and it’s got a vertical range of just under a kilometre. It’s an extensive cave and you have to be confident to be in there, which everybody was. Accidents happen. A boulder can stay in place for 10,000 years and one day it will move. That’s the way it goes. For 9,999 years it’s fine.” Thomas said the rescue had been slow but steady. “When we got to him it was a case of assessing how he was, working out what we’d need, logistics, equipment, where it’s got to come from, who we need, any medical supplies. We have team doctors. Everybody was allocated jobs and then the operation to move him took place, which initially was very, very slow but after about 15 hours he was into a bigger passage so it became easier. “The caves are natural things, there are not footpaths. It’s a geological wonder but it’s full of boulders, potholes, climbs, waterfalls. Each one has to be negotiated in its own way but we’ve done it many times. We’ve rehearsed this. There was nothing that surprised us.” Thomas said the banter kept the rescue teams going – and treats that they stored in their helmets. He said at one point he was surrounded by Yorkshire, Somerset and Irish accents. “It’s a friendly environment we create. Nobody complained about anything they had to do. A lot of it involved lying in water with a stretcher being pulled over you. Nobody said no, we’re all part of the same team.” The man was brought out of the cave to cheers and clapping at about 7.45pm on Monday. He was taken into a cave rescue Land Rover and transferred to an ambulance. Described as an experienced caver, the man became trapped on Saturday at around 1pm after a fall. His injuries are non-life threatening, but are believed to include a broken jaw, leg and spinal injuries. Nearly 250 volunteer cave rescuers helped, including some who were involved in the 2018 rescue of 12 boys and their football coach from flooded caves in northern Thailand, 17 days after they got trapped underground.He is everywhere and nowhere. The words of Jalal al-Din Rumi are found on sunset images pasted on Instagram and coffee mugs sold on Etsy; his poems have been featured in recordings from Madonna and Coldplay and he is reputed to be the bestselling poet in the US. Rumi’s observations and aphorisms on life may be endlessly cited – “You are not a drop in the ocean, you are the entire ocean in a drop” – but few in the west know him as anything more than a bearded Sufi mystic. “Rumi has become a mystical, almost deified figure,” says Nadim Naaman. “The reality is that he was the opposite of an untouchable deity.” Naaman, a British Lebanese singer, actor and writer, has collaborated with the Qatari composer Dana Al Fardan to create Rumi: The Musical. “Our approach was to take the man out of the myth,” says Al Fardan, “and to present him as human being.” This is the second time Naaman and Al Fardan have brought a beloved Middle Eastern poet to the London stage. Their 2018 show Broken Wings, which is returning to London in the new year, was based on a novel by the Lebanese poet and writer Kahlil Gibran. It was the success of that production that convinced them there may be an appetite for a musical that delved into the life of Rumi. Rumi was born in 1207 in present day Afghanistan. He was 36 and married with two children when he met a wandering mystic known as Shams of Tabriz. The two began what started as an intense friendship, and which might have developed into a love affair. When Shams disappeared after three years, Rumi turned to poetry to cope with the separation, writing more than 3,000 love songs to Shams, the prophet Muhammad and God. The contemporary popularity of Rumi traces back to the mid-1970s and the translations of Rumi’s writing by the American academic and poet Coleman Barks, who sought to foreground the timeless, universal essence in the writings. “His entire ideology is based on cultivating the essence within,” says Al Fardan. “Rumi managed to latch on to themes and feelings that can apply to everyone,” says Naaman. “He’s managed to do that because his focus is on self-reflection.” These ideas feel timely given the pandemic and its aftermath. “We’ve all reassessed our lives,” says Naaman, “and explored what we can do without and our place in the world.” His writings may transcend time and place but Rumi was not only a mystic and philosopher – he was also a devout Muslim. These days his Muslim identity is rarely recalled by those in the west who quote him so liberally. The erasure of Rumi’s Islamic identity – what one academic refers to as an act of “spiritual colonialism” – is also what makes a production such as this necessary. It seeks to restore a religious and geographic specificity to Rumi and in so doing challenge common tropes about the Middle East. “We’re tired of the portrayal of our region in drama, where the focus is always problematic – terrorism, refugees, war,” says Naaman. “There is a lack of Middle Eastern stories and those that do exist are fictitious or very Hollywood in their interpretation. You have shows like Aladdin, The Prince of Egypt and Joseph – stories that, to a large degree, come from Middle Eastern and north African heritage, but they have historically been played by white actors with white creative teams and they’re almost a pastiche. They have the right heart but they’re not authentic.” The cast of Rumi: The Musical, by contrast, is of Middle Eastern, north African and south Asian heritage, and the 20 songs featured in the semi-staged production are all inspired by Rumi’s poetry. “If you’re going to bring a Middle Eastern icon to the western stage to celebrate their cultural legacy, it feels entirely right that your cast are able to be a part of that, so they are able to feel proud that they’re the one telling the story from their part of the world,” says Naaman. The team behind the musical hope that by revealing the man behind the myth audiences may also feel able to disentangle the truth from the myths about Islam and the Middle East. “There is much more to the Middle East than they [those living in the west] have been led to believe growing up,” says Naaman. “So many beautiful things on planet Earth come from that region – artistically, linguistically, musically – so much of the culture the world enjoys.” Rumi: The Musical is at the London Coliseum, 23-24 November.Greece is to launch a public campaign urging victims of domestic violence to “speak up” after a spate of femicides whose ferocity has stunned the nation. The country has seen a rise in domestic violence cases so far in 2021, accentuated by a number of brutal murders of women that have dominated media coverage as people from the arts and sports worlds – including the Olympic gold medallist Sofia Bekatorou – have come forward with allegations of sexual abuse. The new initiative will try to ram home the message that “even in the last village” there is help for women trapped in abusive relationships, Greece’s gender equality minister told the Guardian. “What we are seeing is very worrying, and our message is ‘speak up, we are here to assist’,” said Maria Syrengela, emphasising that now, more than ever, it was vital that domestic violence victims knew help was at hand. “It’s very important that women understand the warning signs.” Television channels, social media and the mainstream press will be enlisted as part of the effort to highlight a nationwide network of shelters and counselling centres set up to provide psychosocial and legal support. A free helpline offering support has also been established. The drive, described as unprecedented for Greece in scope and scale, will expand on a pilot programme activated during the pandemic, when cases of abuse, attributed to long months of confinement, began to soar. “So often women have been scared to speak. It was such a taboo they remained silent,” Syrengela said. “Now, even in the last village of Greece, we are saying there are services that can help, that they can start a new life.” Never has domestic violence been so publicly discussed in a country where entrenched patriarchal views have been slow to change and, outside towns and cities, traditional mores still hold sway. “There’s been an increase in women coming in,” said Katerina Kostaki, a psychologist at a counselling centre off Syntagma Square, the capital’s main plaza. “All these incidents have brought up a lot of angst and pain even for victims who may have completed their therapy. Many feel guilt and shame that they are with violent men and anxiety they could be next [to be killed].” From January to October this year, 12 women aged from 19 to 75 were allegedly murdered by husbands or partners. In Crete last week Yiannis Marakis, a father of four, stabbed his estranged wife, Nektaria, 16 times before walking away from the scene with the weapon. The 54-year-old then spent nine hours threatening to commit suicide as the couple’s oldest son pleaded with him to surrender to police. On Thursday, footage released from closed-circuit cameras revealed the 48-year-old woman’s last moments as Marakis appeared to chase her, knife in hand, through a hotel complex on the island. Marakis has since appeared before a public prosecutor, who charged him with manslaughter and ordered that the Cretan be held in prison pending trial after he pleaded guilty. Before he was detained, Marakis reportedly told his children that he had killed their mother to protect them. “I was a good father, I did it for you,” he was quoted as saying by local media. Like many other femicide victims, Nektaria had allegedly approached the authorities to complain about her former partner’s violent behaviour. In a tersely worded statement, Crete’s police flatly denied that a complaint had been filed “at any police station”. The murders have not only piled pressure on the centre-right government of the prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, but led to fervent calls for changes to Greece’s penal code. There are demands for femicide to be classified as a distinct crime to stop perpetrators using legal loopholes in an attempt to get more lenient sentences. Charalambos “Babis” Anagnostopoulos, a helicopter pilot who confessed to strangling his British-born wife, Caroline Crouch, has reportedly been reading law books while in prison awaiting trial in a bid to find legal provisions that might reduce his sentence, according to media reports. For 37 days the UK-trained aviator kept up the charade that the couple had been beaten and tied up by a gang of ruthless foreign burglars in their maisonette in the Greek capital. But Athens’ supreme court prosecutor weighed in last week, ordering jurists to fast-track cases of domestic abuse by adopting a system that would allow suspects to be indicted, arrested and tried within 48 hours of committing a crime. The intervention was described as groundbreaking for a criminal justice system that is not only notoriously slow but regularly compared by legal experts to a relic of the 19th century. “It’s a turning point,” said Maria Gavouneli, president of the Greek national commission for human rights and professor of international law at Athens University. “He has instructed prosecutors across the country to pay special attention to cases of domestic violence and reminded them of the [legal] tool box.” Greek prosecutors would now be encouraged to use every legal provision in the criminal code when dealing with femicides, said the UK-trained lawyer. “They won’t just prosecute for murder but [will also] take aggravating circumstances into account. It’s very significant. “The Greek justice system is extremely slow. It literally doesn’t work any more.” The government campaign is to be followed by other initiatives that will aim to convey the message that women are every bit equal to men. In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org • This article was amended on 10 November 2021 to correct Sofia Bekatorou’s surname, earlier spelled Bekatourou.Angelo Ogbonna could miss the rest of the season after sustaining a serious knee injury, handing West Ham a blow in their challenge to finish in the top four. The Italian centre-back had to go off during the first half of West Ham’s 3-2 win over Liverpool on Sunday and a scan has revealed that the injury is worse than initially feared. Ogbonna, 33, has damaged an anterior cruciate ligament and he could be out for as long as nine months if he needs an operation. Ogbonna will see a specialist this week to determine whether surgery is required. The defender has formed an exceptional partnership with Kurt Zouma this season and has played a major role in West Ham rising to third, three points behind the leaders, Chelsea. Ogbonna, who joined West Ham from Juventus in 2015, was replaced by Craig Dawson during the victory over Liverpool. Dawson will provide reliable cover, with Issa Diop another alternative to partner Zouma. Ogbonna is out of contract in the summer, although the club have a one-year option.After a series of high-profile cases of corporate failures, the way big businesses in Australia treat Indigenous customers will be examined by a parliamentary inquiry. The destruction of Juukan Gorge by Rio Tinto was one of the most recent inexcusable acts, but it is not alone. Woolworths was forced to abandon plans to build a liquor warehouse near three dry Aboriginal communities. Earlier this year, Telstra was fined $50m by the federal court which found it had exploited Indigenous customers by signing them up for phone contracts they could not understand or afford. Each time, the onus has been on Indigenous communities to raise the alarm and bring wider attention to the issue. The minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, now wants how corporations engage with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander consumers to be the subject of a parliamentary inquiry. The House Indigenous Affairs Committee, headed by Liberal MP Julian Leeser will investigate the issue, building on recent inquiries looking at Indigenous employment and small business, as well as the inquiries into some recent examples of corporate treatment of Indigenous consumers and communities. “I think effectively, corporate Australia needs to not only talk the talk, they need to walk the walk as well,” Leeser said. “What we are looking at here is how corporate Australia engages in a meaningful way with Indigenous consumers and what we can do to encourage greater cultural understanding among the corporate sector of Indigenous consumers – not only where there has been bad practice, but also looking at where there has been best practice – particularly the impact of Reconciliation Action Plans in changing and improving the culture generally.” The destruction of Juukan Gorge, a 46,000 year-old site of global archaeological significance was found to be one of “countless instances where cultural heritage has been the victim of the drive for development and commercial gain”, a parliamentary inquiry found. At the time of its fine for exploiting Indigenous mobile phone plan customers – one of the largest ever handed down - Telstra chief executive Andy Penn said it was a “deeply challenging and disappointing chapter” in Telstra’s history. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It was only after a long battle, led by Indigenous health groups, that Woolworths pulled the pin on its Dan Murphy’s plan, with a panel commissioned by the supermarket giant in response to backlash found there was not enough consultation with the local Indigenous communities. Asked if it was finally time for corporate Australia to do the work, instead of leaving it for Indigenous communities to fight, Leeser said the inquiry would look at what engagement was currently occurring. “We’re looking at where that has clearly fallen short in the past, and what people need to do to improve that engagement,” he said. “This will be a holistic examination of some of those past issues, but also a look at where people are getting it right and looking at what are the things that are put in place to try and steer corporate Australia in a particular direction.” The committee has been ordered to report back to parliament by 31 March next year – a date which could see it made obsolete if parliament is dissolved for an election before it is handed down.Primark owner, Associated British Foods, has set out ambitious overseas expansion plans as it bets on a strong sales rebound from the Covid-19 pandemic, with customers returning in large numbers in countries where vaccines have been rolled out. The fast-fashion retailer is planning to open more than 100 new shops over the next five years, as it pushes into the US, France, Italy and Spain. It would take the number of stores worldwide to 530 from 398 at present. In the US, where Primark opened its first store in Boston six years ago, it plans to go from 13 to 60 outlets over the period. The retailer has already signed five new leases in the New York region, including in Brooklyn, Long Island and Albany. Paul Marchant, the Primark chief executive, said: “With our current portfolio trading really well, it feels like we’ve established a strong foundation from which to accelerate our expansion in the US market.” Primark’s US stores are being especially affected by ongoing disruption in its global supply chain due to congestion in international shipping and at ports. “We’ve never seen anything like it, and the hold-ups are right the way through the supply chain,” said George Weston, chief executive of ABF. “From the factory in China through to the ports in the country where goods are manufactured, through to availability of containers and vessels to move goods to European markets and American markets.” The group said it had been affected by supply bottlenecks caused by the Suez Canal blockage and a shortage of HGV drivers, which had been worsened in the UK by its exit from the EU. “It doesn’t seem to be getting any better,” Weston said. “We are working very hard at it and have had to pay significant extra costs but we are managing.” Weston said the retailer had prioritised bringing its Christmas stock to Europe and the US from Asia, and was starting to put the goods into its stores. It is expecting this year’s seasonal bestsellers to include matching family pyjama sets, as well as the “snuddie”, an oversized snuggly hoodie, in a sign that the loungewear trend hasn’t yet gone away. The scale of ABF’s business is likely to mean it gets better rates for shipping and better availability on boats than others, he said, although it is also having to pay more to truck drivers and staff at its warehouses and depots. Despite rising costs, the company said some increases were covered by exchange rate fluctuations, while it was able to absorb the rest, meaning Primark does not intend to raise its prices. However, this is not the case at some other ABF brands, including hot drinks firms Ovaltine and Twinings, where the company said it was “not immune” to supply chain problems and rising raw material costs and wages, and would raise some food prices as a result. News of Primark’s expansion plans, as well as the announcement of a special dividend found favour with investors, as ABF share closed almost 8% higher on Tuesday, making it the top riser on London’s FTSE 100. The retailer said footfall has been improving at its UK stores, although some of its central London shops including the branches at Marble Arch and on Oxford Street are still suffering from a lack of visitors, and especially international tourists. Primark reported a 12% drop in like-for-like sales from pre-pandemic levels in the year to 18 September, an improvement on the 24% decline posted over the summer, when many people had to self-isolate in the UK amid a “pingdemic”. The clothing chain’s full-year adjusted operating profit rose 15% to £415m. Michael McLintock, ABF’s chairman, said: “Absent the reimposition of significant restrictions, we expect Primark trading to continue to improve and for sales to increase by at least the estimated £2bn of sales lost due to store closures last financial year.”Germany needs to get the “whole of the democratic world” onboard to support orderly immigration to Europe, its interior minister has said, amid a worsening crisis at the Poland-Belarus border. Horst Seehofer accused Belarus and Russia of exploiting refugees and migrants in an attempt to destabilise the west, and said EU countries must stand together in the face of a “hybrid threat” posed by “politically organised migration”. Polish police blocked hundreds of people from entering the country on Monday after Belarusian authorities had escorted them to the border. Poland and other EU countries have accused Belarus of trying to provoke a new refugee crisis in Europe in revenge for their criticism of Alexander Lukashenko’s brutal crackdown on domestic opposition. Minsk has reportedly issued special visas allowing migrants to fly into Belarus from Iraq and other Middle Eastern countries. “The Poles have reacted correctly so far,” Seehofer told the German newspaper Bild of Poland’s reinforcement of the border. “We cannot criticise them for securing the EU’s external border with admissible means. The Poles are fulfilling a very important service for the whole of Europe.” EU countries “must stand together, because Lukashenko is using people’s fates with the support of Russian president Vladimir Putin to destabilise the west,” he said. “Poland or Germany can’t handle this alone. We must help the Polish government secure their external border. This would actually be the task of the European Commission. I’m now appealing to them to take action,” he said. Seehofer’s deputy, Stephan Mayer, told Bild that “Germany could send police very promptly to support Poland if Poland wants that”. A Polish government spokesperson said a further 3,000 to 4,000 migrants were gathering near the border on Tuesday. “We expect that there may be an escalation of this type of action on the Polish border in the near future, which will be of an armed nature,” he said. Poland has sent thousands of soldiers to the border area, created a two-mile deep militarised zone, built a razor-wire fence and approved the construction of a border wall. It is also enforcing a state of emergency in the region complete with a media blackout. Hundreds of people spent the night in tents in a camp along the border overnight, gathering firewood and lighting campfires as temperatures fell below freezing. Poland’s Kuźnica border crossing was closed early on Tuesday, and police monitoring the area with night-vision and thermal imaging reported a large detachment of Belarusian troops approaching the migrant camp. During clashes on Monday, video footage emerged that appeared to show an armed Polish officer spraying chemicals at men who were trying to cut the razor-wire border fence. Others tried to clear the fence by climbing long wooden poles or branches. Polish police were hit with objects thrown from the Belarusian side as helicopters hovered above. Gunshots were audible in several videos posted online on Monday evening. It is not clear whether anyone was injured. In the footage, a voice off-camera says that Belarusian border guards had opened fire, possibly in the air. Belarusian officials confirmed that gunshots were audible but claimed they had come from the Polish side of the border. There have been no repeats of Monday’s clashes, although the situation remained tense. On the Belarusian side, guards have been searching cars and buses approaching the border area and reportedly fired warning shots to prevent more people from joining the camp. Paweł Soloch, the head of Poland’s National Security Bureau, said late on Monday that “in the coming hours attacks on our border will be renewed by groups of several hundred people”. Many of those seeking entry into Poland are desperately fleeing war and poverty-racked countries in the Middle East. Most want to reach Germany, which said it had received more than 6,100 refugees via Poland from Belarus since the beginning of the year. On Monday, the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, pledged greater support for Poland, Lithuania and Latvia to deal with the emergency. She said the EU would explore “how to sanction, including through blacklisting, third-country airlines that are active in human trafficking”. “Belarus must stop putting people’s lives at risk. The instrumentalisation of migrants for political purposes by Belarus is unacceptable,” she added. Nato also hit out at Belarus, accusing its government of using migrants as political pawns. The US Department of State called on the regime in Belarus to “immediately halt its campaign of orchestrating and coercing irregular migrant flows across its borders into Europe”. Poland, a member of the EU and Nato, has drawn sharp criticism for its tough rhetoric on migration in recent years. The latest comments from Seehofer, Von der Leyen and others suggest a softening of the approach towards the country’s rightwing government. Those attempting to cross from Belarus into the EU have become trapped between the two since October, when Polish police were authorised to summarily expel migrants and ignore asylum applications. Belarusian border guards have refused to allow them to turn back. Belarus has denied it has any hand in directing the flow of migrants. “The indifference and inhumane attitude of the Polish authorities has prompted the refugees to take such a step of despair,” the Belarusian border guard said in a statement.Good morning. Barack Obama has called on world leaders to “step up and step up now” to avert climate breakdown, singling out China and Russia for being foremost among countries that are failing to cut planet-heating emissions quickly enough. Obama said that while progress had been made at the Glasgow climate talks – including significant pledges made by countries to reduce methane emissions and to end deforestation – “we are nowhere near where we need to be at” in cutting emissions and that “most nations have failed to be as ambitious as they need to be”. “It was particularly discouraging to see the leaders of two of the world’s largest emitters, China and Russia, decline to even attend the proceedings,” the former US president said in a speech to delegates at Cop26, echoing the criticism levelled at Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin by Joe Biden at the summit last week. What else did he say? He said that “there are times where I feel discouraged, there are times where the future seems somewhat bleak”, adding that “images of dystopia start creeping into my dreams”. What did Obama say to young activists and indigenous people who are disappointed by the promises made at Cop26? He said “imperfect compromises” will be required to address the climate emergency. “Gird yourself for a marathon, not a sprint.” Trump ‘throws sand’ in gears of Capitol attack inquiry amid legal setbacks Donald Trump has suffered a series of legal setbacks and more loom, as he wages a court battle to thwart a House committee from obtaining White House records for its inquiry into the 6 January Capitol assault and a new grand jury begins hearing evidence about possible crimes by his real estate firm. Former justice officials and legal scholars say Trump’s longstanding penchant for using lawsuits to fend off investigations and opponents is looking weaker now that he’s out of the White House and facing legal threats on multiple fronts. The list of significant legal setbacks is lengthy for the former president and real estate mogul who has long had a reputation for threatening to sue his foes. Meanwhile, the panel investigating the Capitol attack has issued subpoenas to six of Donald Trump’s associates involved in the effort to overturn the results of the 2020 election from a “command center” at the Willard Hotel in Washington DC. Who has been subpoenaed? The legal scholar John Eastman, Trump’s campaign manager Bill Stepien, Trump’s adviser Jason Miller, the former national security adviser Michael Flynn, Trump’s campaign aide Angela McCallum, and the former New York police department commissioner Bernard Kerik. Astroworld disaster fuels wave of satanic conspiracy theories on TikTok Videos of the Astroworld crowd crush that killed eight people flooded TikTok over the weekend. But conspiracy theories have also flourished alongside the graphic footage, accusing the rapper Travis Scott, who founded and performed at the festival, of orchestrating a massive satanic ritual. “This ain’t a festival, it’s a sacrifice,” reads one comment. “The music industry is demonic and collects souls,” reads another comment with 34,000 likes. Despite its absurdity, the theory has steadily gained traction – with phrases such as “astroworld demonic”, “astroworld illuminati” and “astroworld upside down cross” trending among other AstroWorld content on the platform. Experts say the viral misinformation illustrates how young social media users are increasingly susceptible to fringe conspiracy theories, despite their reputation as savvy “digital natives”. Why do people believe the theories? Internet users have seized on several far-fetched “symbols” present at the concert, including imagery of flames and burning doves. What else has happened since the disaster? Scott and Drake have both been sued for having “incited mayhem”, a law firm has confirmed. In other news … Two California couples gave birth to each other’s babies after a mix-up at a fertility clinic and spent months raising children that were not theirs before swapping the infants, according to a lawsuit filed in Los Angeles. A North Dakota Republican who organized a rally to oppose Covid-19 vaccine mandates said he would not attend the event – because he was infected with Covid-19. The state representative, Jeff Hoverson, posted on Facebook on Sunday that he was “quarantining and each day is getting better”. The head of Canada’s largest airline is facing public outrage and calls for his resignation after giving a speech in English to business leaders in Quebec – a misstep that has inflamed longstanding grievances over linguistic rights where French is the only official language. Singapore will no longer pay the Covid-19 medical bills for people “unvaccinated by choice”, the government said, as the country grapples with a surge in cases. It said unvaccinated people “disproportionately contribute to the strain on our healthcare resources”. Stat of the day: people who go to sleep at midnight linked to 25% higher risk of heart disease When it comes to sleep, Goldilocks may have argued the trick is to find a bed that is “just right” but research suggests there may also be an optimal time to nod off – at least when it comes to heart health. Not too early and not too late, with the sweet spot being between 10pm and 11pm. The study, based on data from more than 88,000 participants of the UK Biobank, suggests going to sleep at 10pm or shortly after is associated with a lower risk of developing cardiovascular disease compared with falling asleep earlier or later at night. Don’t miss this: why don’t we dump toxic friends? A toxic friend may seem oxymoronic: unlike families or colleagues, where we might be obliged to maintain ties, most friendships we opt into. Yet nearly everyone has someone in their social network that they have mixed feelings about, says Julianne Holt-Lunstad, a professor of psychology and neuroscience at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. “The distinction seems to be that there are some people who just have more than others,” she says. Holt-Lunstad launched a study into “ambivalent relationships” and found study participants’ interactions with these kinds of friends was associated with increased stress and cardiovascular reactivity. Climate check: about 26,000 tonnes of plastic Covid waste pollutes world’s oceans – study Plastic waste from the Covid-19 pandemic weighing 25,900 tonnes, equivalent to more than 2,000 doubledecker buses, has leaked into the ocean, research has revealed. The mismanaged plastic waste, consisting of personal protective equipment such as masks and gloves, vastly exceeded the capability of countries to process it properly, researchers said. Since the beginning of the pandemic, an estimated 8.4m tonnes of plastic waste has been generated from 193 countries, according to the report, published on Monday. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: collector puts world’s worst album art on show There’s the album cover with the band as rabbits, or the one with a harmony duo walking out of water dressed only in their underwear and ties, but surely the most baffling is the concert guitarist pictured in dinner jacket and no trousers. Why? “I’ve no idea, sorry,” says Steve Goldman, who owns about 300 records that can lay claim to having some of the world’s worst cover art. Goldman, 55, has been obsessively collecting the records for five years and this week shares them with the public in a display raising money for charity. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comAs the Covid-19 pandemic swept towards the UK, a senior employee of the healthcare firm Randox addressed an audience of horse racing royalty, gathered amid the neoclassical splendour of St George’s Hall in Liverpool. Randox, which had garnered a role within the “sport of kings” via its sponsorship of the Grand National, had developed a test for Covid-19, he told them. According to one observer, coronavirus seemed an unusual theme for the “weights lunch”, an annual event to celebrate the announcement of weight handicaps for the race. It was February 2020, and, with the pandemic yet to let rip in the UK, coronavirus was not yet a pressing concern for many of the guests. Within a year, Britain’s pandemic response – and Randox’s role in it – would be a matter of public scrutiny, not least due to the company being named in a lobbying scandal involving the Conservative MP Owen Paterson. Randox was founded in 1982 by the biochemist Peter FitzGerald, who ran a one-man-band operation from a converted chicken house off Randox Road, near Crumlin in Antrim, where he had grown up. FitzGerald started out using equipment discarded by university research labs but, through decades of hard work and innovation, slowly built the company into a market leader. Today, FitzGerald is a multimillionaire with a penchant for polo, while Randox is one of the best-known diagnostics companies in Europe, if not the world. It is also one of the biggest beneficiaries from UK government contracts in the fight against Covid-19. Since the start of the pandemic, its testing division, Randox Laboratories, has won nearly £500m-worth of government contracts and processed more than 10m Covid-19 PCR tests. The full effect of those contracts on its financial position will not be known until the company publishes its next set of accounts, due next year. Figures covering the 18 months ending in June 2020 show a pretax loss of £11.7m, due largely to £33m in one-off accounting items related to its rapid shift in focus to Covid-19. Revenues for the period, including the first four months of the pandemic, offer some indication as to the company’s more recent fortunes. Sales nearly doubled from £94m to £181m, although this was due partly to the extension of its financial year by six months. The company also paid a £15.9m dividend, the first in Randox’s history, according to Companies House filings. The payout, to parent company Randox Holdings, came in a year that was significant for another reason. In March 2020, shortly before Randox Laboratories won its first Covid-19 contract, worth £133m, the company restructured itself. It did so via the creation of a new ultimate controlling entity, Randox (IOM) Ltd, in the Isle of Man. The accounts do not make clear whether the company paid its £15.9m dividend before or after the restructure but Randox said it had received “no tax advantage”. A spokesperson said the new Isle of Man ownership arrangements were made “to support any future transfer of company ownership to future generations”. While Randox denies a tax benefit, tax is among the subjects that first brought the company into contact with Owen Paterson, according to government disclosures. In July 2014, after stepping down as secretary of state for environment, food and rural affairs, Paterson sought advice from Acoba, the body that scrutinises former ministers who take paid jobs. The advice Acoba gave to Paterson highlighted that his contact with the company began when he was shadow secretary of state for Northern Ireland, between 2007 and 2010, a dialogue that continued when he held the same brief in government. The relationship was established “in the context of the debate about the devolution of responsibility for corporation tax”, Acoba said. It was not until August 2015 that Paterson took up a paid role with the firm, on a £100,000 salary, the equivalent of £500 an hour for his part-time consulting work. With Paterson onboard – and FitzGerald’s expertise and enthusiasm driving the company on – Randox was going from strength to strength even before the pandemic – but not without a degree of controversy. In March 2016, seven months after Paterson joined, Randox agreed to sponsor the Grand National, held at Aintree. The racecourse was chaired, at the time, by Paterson’s wife, Rose. There is no suggestion the relationship affected the sponsorship decision. It was in 2016 and 2017 that Paterson lobbied the ministers Priti Patel and Rory Stewart on behalf of Randox, among the actions that ultimately led to his resignation last week. The following year, the criminal convictions of 41 people who had pleaded guilty to drug driving were quashed – and a further 50 investigations were dropped – after an investigation into alleged data tampering at a Randox forensics lab. The National Police Chiefs’ Council forensics lead, chief constable James Vaughan, described the scandal as the “biggest breach of integrity in forensic science” in living memory. Nor have its Covid-19 contracts been entirely free of setbacks. In July 2020, the government instructed care homes and members of the public to immediately stop using the company’s testing kits, after discovering problems with sub-standard swabs. At the time, the company said it had temporarily suspended distribution of home sample collection kits using one particular batch/supplier of swabs and that the issue did not affect its private business, which used a different supplier of swabs.Videos of the Astroworld crowd crush that killed eight people flooded TikTok over the weekend. But conspiracy theories have also flourished alongside the graphic footage, accusing the rapper Travis Scott, who founded and performed at the festival, of orchestrating a massive satanic ritual. “This ain’t a festival, it’s a sacrifice,” reads one typical comment. “The music industry is demonic and collects souls,” reads another comment with 34,000 likes. Despite its absurdity, the theory has steadily gained traction – with phrases such as “astroworld demonic”, “astroworld illuminati” and “astroworld upside down cross” trending among other AstroWorld content on the platform. Experts say the viral misinformation illustrates how young social media users are increasingly susceptible to fringe conspiracy theories, despite their reputation as savvy “digital natives”. “We have this stereotype of conspiracy theorists being older people on social media, but young people can in some ways be more susceptible,” said Jennifer Stromer-Galley, a professor studying social media platforms at Syracuse University. “We know that human brains really like sensational content, and teenage brains even more so because they are still developing,” she added. Internet users have seized on several far-fetched “symbols” present at the concert, including imagery of flames and burning doves. Some TikTok users described the stage as “an inverted cross leading to hell”. Others cited numerology, falsely claiming that Travis Scott and his fellow performer Drake “were born 66 months 6 days apart”. Joseph Russo, who teaches a class on the anthropology of conspiracy theories at Wesleyan University, said such wild claims bore links to QAnon, a conspiracy theory that claims a secret cabal of pedophiles controls the government and is trafficking children. “It is mutating and taking different forms, but it goes back to the idea there is a shadowy group of people in control behind it all,” Russo said. “It is super seductive, and always comes back – but it is surprising young people are following this script more and more.” Gen Z – the name for the generation born after 1996 – faces a number of risk factors for misinformation. It has far higher rates of mistrust in traditional institutions such as the news media and the government compared with past generations and uses social media to get its news coverage at much higher rates than its counterparts. The algorithms used to increase user engagement on these platforms presents an additional risk, according to Ioana Literat, an associate professor of communication studying social media at Teachers College, Columbia University. “This is an indication of just how fertile of a ground TikTok is for creating and sharing misinformation and conspiracy theories,” she said, adding that while conspiracy theories were common after tragic events, it was now easier to share them. “With the reign of social media platforms like TikTok, there’s the potential for greater and further spread, and a certain rise in sophistication in terms of the deployment of media resources to craft these arguments,” she said. It’s not the first time that TikTok has enabled the spread of misinformation among young users. In 2020, a debunked theory that the online furniture outlet Wayfair was involved in a child sex trafficking ring was shared hundreds of thousands of times. A spokesman for TikTok said the conspiracy theory content violated its community guidelines and it was taking action against the material. While many of the theories might seem harmless, they could still present problems offline, said Abbie Richards, a TikTok disinformation researcher. “We’ve seen that time and time again this can absolutely translate to real-world harm,” she said. In 2016, a man radicalized by online conspiracy theories related to QAnon stormed a restaurant in Washington DC with a weapon. The 2021 insurrection at the US Capitol was largely fueled by online conspiracy theories and resulted in five deaths. The rise of conspiracy theories, among Gen Z and its elders, appears only to be worsening in the wake of tragedies like the concert in Houston, said Russo. “In a moment in which young people feel they’re living in a really chaotic world where not much makes sense, certain conspiracy theories can feel like a security blanket, because they tell us there is actually an order underneath it all,” he said.Can you hear it? That frantic cacophony of click-clacks is the sound of pundits, professors and politicos typing think pieces and Twitter posts dissecting the results of last week’s gubernatorial election in Virginia. Less than a year ago, Democratic candidates won the only two statewide races by more than 10 points. So how did Republican Glenn Youngkin ride his critical race theory surfboard into Virginia’s governor’s mansion? The explanations for the former governor Terry McAuliffe’s political mollywhopping are endless. CNN’s Van Jones attributed the loss to the fact that progressives are perceived as “annoying and offensive”. Others concluded that the Democratic party has a “messaging problem”. According to Bloomberg, “Tuesday’s outcomes highlight deepening strains in the coalition of suburban, independent and Black voters who helped Joe Biden win the White House.” Perhaps some of those things are true. Maybe the Democratic messaging machine is at fault. Perhaps the party is overly woke. It is possible that McAuliffe chased independent voters instead of focusing on turnout among his party’s most reliable constituency. It could be that the fault lies with a combination of these missteps. Maybe none of these things was a major factor. Of all the opinions, projections and political analyses produced by perfect hindsight, there is only one thing we can conclusively know for sure: whiteness played a significant part in the McAuliffe loss. After party affiliation and political ideology, no other metric was more determinative of who voted for Youngkin than whiteness. According to exit polling data, six out of 10 white Virginia voters cast ballots for the hedge fund manager-turned-politician. Two-thirds of white men and more than half of white women voted for the GOP’s gubernatorial candidate. Whiteness was more predictive of who voted for Youngkin than many traditional conservative political issues, including the economy or abortion. Nearly nine out of 10 Black Virginians voted for McAuliffe, as did two out of three Hispanic and Asian voters. Youngkin didn’t simply win the white vote; he won only the white vote. In spite of the popular narrative, the hullabaloo that propelled GOP candidates to victory in Virginia had very little to do with Democrats’ inability to counter conservative concerns that history teachers were indoctrinating white students into the cult of wokeness. Youngkin didn’t win by slipping into a cable-knit sweater vest and presenting a more palatable, toned-down version of Trumpism. He won by employing the most reliable tool in conservative politics – the race card. Long before Virginia’s governor-elect rallied a monoracial coalition of white voters around social studies curricula, conservatives pioneered the pastime they now call “identity politics”. And, while it is impossible to gauge the feelings of every single politician who issues the clarion call to whiteness, by every objective metric, we know that it works. More importantly, they know it works. When America’s biggest terrorist threat was rightwing violence, Trump defied every pundit’s prediction and leapfrogged every Republican presidential candidate by promising to erect a wall on the US southern border, issuing a travel ban from majority-Muslim countries and demanding Barack Obama’s birth certificate. While Democrats generally embrace values such as faith, family, a strong military and the all-American hate for tan suits, conservative politicians don’t just reject police reform, voting rights legislation and nearly every issue that specifically addresses racial disparities, they trumpet their opposition to these issues as a white badge of courage. And they do it because it works. To be clear, these are not political issues; they are white issues. Whether it is cast as “increased public attention to the history of slavery and racism in America” or “critical race theory”, poll after poll shows majority support among Black, Hispanic and Asian Americans. But those teary-eyed white women weeping in campaign ads and school board meetings about the horrors of Toni Morrison novels were not the target of Youngkin’s most crucial campaign issue (McAuliffe actually won women with children); they were a living illustration that embodied all white grievances. And Youngkin’s dog-whistle worked because, for a large portion of the American electorate, whiteness has always been a legitimate political issue that manifests itself in many ways. CRT is just the latest interchangeable placeholder that summons white fear to win elections. Ronald Reagan’s version of critical race theory was the “welfare queen”. George HW Bush turned Willie Horton into a ghoul to coast to victory in 1988. Whiteness saved George W Bush after losing his first presidential primary when a rumor emerged that his opponent John McCain had a secret Black baby. Birth certificates, Barack “Hussein” Obama and “radical Islamic terrorism” were all iterations of the same strategy. There are legitimate reasons why the original race-baiting works so well. In a country whose economic, political and social hierarchy is inextricably intertwined with whiteness, upending this historically sound apple cart can be disquieting. For those who conflate convention and tradition with Americanism, teaching children about their beloved country’s tragic flaw of white supremacy can seem as unpatriotic as watching a man in an afro kneel during a pregame ceremony of a football game. Seeing Obama’s birth certificate is more important than seeing Trump’s taxes. It’s hard to explain why actual, documented voter suppression doesn’t cause as much concern as fake electoral fraud, but it just feels different. Perhaps it’s because, when they recall the good old days, they actually remember good days. The victory in Virginia has nothing to do with nonexistent anti-white social studies classes or Mexican caravans or sharia law, which is also why it’s nearly impossible for Democrats to construct a counter-narrative that can defeat the history of white identity politics. It’s not even about race. It’s just American-style politics. But mostly, it’s about whiteness. And, as you can see … It works. Michael Harriot is a writer and author of the upcoming book Black AF History: The Unwhitewashed Story of America.Oralia Perez waited nervously and excitedly on the US side of the border from Mexico for the chance to hug her sister and mother for the first time in almost 20 months. One minute after midnight east coast time, ie the first moments of Monday – which was actually still Sunday night, 10.01pm local time, in El Paso, west Texas, where she was – the US government lifted pandemic restrictions on non-essential cross-border travel for those who are vaccinated. As soon as the deadline passed, Oralia’s sister Guadalupe Perez and their mother Lorena Hernandez were among the first to rush by foot across one of the international bridges linking Mexico and the US, and in the late fall chill and the darkness, they flung themselves into each other’s arms. The last time the three had been together was February 2020. “As soon as we found out they were being allowed to pass, we couldn’t wait for today,” Oralia said. “They were very difficult months.” Hernandez said she had been afraid the authorities would decide yet again it wasn’t time to reopen the border. But having crossed successfully she stroked Oralia’s hair and beamed. The women repaired for the night and on Monday morning they had a celebratory breakfast together at the American chain staple, International House of Pancakes (Ihop), in El Paso. Then they went shopping, thrilled to be back in each other’s company, Oralia told the Guardian. The US temporarily limited inbound border crossings from Canada and Mexico to only “essential travel” from 21 March 2020. Restrictions were extended again and again, finally coming to an end at the start of this week. In El Paso, the city and county authorities, the police department and the federal Customs and Border Protection agency coordinated to oversee the clusters of people eager to cross by foot or car into the US for the first time in almost 20 months. Agents checked passports and proof of vaccination and visitors began trickling in from the Mexican metropolitan area adjacent to El Paso, Ciudad Juárez, and all along the almost 3,000 miles of the US-Mexico border on Monday. Apart from keeping families apart and creating yet more havoc and misery for undocumented migrants and asylum seekers, the pandemic border restrictions hammered local businesses. “All along our border and throughout our community, there are businesses that have prospered for generations because they were able to serve consumers on both sides of the border,” said Cindy Ramos-Davidson, chief executive of the El Paso Hispanic chamber of commerce. “The halt to non-essential travel … has devastated our small, local businesses that depend on that foot traffic,” she added. “For months, we waited, it’s finally here,” Gustavo Tavera, who owns a perfume shop in downtown El Paso, said of the restrictions being lifted. “So many businesses are [now] smaller or didn’t make it.” Not far away, on the corner of a street lined with small stores, Mercedes Vasquez and her aunt Patricia Carmona clung to each other on Monday morning, hugging and sobbing after Carmona showed her vaccination certificate and walked across from Juárez to El Paso. “I’m just so happy,” Vasquez said through tears after finally stepping back from their embrace. They used to visit each other frequently and are very close, but had been separated by the pandemic. “The last time I was able to see my family [in Juárez] was two years ago at my grandpa’s funeral. Then sadly Covid happened and we couldn’t go back to visit,” said Vasquez. “It’s been the hardest years of my life and not being close to my loved ones was the worst,” she said. Her aunt has lived alone in Juárez since her father, Vasquez’s grandfather, died before the pandemic. Then a mutual cousin of theirs died just last month. So now, amid the joy of their belated rendezvous, Vasquez and Carmona will soon be discussing plans for another funeral. But they are also looking forward to spending Thanksgiving in El Paso, a reunion of relatives who live there and those visiting from Juárez. “Crying will be the first thing, but also joy and happiness. I just want to hug them and never let go,” said Vasquez. While the excitement is buzzing for families and for the holidays, Covid-19 cases in El Paso have been rising again. A year ago the city was reeling from a coronavirus surge that was overwhelming hospitals and funeral homes, with inmates brought in to load bodies into mobile morgues. By this summer, with a vaccination rate of 78% for those over the age of 12, and a huge outreach effort, El Paso reached a low of fewer than 300 active Covid-19 cases. As of Monday, there were about 3,200 cases across the county, a fraction of a year ago but still a stark increase from summer numbers. But Hector Ocaranza, sometimes dubbed Dr O, the public health official leading El Paso county’s Covid response, said: “Positive cases are attributed to the unvaccinated.” Because proof of vaccination is required for non-essential travel, Ocaranza has not expressed concerned about the border reopening, though he warned against anyone letting their guard down. “We continue to encourage everyone to get vaccinated,” he said. “We want everyone to celebrate the holidays with their families, but do so in a safe manner.” Reuters contributed reportingThe industry built on Britney Spears is a vast and adaptable beast. Ever since the singer first appeared on the scene in 1998, at the age of 16, she has been a profitable asset. She has sold many millions of records and concert tickets and given her name to countless products, from soft drinks to cameras to perfume. Her personal life has also sold, and continues to sell, newspapers and magazines. She has kept gossip sites and paparazzi operations in rude health for decades. Now, the world seems to be asking, what was the cost? An old episode of South Park posed this question as early as 2008. It was made around the time that Spears was admitted to a psychiatric ward, and she and her estate were placed under the conservatorship of her father, Jamie, a controversial arrangement that has only just begun to shift. The episode, Britney’s New Look, was an excoriating satire on the savage treatment doled out to young women in the public eye; it ended with cartoon Britney being ritually sacrificed by the townsfolk, with the blame shared out between the press and the people. The current phase of the Britney industry, still evolving rapidly, owes much to the tone of this old 20-minute animation. It is both fascinated by her suffering and disgusted by this fascination with it, trapped in a conflicted state of concern and curiosity. For a while, the #FreeBritney movement, which began as a campaign by fans to liberate the singer from the conservatorship that remained in place for 13 years, looked like a well-meaning conspiracy theory, to outsiders at least. Fans looked for signals that the singer might be asking for help in her Instagram posts. But as allegations about the dark nature of the conservatorship surfaced, the fans’ cause went mainstream. This year, a number of documentaries have attempted to expose the truth of what has happened to Spears since 2008. These films – Framing Britney Spears, Controlling Britney Spears, The Battle for Britney and Britney vs Spears – have used the unravelling of the conservatorship to reassess Spears’s place in the cultural canon. They employ a tactic of revisionism that takes media coverage from the time and condemns it from a 2021 perspective. Yet they also draw heavily on the material they condemn, and can lapse into a state of queasy piousness. Now Being Britney: Pieces of a Modern Icon joins the fray. The book does not appear to report anything new; rather, it gathers up fragments of news stories, fan gossip, documentaries, chat forums, opinion pieces and more, to scrabble together a biography of sorts. This fractured style is fitting for the digital age in which we live, and its tone recalls the hot-take rapid-churn of the internet. Otter Bickerdike is an academic and cultural historian who dedicates each chapter to a big talking point or scandal or victory in Spears’s career, from the … Baby One More Time video to the famous double-denim look she wore to an event with Justin Timberlake, to media speculation on whether she had breast implants, her rivalry with Christina Aguilera, the horrors of her 2008 crisis and the ongoing fallout from that time. She is interested in Spears as “a cultural vessel”, and the book sets up the star as a blank canvas on to which audiences can project whatever they like. Spears can be a businesswoman, a canny pop genius, a victim, a survivor, an icon, depending on which way and when you look at her. But its broad brushstrokes can make for a wild read. There is a chapter about Spears fleeing a supposedly haunted house, which she sold to the actor Brittany Murphy and her husband, Simon Monjack, who both later died there. “Perhaps the ‘disturbed’ couple Spears encountered were the future ghosts of Murphy and Monjack?” Otter Bickerdike suggests. Perhaps! Crucially, Spears is positioned as relatable, with the author arguing that despite the star’s troubles, she is “showing us all how to be bloodied and bruised yet seemingly unbreakable, no matter how daunting the circumstances”. But I am not sure that the Spears saga lends itself to universal lessons about triumph in the face of adversity. What this line of argument misses, surely, is the uniqueness of Spears’s situation. What happened to her is grotesque and extreme. She is one of the most famous women in the world, living with unimaginable scrutiny, and yet she has spent more than a decade allegedly under the control of her father – who, she told a court back in June, medicated her, threatened her with being sent to a psychiatric unit if she disobeyed his orders to work, and gave her a contraceptive implant to stop her having more children. In response, Jamie Spears said he had no power over his daughter’s personal affairs for nearly two years, and that when he was conservator over her personal decisions, he did everything in his power to support her wellbeing, including consenting to her getting married in 2012 and sharing conservatorship duties with her fiance. “I just want my life back, and it’s been 13 years and it’s enough,” Spears said then. But the pieces of her life continue to be arranged and rearranged, for our entertainment. • Being Britney: Pieces of a Modern Icon is published by Bonnier (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Amid an array of discouraging election results for Democrats last week, there was one under-the-radar outcome that was especially perplexing. In New York, one of the country’s most progressive states, voters overwhelmingly rejected initiatives that would have expanded voting access in future elections. The vote, which came in a year when Republican-led states have passed dozens of laws to restrict voting access, left voting rights advocates stunned. One of the proposals would have paved the way for lawmakers to get rid of a longstanding states policy that requires voters to give an excuse if they want to vote by mail (34 states and the District of Columbia allow anyone to vote by mail for any reason). Another would have allowed people to register to vote on election day, a reform advocates believe significantly increases political participation. None of the measures came anywhere close to passing. Republicans waged a well-funded and aggressive campaign to oppose the amendments, a move that caught supporters of the proposal off guard. The reforms were also hampered by low turnout and confusing wording on the ballot, which may have prompted some voters to choose to skip voting on the measures altogether. The failed ballot measures mean that for now, New York will remain in a category with conservative states like Alabama, Mississippi and Texas, all of which require voters to give an excuse if they want to cast a mail-in ballot. “There was an assumption that of course it’ll pass because it’s New York. And unfortunately, we woke up Wednesday morning and saw that was definitely not true,” said Sarah Goff, the deputy director of the New York chapter of Common Cause, a watchdog group that supported the measures. “Republicans and conservatives treated these ballot initiatives like essential threats and moved accordingly. And we just did not see that from the institutional supporters that we would have liked to.” The defeat offered a huge boon for Republicans, who are vigorously opposing Democratic efforts at the federal level to make it easier to vote. “Even in deep blue New York, citizens appear to be rejecting Democrats’ demands for weaker elections,” Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader in the US Senate, said on Wednesday. New York’s Conservative party spent $3m opposing the effort, according to the New York Times, and Republicans traveled across the state as part of a “Just Say No” campaign. There was a heavy push to advertise online and on TV against the amendments, especially in more conservative areas of the state outside the city. Echoing national Republicans, the campaign touted the specter of voter fraud, which is extremely rare, to urge voters to vote down the measures. “The Republicans dedicated a significant amount of money to defeating it and did a successful job of politicizing the question,” said Michael Gianaris, a Democrat in the New York state senate who backed the measures. New York’s Democratic party did not spend any money supporting the efforts, Jay Jacobs, the party’s chair told reporters. New York state senate Democrats spent $300,000, and asked the state party for help, but got radio silence, Gianaris said. “Republicans spent millions of dollars upstate and on Long Island educating voters to vote no and we did not spend hardly any money or even effort to educate voters on the other side,” said Jan Combopiano, senior policy director and executive committee member at the Brooklyn Voters Alliance. “I don’t think it matters if you’re a Democrat or Republican or whatever – all voters, to some extent, are afraid of fraud,” said Jennifer Wilson, the deputy director of the New York chapter of the League of Women Voters, a good-government group. “We didn’t do a good job of reassuring voters ‘don’t worry this isn’t gonna cause fraud. All it’s gonna do is make voting easier.’” Voters also may have simply not understood the lengthy and complex descriptions of the proposals, printed on the back of ballots. Up to 13% of voters left each of the three questions blank. “They had so many candidates on the front side and then they flipped it over to the backside and they had a dissertation to read,” Wilson said. A third proposal, which was more controversial, would have changed the rules around how the state draws new political districts each decade. Good-government groups were divided on that measure, a fissure that made it harder to organize a cohesive message to voters to support the ballot initiatives that would have expanded absentee voting and allowed same-day registration, Combopiano said. Nineteen states passed 33 laws between January and the end of September that made it harder to vote, according to the Brennan Center for Justice, and are widely seen as an effort to make it harder for minority voters to cast a ballot. Democrats have aggressively challenged the new policies in states like Georgia and Florida, both of which allow for no-excuse absentee voting, the same policy New York voters rejected on Tuesday. It could be years before the proposals appear on the ballot again because amending the constitution is a years-long process in New York state. “These are not out-there ideas,” Combopiano said. “If we can’t even get these things done, we are really behind the curve.”Donald Trump has suffered a series of legal setbacks and more loom, as he wages a court battle to thwart a House committee from obtaining White House records for its inquiry into the 6 January Capitol assault and a new grand jury begins hearing evidence about possible crimes by his real estate firm. Former justice officials and legal scholars say Trump’s long-standing penchant for using lawsuits to fend off investigations and opponents is looking weaker now that he’s out of the White House and facing legal threats on multiple fronts. The list of significant legal setbacks is lengthy for the former president and real estate mogul who has long had a reputation for threatening to sue his foes. Early this year, for example, Manhattan district attorney Cyrus Vance Jr won a lengthy legal fight to obtain Trump’s tax returns, and in July charged two Trump companies and the Trump Organization’s chief financial officer with a 15 year tax fraud scheme, which the companies and the CFO have denied in pleas. On 4 November, a second grand jury was convened by Vance to hear more evidence about the financial practices of the Trump Organization and possibly bring more charges, according to the Washington Post. Trump suffered another legal setback when a New York court ordered him to give a deposition in October that lasted more than four hours in an old lawsuit by men alleging they were attacked in 2015 by Trump security guards at a demonstration outside Trump Tower in Manhattan. Meanwhile, in his latest high stakes court fight, Trump’s attorneys have launched a legal blitz invoking executive privilege to block the House select committee from obtaining hundreds of pages of documents from the National Archives the committee seeks as it investigates the 6 January Capitol riot and what role Trump played in it. A federal judge at a hearing on Trump’s legal challenges on 4 November voiced strong scepticism about his lawyers’ executive privilege claims to keep the committee from getting most of the records it wants, noting that President Joe Biden approved turning them over. Trump’s many reverses in court and his efforts to blunt the bipartisan House committee’s inquiry, underscore the growing legal threats Trump is facing that pose new financial and political risks, say former justice department lawyers and legal scholars. Historically, Trump has relied on lawsuits as a delaying tactic to benefit his business interests, or to claim executive privilege or immunity to stymie congressional, state and other investigations when he was president, according to legal analysts. Likewise, after his loss to Joe Biden last year, Trump’s campaign and allies filed more than 60 lawsuits claiming widespread fraud that were rejected by various courts. To back his fights Trump boasts a legal arsenal with a shifting cast of lawyers, in part because Trump has been rebuffed by several high-profile attorneys this year, according to a CNN report and legal sources. “Trump is going pretty deep down the bench to find lawyers,” said one former DOJ prosecutor and GOP white collar attorney. “I think a lot of established lawyers would have trouble getting approval from their firms because of political blowback and risk of non-payment.” DoJ lawyers and experts say that Trump’s legal fortunes now look grimmer, and that his current battle royale to block the House inquiry into the Capitol riot by his allies seems quite weak, though it may delay the inquiry for months. “Trump’s current assertions of a privilege against the disclosures are almost identical to the baseless claims of an absolute immunity that he advanced repeatedly – and the supreme court rejected – when he was president,” said Donald Ayer, a former deputy attorney general in the George HW Bush administration, in a Guardian interview. Ayer added that “Trump is just blowing smoke and trying to throw sand in the gears of the select committee investigation. Congress, the administration, and the courts need to quickly and emphatically say no and press ahead with the investigation.” Other DoJ veterans agree that Trump’s legal case looks flimsy, but say it could stall the House inquiry. “The executive privilege claim against the National Archives is extremely weak,” said former federal prosecutor Paul Rosenzweig. “The question is whether he can game the system to run out the clock and make the requests moot.” That may well be the point. Trump’s regular use of litigation to delay federal and state inquiries echo his modus operandi when he was president and in the business world, say experts. “Likelihood of success on Trump’s legal claims is not always or often the primary goal,” said Stephen Gillers, a law professor at New York University. “The primary goal, at least for the farfetched claims, is delay. If there’s also a partial victory, so much the better.” More legal battles are pending for Trump, including claims by two women, ex- Apprentice candidate Summer Zervos and writer E Jean Carroll, who, respectively, have alleged they were sexually harassed or raped by Trump, charges he has denied. Zervos has sued Trump for defamation and Trump, who has threatened to counter sue, faces a court order to sit for a deposition by Christmas. Similarly, a New York judge in September denied a Trump lawyer’s request to pause a defamation lawsuit by Carroll against Trump. But Trump’s legal armada now seems focused on blocking White House records from the House committee investigating the deadly 6 January attack on Congress, which followed a Trump rally where he told a large crowd of loyalists to “fight like hell”, as Congress was poised to certify Biden’s win. Trump’s legal tactics fit his old playbook. “He is behaving now as he long behaved as a real estate investor and builder in the high stakes and often vicious world of New York commercial real estate,” Gillers said. “When the same tactics are employed in national politics, the victims are democracy and the nation.”On Friday night, 27-year-old Asadullah, who sold old shoes on a cart, set himself on fire in the Pakistani city of Karachi. Ghani, a relative, blamed the state of an economy where rampant inflation is hitting those least able to cope. In comments to local media, he said Asadullah used to get calls from his wife and parents asking him for money, but he could not afford to pay the rent and meet his own expenses and sending money back home was no longer possible. “We can’t run our homes, that’s why Asadullah committed suicide,” Ghani said. “I know five more people who are fed up with inflation and want to end their lives because of skyrocketing prices. The government should have mercy and decrease the inflation.” An economic meltdown is putting the Pakistani prime minister, Imran Khan, under immense pressure and bringing the threat of unrest as record inflation – the fourth highest in the world – pushes the price of sugar higher than petrol. Before coming to power, Khan had vowed to root out corruption and lift people out of poverty as he promised a new and prosperous Pakistan with the creation of 10m jobs. Instead, after a visit to Saudi Arabia last month, he announced $3bn in financial support from Riyadh. In an address to the nation last week, Khan blamed the opposition for past mistakes and inflation in the international market for the miseries of the people in Pakistan. He also announced a 120bn-rupee relief package providing subsidies on essential food items. Khurram Hussain, an economic analyst, said it was not enough. “The package is a drop in the ocean and will do little to help the mass of ordinary people. The pressure on Imran Khan will continue to mount because we have seen further price hikes, such as of fuel and sugar, after the announcement of the package.” He said inflation was imposing a crushing burden on ordinary people because it comes at a time of high unemployment and stagnant wages. Prices of some essential items, such as fuel and electricity, are unprecedentedly high. The Pakistan Democratic Movement (PDM), an opposition alliance, has announced a campaign against the government of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) and the inflation rates the country is witnessing. A long march against inflation was also announced as a part of the campaign from Lahore to Islamabad. It says ordinary people of the country will struggle to afford basic necessities if prices do not come down. Two weeks ago, Mohammed Ghufran, 47, a shopkeeper in Mardan, Pakistan’s north-western province, was arrested after he went to a mosque and prayed for cursing the prime minister. Ghufran said he had seen a fall in the number of customers as prices went up. He talked about inflation to daily wage workers, who told him that they could not afford to buy food for their families. “I rushed to a mosque and announced to the speakers that we should curse Imran Khan,” he told the Guardian. “The prime minister promised a new (Naya) Pakistan and that it would be a welfare state for ordinary people but he has done the opposite. He is crushing the poor.” Ghufran said he regretted voting for Khan and “everyone I know who voted for him and believed in him” regretted it, too. “People in my neighbourhood supported my calls against Imran Khan after I was released in two days. We believe Imran khan should resign if he can’t control the prices of essential commodities.” Three years ago, a sack of sugar (50kg) cost about 3,000 rupees (£13) but now it is more than 7,000 rupees (£30). “As he lied to us, I pray God would ask him,” he said. A government employee, asking to remain anonymous, told the Guardian that the prices of necessary commodities had increased with little increase in income. The government has failed to control inflation,” he said. “I could run my kitchen for 60,000 rupees (£261) three years ago and now I can’t do it for 90,000 rupees (£393).”Dean Stockwell, the former child star who became a key figure in the Hollywood counter-culture and enjoyed late success in popular TV shows, has died aged 85. According to Deadline, his family said he died at home “of natural causes”. Born in Los Angeles in 1936, Stockwell had become a major name while still in high school, starring in the anti-racism parable The Boy With Green Hair in 1948 and alongside Errol Flynn in the 1950 adaptation of Rudyard Kipling’s Kim. However, Stockwell found the transition to adulthood difficult and after dropping out of university he re-established his film career with a lead role in Compulsion, the 1959 crime film based on the Leopold and Loeb murder case, for which he won a best actor award at the Cannes film festival alongside co-stars Orson Welles and Bradford Dillman. Stockwell won another best actor award at Cannes for the 1962 adaptation of Long Day’s Journey into Night, directed by Sidney Lumet, and continued working steadily on TV, but was rapidly growing disillusioned with the entertainment business; he famously joined Hollywood’s Topanga Canyon hippy culture and largely dropped out of acting. In 1968, he began to return, appearing as a guru-like long-hair in Richard Rush’s Psych-Out, and in 1970 in Dennis Hopper’s epic The Last Movie; he later said: “It was a great pleasure to work with Dennis on it and we had a wild time down there in Peru.” Stockwell continued to associate with Hopper and other counter-culture figures such as Bruce Dern, Rip Torn and fellow former child star Russ Tamblyn, but struggled to find work in the 70s, and by the early 80s had largely switched to selling real estate. A career revival began to gather momentum after David Lynch cast him in a small role in his 1984 adaptation of Dune, followed by a larger role in Paris, Texas, after lead actor Harry Dean Stanton suggested him to director Wim Wenders. Stockwell’s new cachet was cemented with a role in Lynch’s next film, Blue Velvet, in which he performed a memorably creepy lip-sync to Roy Orbison’s In Dreams. Stockwell then gained an Oscar nomination for best supporting actor for his role as a mafia boss in Jonathan Demme’s 1988 comedy Married to the Mob, saying: “Some people might pooh-pooh it and say it didn’t mean anything, but it does. It’s really gratifying to get the recognition from your peers.” In 1989, he also secured probably his most high-profile TV role alongside Scott Bakula in time travel series Quantum Leap, which ran until 1993, and for which he won three Emmy awards and a Golden Globe. For the next two decades, Stockwell worked steadily on TV and in Hollywood, often as authority figures; he appeared in Robert Altman’s The Player, Air Force One and Francis Ford Coppola’s The Rainmaker, while on TV he had roles in JAG, Star Trek Enterprise and Battlestar Galactica. In 2015, he retired from acting following a stroke. Stockwell was married twice: to actor Millie Perkins between 1960 and 1962, and then to Joy Marchenko from 1981 t0 2004, with whom he had two children.Picture the scene: winter 1961, Department of Meteorology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Edward Lorenz, affable professor of Meteorology is in his office tinkering with his computerised weather system. This particular morning, Lorenz wants to take a closer look at one of his computerised weather patterns so he re-enters the sequence of digits in order to recreate it, sets his machine off whirring and goes to grab a cup of coffee while the computer does its thing. Namely, printing out a series of wavy lines of the letter “a” in, “a long series of hills and valleys” to represent a weather system. Lorenz returns shortly after, and what he finds makes him almost spill the remnants of his java on to his brogues. The two weather system printouts, far from being duplicates, are completely different. In his haste, Lorenz has entered the number to only three decimal places, rather than the usual six, .506 rather than .506127. This fraction of a difference has a dramatic effect. That cold morning Lorenz stumbled into chaos theory, the notion that nature is incredibly sensitive to the tiniest change. It would later become simplified as the Butterfly Effect, after Lorenz wrote a paper in 1972 titled, Does the Flap of a Butterfly’s Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado in Texas? Chaos can be defined as a “state of utter confusion or disorder”, which anyone who has been in the changing room after a flurry of quick wickets can easily relate to. Cricket lends itself particularly well to chaos theory. One of the joys, or tortures, of following sport is to go down these hypothetically shaped rabbit holes. “What if …” is muttered as much by the sports fan as the spurned lover. In both cases it is often in postmortem, the writing of the result and the relationship firmly etched on the wall. In his 1998 book Chaos, James Gleick describes the related work that chaos theorists undertake as “having a long look into the universe’s bowels” – which doesn’t sound too dissimilar to what fans do year-round in pubs, trains and on the internet after the final whistle has sounded or the stumps have been drawn. Most sports hinge on a series of tiny moments. Vast amounts of money and time are spent on doing something a fraction quicker or more efficiently. But what about when the universe weighs in and throws up a bit of chaos for a laugh? Lorenz and his followers would have had a field day with the recent cricketing match-ups between England and New Zealand. 2019, Durham. By his own admission, Mark Wood has tiny hands. In a must-win World Cup game for England he runs in to bowl at Ross Taylor with the Black Caps 61 for two in pursuit of 306. The ball is full and Taylor whips it straight back past Wood who reaches out in his follow-through to land the faintest tickle with one of the diminutive digits on his right hand. The ball cannons into the stumps at the non-striker’s end and Kane Williamson is stranded short of his ground. He’s out. With 27 off 40 balls, Williamson was well set and New Zealand would have backed themselves to chase the runs. His highly unfortunate departure brought about a clatter of wickets and England ran out comfortable winners to keep their World Cup campaign alive. Afterwards, Wood admitted the fluke dismissal was probably the only way he was going to get Williamson out. 2019, Lord’s. Ben Stokes crouches over his bat. His pale skin is flushed pink with exertion. His eyes glassy, glazed, shark-like. A great white in pale blue. He has to keep moving, propelling England’s run chase forward in order for them to stay alive in this match. The emotional and physical exertion required to do so is starting to take its toll. He drops to his knees between overs, taking deep breaths, torso rising and falling, gulping in oxygen. England are 222 for seven, they need 22 off nine balls and are desperate for a boundary. Jimmy Neesham, floppy fringe and matinee idol looks, has just dismissed Liam Plunkett, caught a few feet inside the long on boundary going for the much-needed maximum. The next ball Neesham floats outside the off-stump, Stokes drops to his knee and slaps the ball high and far. But it’s not quite far enough and Stokes knows it immediately. Trent Bolt takes the catch cleanly a couple of feet inside the boundary but the momentum of the ball forces him to take a backward step and he treads on the rope with ball in hand. In a split second Stokes has gone from being out – England left with 22 needed off eight balls with Jofra Archer and Adil Rashid at the crease – to not out and the more palatable equation of 16 off eight with, crucially, Stokes still there. When Ian Smith uttered the immortal “by the barest of margins” line shortly afterwards, he could have been referring to any number of moments that the game hinged on. Bolt stepping on the rope, Stokes’s final-over ricochet, Wood (inexplicably in full protective kit … what was that about marginal gains?) diving for his ground off the last ball. Buttler’s final-ball-of-the-super-over boundary, Neesham’s super-over six. Jason Roy’s misfielding and Roy not misfielding. Rather than a solitary flap, this match saw the butterfly breakdancing between backflips. 2021, UAE. England face New Zealand again in Wednesday’s semi-final. You don’t need a computer system to see that all the signs point to another tight contest. The universe has conspired against Roy and Tymal Mills meaning England are weakened and coming off the back of defeat to South Africa and an uncharacteristically sloppy performance in the field. New Zealand are quietly going about their business as ever. In their last match against Afghanistan they were pin-sharp, taking all their catches and saving runs – Daryl Mitchell enacting one of those gravity-defying boundary saves that must make a small part of Trent Boult (and Martin Guptill) wince every time they are pulled off. Williamson’s side will be looking to avenge events of 2019 while Eoin Morgan is trying to get his mitts on another ICC trophy. The sides have been separated only by cigarette paper and a further super over in recent meetings and the low-scoring totals seen in this World Cup could well result in another match decided by a tiny moment. Lorenz wouldn’t have it any other way. And whisper it, neither would we. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Women are less tolerant of sexist behaviour at football matches than they were seven years ago, according to a new survey of more than 2,000 fans. The Football Supporters’ Association research has measured current views against those of fans in 2014, finding there has been an 20 percentage-point increase (to 49%) in the number of matchgoing fans who said witnessing sexist behaviour made them angry. Meanwhile, just 12% said they would laugh off sexism, as opposed to 24% of fans surveyed in 2014. Although fans’ willingness to put up with sexist behaviour has dropped, 20% of women reported having experienced unwanted physical attention when attending men’s games, up from 8% in 2014. At women’s football matches three-quarters of supporters said they had not heard sexist comments or chants or experienced unwanted physical attention. FSA board member and Port Vale fan, Ally Simcock, said: “It is heartening to see the change in attitudes over recent years, with fans less likely to be accepting of sexist behaviour, or willing to just brush it off or excuse it as banter. “I’ve been going to men’s football for a long time now and have heard my share of sexist comments, but a lot has changed recently. Things like the #MeToo movement have helped change people’s perceptions about what they’re willing to put up with, and what is or isn’t acceptable. “The FSA is absolutely clear on this – there is no place whatsoever at football for sexist or misogynistic behaviour. We’d encourage all supporters to challenge it, and if necessary, report it to their club or the authorities.” In the 2014 study, close to one in three fans said they were not bothered when witnessing a sexist incident at a match, now that number is down to one in seven. Of those that took part in the survey, 97.2% identified themselves as women and 0.6% identified as non-binary. The remainder either self-identified as another gender, or preferred not to say. Of those who follow the men’s game, 61% are season-ticket holders and 81% attend at least five games a season. Of those who said they support a women’s team, 16% were season ticket holders and 74% had attended matches pre-Covid. The FSA survey also asked women about other barriers to attending men’s matches, with 51% citing high ticket prices and 45% pinpointing cost and distance to games.Changes in behaviour are needed to tackle the climate emergency, the UK’s chief scientific adviser has said at the Cop26 summit. Sir Patrick Vallance said behaviour change was starting to happen but needed to go further and said he cycled to work, ate less meat and had taken the train to the climate summit in Glasgow. He also said the climate crisis was a far bigger problem than coronavirus and would kill more people if immediate changes were not made. Canada’s chief scientific adviser, Mona Nemer, said there would need to be a “profound behavioural and cultural change in terms of our relation to the Earth”. Systemic changes are widely acknowledged as necessary to end fossil fuel burning and halt global heating, for example by switching to renewable electricity. But the role of individual behaviour is more controversial, with most politicians shying away from encouraging less meat-eating or flying. The UK government recently published a study proposing taxes on high-carbon food and a reduction in frequent flying, but then swiftly withdrew it, saying: “We have no plans whatsoever to dictate consumer behaviour in this way.” Cutting meat consumption in rich nations is vital to fighting the climate crisis, scientists have said. “Behavioural change is part of [climate action],” said Vallance. “Some of that comes down to what we do as individuals, and some of it is what needs to happen to make things easier for us, because we can’t assume that there’s going to be dramatic personal behaviour change unless we can make some way of making that easier, so that the green choice is actually easy choice. “I cycle to work, I eat less meat than I used to and I came here by train,” he said. “I think [behaviour change] is starting. Is it where it needs to be yet? Probably not and I think there’s more to go. But I think there’s a willingness and an engagement taking place that is going to be important.” Science has been very good at detecting the changes in climate, Vallance said. “Where we have to go now is to move from diagnosis to treatment. Science is going to be crucially important, of course, for innovation, technology, and research and development to implement and scale up the technologies that we need and it’s going to be important for the behavioural sciences and the other sciences crucial to actually make this work,” he said. Vallance also told the BBC on Tuesday that the climate crisis was a far bigger problem than Covid. He said that, while the pandemic had been awful, Covid might be a two- to four-year problem, rather than a 50- to 100-year problem that could be “really, really damaging”. He stressed that people should not rely on science and technology alone to halt climate breakdown. “In the pandemic it took a concerted worldwide effort to come up with vaccines, drug treatment [and] understanding what behavioural change is necessary – the same is true for climate.” Nemer said: “Science will be an absolutely essential part of the solution, both the technology but also the behaviour aspect. We’re going to have to have a profound behavioural and cultural change in terms of our relation to the Earth, our relation to consumption, our relation to transport, etc, and that’s something that is extremely challenging.” But Vallance said there was a lot of hope that the climate emergency could be ended. “The technologies we need are either here or are in development. If we implemented them now and scaled up, a lot of change then takes place in terms of climate emissions. The second reason for hope is we’ve got a whole generation that’s absolutely determined to do that. So there’s behaviour change already happening right across the globe. And the third thing is that I think some of the commitments at [Cop26] are going to make a difference in terms of getting people together.”Deep into the night last Friday, long past the hour when most Americans had ceased paying attention, Congress passed the $1.2tn bipartisan infrastructure bill otherwise known as the BIF. Its passage was heralded as a victory for President Biden, and the daily news chyrons dutifully marked a point in his column. But beyond the horserace myopia of the Beltway – and especially among young people – the news came tinged with the threat of disaster. Because for those of us interested in sustained human civilization on a habitable planet, the most relevant fact about the BIF is this: without consequent passage of the clean energy and social welfare bill known as Build Back Better, the BIF alone will exacerbate the climate crisis. The reasons are manifold. The bill is riddled with exemptions and subsidies for corporations like ExxonMobil, whose lobbyists were caught bragging about their role in shaping the text. It invests in highways, bridges and airports that – in the absence of an aggressive drive to electrify cars and planes – will only add to emissions from the transportation sector. And the climate funding it does contain is focused not on drawing down emissions but on preparing Americans for worsening floods, fires and superstorms. If this is all we get, the message to young people is clear: Exxon will continue to be allowed to drown your homes, but not to worry, the government is investing in some life vests. Good luck! When it comes to passing the Build Back Better bill, the handful of extremist, Wall Street-backed Democrats who have obstructed it for months are now asking for something they have done very little to earn: trust. It would be one thing if congresspeople like Josh Gottheimer and Abigail Spanberger gave the impression of fully understanding the gravity of the climate crisis and pulling out all the stops to make a commensurate response politically possible. Instead, they come off as narrow-minded political animals, too blinkered by the game to see the world around them burning. It seems doubtful that any of them have read – much less internalized – the findings of the latest IPCC report. If she had, Representative Spanberger might have registered the irony in her insisting that Biden “be normal and stop the chaos”. As if it weren’t precisely those ideas long considered “normal” – massive fossil fuel subsidies, economic austerity, energy market deregulation – that are leading us straight into planetary chaos. Even more worrisome, their excuse for obstructing Build Back Better seems less than fully genuine. They insist they need to see an estimate from the Congressional Budget Office on how the bill would affect the national deficit. But they seemed little bothered when the CBO made it known that their BIF would expand it by $256bn. They also seem intent on ignoring the many analyses – including several from the treasury department itself – showing that Build Back Better would actually reduce the deficit. And that’s not to even mention the fact – still rarely mentioned, somehow! – that climate disasters have cost Americans $1.9tn since 1980. Even if their concern about the deficit is genuine, it’s grounded in a fundamental misapprehension of contemporary macroeconomics, which is undergoing a revolution in how it understands national debt and deficit spending. It’s as if they made some sort of superstitious pact, circa 1980, to admit no additional research from either economists or climate scientists. Even the former chief economist of the CBO made it clear that their insistence on a CBO score is ludicrous. “This is a really important package that will change people’s lives, and that should be the guiding principle,” she said in reference to Build Back Better. “The 10-year window [for CBO scoring] is arbitrary. Aiming for deficit neutrality is arbitrary – it’s arbitrariness on top of arbitrariness.” But despite all of these red flags, most of the self-styled House “moderates” – with a few notable exceptions, including Spanberger – have promised to eventually vote for Build Back Better in its current form. It is hard to overstate how much rests on that single-paragraph promise. A failure to pass Build Back Better would, at this point, amount to a betrayal so large it would disillusion an entire generation of young voters, and potentially fracture the Democratic party itself. The muted applause for BIF would be completely drowned out by recriminations, and the party would stumble into the midterms in open civil war, having failed to pull us back from the brink of worldwide catastrophe. Maybe Abigail Spanberger would hold on to her seat, but she would probably find herself isolated and ineffectual in a Republican Congress, desperately clinging to her fantasy of “normality” as she cranked up the A/C on another blistering summer day. Meanwhile, President Biden’s legacy would be sealed. For all his adulation of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, he would have failed to live up to the one test that cemented his predecessor as a hero. It’s worth remembering that FDR passed the New Deal over the violent protestations of Wall Street bankers, some of whom tried to stage a coup to replace him. Biden faces a similar test on Build Back Better: can he discipline the wealthiest and most dangerous industry in history, who will stop at nothing to make the “moderates” kill the bill? Can he wrest the helm of history from the fossil fuel executives, who would just as soon watch it all go down in flames? If he fails to pass Build Back Better, China’s taunts will ring true, though for the wrong reasons. The American political system will have proven itself incapable of passing extremely popular policies to address the climate crisis – not because it was too democratic, but because it was never democratic enough. With stakes this high, it’s no wonder the Progressive Caucus leader, Representative Pramila Jayapal, asked each “moderate” to look her in the eye as they signed their name to the Build Back Better promise. That look might have contained the anxiety of my entire generation. Not only our fear of being played, not only our dread of inheriting a squandered planet, but our ongoing hope – despite all evidence to the contrary – that our leaders may actually choose to lead. • This article was amended on 10 November 2021. The $1.9tn estimate for the cost of climate disasters to the US is cumulative since 1980, not for the single year 2020, as an earlier version said. Daniel Sherrell is the author of Warmth: Coming of Age at the End of Our World (Penguin Books) and a climate activistA vibrant sisal plant in a public cemetery on the outskirts of Nanyuki in Kenya marks the grave of Agnes Wanjiru, the woman allegedly murdered by a British soldier in March 2012. It is easy to miss the grave due to heavy undergrowth in the unkempt cemetery. But Wanjiru is not resting in peace. Recent media reports claiming that a British soldier had confessed to a fellow squad member to killing the 21-year-old woman and dumping her body in a septic tank at Lions Court hotel have reignited a fire that her family and friends thought was long extinguished. The claims, and subsequent global media interest in the story, have put Rose Wanyua, Wanjiru’s eldest sister, on edge, not sure of what to make of this “new” information. She still has one question for the killer: “What did my sister do to you to deserve this?” Wanyua is reserved, and would rather keep quiet when asked about the events that led to Wanjiru’s death nine years ago. The death, Wanyua says, affected her more than their mother’s, which occurred when Wanjiru was a small girl. “It’s painful, very painful. Shiru did not deserve to die the way she did,” says Wanyua, using a diminutive form of her sister’s name. “We will never forget her.” She abhors the now “unanimous conclusions out there” that Wanjiru was a sex worker who frequented Nanyuki’s entertainment hotspots looking for male clients. “A friend told my sister that there was some ‘quick money’ to be made that evening if only Wanjiru joined her in entertaining the Johnnies in town. She was a hair stylist who used to make my daughters’ hair, never the prostitute as many would like the world to believe,” says Wanyua, referring to soldiers who are part of the British army training unit in Kenya (BATUK). The family is especially appalled by the apparent cover-up of the events that led to Wanjiru’s death and the lacklustre manner in which previous investigations were conducted by those the family had put their hopes in. The family comes from a poor background – so poor that it took weeks to fundraise the 7,000 shillings needed to buy a coffin – and lacked the financial muscle to summon the strong legal representation needed to fight it out with the British government. Wanyua and her husband, John Wachira, live in Majengo, Nanyuki, where most homes are made of rusty corrugated iron sheets and rickety wooden planks. Their one-bedroom house is dimly lit and it is difficult to make out the couple’s facial expressions. The family moved here in 2013, in an attempt to wipe out the bad memories after Wanjiru’s death. The houses contrast sharply with the high-end tourist lodges around Nanyuki, many foreign-owned, where guests pay close to a million shillings (£6,500) to spend a night. Wanjiru’s death has upset this delicate balance. Apart from the training carried out jointly with Kenya’s military, the UK soldiers’ development activities, including infrastructure rehabilitation and drilling boreholes in Laikipia county’s arid regions, portray them as “kind and compassionate”. The UK government pumps an average of 7.5bn shillings annually into the Kenyan economy through British military training. The money trickles down to motorcycle riders, taxi drivers and curio dealers in Nanyuki. Part of this money, in the pockets of British soldiers, has sustained the town’s sex trade, reeling in young girls to the soldiers on a regular basis. “I don’t think the ‘business’ will stop,” says Wycliffe, a boda boda (motorcycle) rider and a former classmate of Wanjiru’s. “The girls are just lying low to let the [storm] pass.” Others have accused the soldiers of soiling their reputation after numerous reports of “debauchery and lawlessness”, especially when dealing with locals. In March 2021, British soldiers in a training excursion were blamed for a fire that razed part of the 49,000-acre Loldaiga conservancy with one soldier reportedly writing a Snapchat post about his role in the fire. “Two months in Kenya later and we’ve got only 8 days left … been good, caused a 4.5k fire, killed an elephant and feel terrible about it but heyho when in Rome …” read the soldier’s message as reported in local and international media. The British high commission in Nairobi promised to look into the unnamed soldier’s allegations, stating: “We are extremely concerned by a social media post by a member of the British army and it is being investigated.” The results of the investigations were never made public. Regarding Wanjiru’s murder, Jane Marriott, the high commissioner, tweeted on 3 November: “We will leave no stone unturned as we provide our full support to the investigation.” Military chiefs in the UK have made similar pledges, with the head of the army, Gen Mark Carleton-Smith, saying: “I am sure you are all as appalled as I am at the recent allegations surrounding the murder of Agnes Wanjiru in Nanyuki, Kenya, in 2012. I want you to know I am determined we support the appropriate authorities to establish the facts of the issue as quickly as possible.” Noordin Haji, Kenya’s director of public prosecutions, said the government would request the soldier’s extradition to face murder charges in Kenya. Despite the mounting assurances, some are sceptical about justice being served for Wanjiru. “It has been nine years of complicity by different levels of authority,” says Irene Wangui, a woman in her 60s who has lived in the region for decades. “You mean nobody took note if indeed she was killed by a soldier in a hotel and thrown into a septic tank? Did the soldier carry her to the septic tank by himself?” Wangui added: “If the reports about the manner of Wanjiru’s death are true, it confirms what we have always suspected about the young soldiers. We have heard about how they treat young women in town. But there is nothing we can do about it. Well, perhaps we should not condemn the whole army for the misdeeds of a few rotten potatoes.” Wanjiru had a five-month-old baby girl when she died, who has been under Wanyua’s care. She is now 10 and had to undergo counselling sessions when she learned, a few weeks ago, that her mother was murdered. Wanyua goes blank when we ask her how she and her niece might feel when the face of the alleged killer is revealed for the first time. “I don’t know. I just don’t know.”It started with giveaway cards inside boxes of Weetabix and the chance to send off for a plastic 3D viewer, price one-and-sixpence. For Brian May, a 10-year-old boy who would grow up to become a rock superstar with Queen, it resulted in a lifelong fascination with stereoscopy. This week, May publishes a book devoted to the history of his passion. Stereoscopy: the Dawn of 3D, written by the art historian Denis Pellerin, contains images from May’s collection of about 100,000 photographs – including two previously unseen images of Charles Dickens – and comes with its own foldable viewer. May and Pellerin are also giving a talk hosted by the British Library and King’s College London on Wednesday. The book focuses on the birth of stereoscopy in the mid-19th century and the enthusiasm with which Victorians embraced the 3D craze. “People had a stereoscope and a stack of cards on the parlour table, and when friends came they would look at stereos. It was a window to the world,” said Pellerin. The images were of two photographs of the same subject, taken from viewpoints about the same distance apart as human eyes. By looking at these images through the stereoscope, the two pictures appeared as one 3D image. Stereoscopy turned out to be a “rollercoaster ride with peaks and periods of total oblivion and neglect”, he added. After the Victorians, it enjoyed a revival during the first world war, and again in the 1950s when the young May became enraptured. Recalling his Weetabix giveaways, he said: “There were two little flat pictures of hippopotamuses, but when you looked through the viewer, the animals leaped out at you in glorious 3D realism. You felt like you could touch them. Once you have experienced that, you never want to go back to flat photography.” Another revival came in the 1980s, and in 2009 “we had [the film] Avatar and every TV set you bought was 3D-ready. Where is it now? It’s all disappeared.” The book credits Charles Wheatstone as the inventor of the stereoscope. “He was denied his proper place, other people claimed that they had invented it, and some of those falsehoods survived until quite recently,” said May. The book sets the record straight, he added. Among the images in the book is a stereoscopic portrait of Dickens taken moments before he began reading extracts from his Christmas stories to an audience in 1858, and another of the author writing at his desk. The first stereo of the moon is also included, alongside scores of images of Victorian life. The instruments were advertised in the Times “at unprecedented low prices”, starting at sixpence, under the heading “No home without a stereoscope”. Cards were given away with magazines and circulated through special libraries. Stereoscopy “takes a little time to appreciate”, said Pellerin. “It’s like good wine, not Coca-Cola – you can’t just gulp it down, it’s something you sip. You can’t just glance at a stereo. You have to look at it, examine all the details. And that’s what the Victorians were very good at.” May, who has a PhD in astrophysics, is in the process of acquiring another set of images that will make his collection of stereos the biggest in the world. He is transferring all of them into the Brian May Archive of Stereoscopy. “This is a gift to the nation. It will be a national archive long after I’ve passed away. It’s like starting a museum so future generations can enjoy this incredible material.”About 5,000 public phone boxes around the UK will be protected from closure in areas of high accident rates or poor mobile signals, under plans drawn up by Ofcom, the regulator. The communications watchdog said it would ban BT from scrapping payphones in areas where they were still needed, namely locations with poor mobile coverage, high accident or suicide rates, or higher-than-average use. There are about 21,000 call boxes across the country. For several years, BT has been decommissioning payphones that are deemed to be no longer needed. Phone box use has plummeted as 96% of UK adults own a mobile phone. However, local organisations can buy a red phone box for £1 and use it for something else. More than 6,000 have been converted to other uses, such as community libraries, or to house public defibrillators. Ofcom said it had received a call on Tuesday from a mountain rescue team in the Lake District that was keen for its local phone box, earmarked for closure by BT, to be saved. Selina Chadha, the Ofcom director of connectivity, said: “Some of the call boxes we plan to protect are used to make relatively low numbers of calls. But if one of those calls is from a distressed child, an accident victim or someone contemplating suicide, that public phone line can be a lifeline at a time of great need. “We also want to make sure that people without mobile coverage, often in rural areas, can still make calls. At the same time, we’re planning to support the rollout of new phone boxes with free wifi and charging.” About 5m calls were made from phone boxes in the year to May 2020, including almost 150,000 to emergency services, while 25,000 were made to ChildLine and 20,000 to Samaritans. However, call volumes from payphones have fallen from about 800m minutes in 2002 to 7m in 2020. Under the plans, BT and Kcom, which operates Hull’s unique cream phone boxes, must install batteries in some payphones so they can be used during a power cut. A BT spokesperson said: “BT takes its regulatory obligations seriously in providing a public phone box service. Any phone box removals are carried out in strict adherence to Ofcom guidelines and, where appropriate, with the consent of local authorities. “We also know many communities love their red kiosks and, to date, more than 6,500 have been adopted across the UK via our continuing Adopt a Kiosk scheme - turning them into lifesaving defibrillator units, mini libraries, and many other new uses. BT looks forward to working constructively with Ofcom throughout the consultation process to ensure the universal service obligation meets the needs of the public today.” Under Ofcom’s stronger rules, a phone box will be protected from removal if one of four criteria apply: its location is not covered by all four main mobile networks; it is located at an accident or suicide hotspot; more than 52 calls have been made from it over the past 12 months; or exceptional circumstances mean there is a need for a public call box. Ofcom said BT and Kcom could propose to remove phone boxes that did not fall within these criteria, but would need to formally consult local communities before any action was taken. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. For more information visit www.samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgTikTok is made for dance. The most popular TikToker – Charli D’Amelio, 17, with 9.9bn likes – is a dancer, or started out as one. And it is the platform that’s launched or spread a thousand dance trends, from the #toosieslide to the #TheGitUpChallenge, via the Floss, the Dougie and the Milly Rock. Unlike the slick pros of Instagram, or the archive performances on YouTube, TikTok is just about the pure joy of dancing, whoever you are. Size, shape, experience and natural grace are immaterial. It’s essentially the school playground writ very large, the silly routines and memes that used to get passed around, with everyone miming the lyrics to whatever was on Top of the Pops last night. Viral dances have boomed, not least during lockdown, when teenagers dragged their whole families into recreating routines: Tilly Ramsay and her dad Gordon being one. It’s often impossible to know where dances started – D’Amelio has got herself in trouble for not crediting choreographers. Such (important) things get lost because TikTok is driven by the need to share, rather than own. To go viral, a routine must be simple enough for anyone to have a stab: a few atomised hand gestures, standing on the spot – it forces creativity because of its restrictions. The dominant styles are hip-hop and street dance, commercial pop video moves and steps drawn from African and Caribbean social dance. It harks back to the 50s and 60s when everyone knew how to do the mashed potato or the twist. People don’t seem to behave as if the whole world could be watching. That scrappy have-a-go-quality is what gives it its exuberance. But there are big names too. Like New York City Ballet principal (and social media queen) Tiler Peck, doing Broadway routines and backstage larks. Or super-slick dance troupe the Rockettes doing All That Jazz as part of the #fossechallenge. Royal New Zealand Ballet’s Leonora Voigtlander (leonora221) films herself in the wings, in a “guess the ballet” challenge. Broadway tap dancer Cory Lingner uses TikTok’s split screen facility to duet with Gene Kelly and Shirley Temple. American Ballet Theatre’s Isabella Boylston took on the #esmeralda challenge, dancing a fiendish solo from ballet La Esmeralda, using a frozen pizza where normally you’d have a tambourine. Miko_Fogarty tried it later in science lab dressed in full PPE. TikTok is the place where ballet dancers drop the facade, show their red-raw toes and their inner voices. Katelyn_Power has an amusing account recounting ridiculous ballet plots and posting videos with titles such as: “Reasons why ballet will be the end of me.” There are so many different strands of dance: a lot of cheerleader types dancing to horny hip hop lyrics; two construction workers dancing to Oasis and Elton John on a building site (@ctdiaries); tightly choreographed tutting from Italy’s @urbantheory_ or feelgood hip hop and Afro dance from Ghanaian/German choreographer Isaac Kyere, even flamenco done TikTok style, in short shorts and side-by-side duets by @myriamlucia.flamencas. There’s challenging of gender norms (see Houston Ballet’s Harper Watters, @theharperwatters) and celebrating body positivity – in one clip, a girl drops her substantial belly fat and joyfully swings it in time with the music. Most interestingly, dance also permeates things non-dance. The UN started a dance challenge to campaign for investment for rural youth. And #QuestionsIGetAsked has its own dance, where TikTokers do a hand jive while correcting people’s assumptions about them, whether they’re an emo fan (Matt Cutshall), a GB sprinter (Laviai Nielsen) or an Auschwitz survivor (Lily Ebert). It sounds so random written down but, like any cultural code, once you’ve been sucked into watching a few, it starts to make sense. And you will get sucked in.The first series of In My Skin (BBC Three) tapped into a particular kind of British nostalgia, recognisable to anyone familiar with afternoons spent consuming illicit booze in a local park or whizzing around car parks in shopping trolleys. It was a coming-of-age story about 16-year-old Bethan (Gabrielle Creevy), growing up in Cardiff with a fantasy life that was far more pleasant than her real one. She lied to her school friends about having a loving family and extravagant lifestyle – she claimed to have a conservatory – to mask the reality of a violent father, a mother with bipolar disorder, and the fact that she was the only one holding the scraps of family life together. It might sound strange to talk about nostalgia, given that it went to such dark places, but it was as touching and funny as it was bleak, owing to a combination of gorgeous writing and great performances. I am not sure if this second series is the last we will see of Bethan and her friends and family, but it does seem to reach a conclusive ending, and over five episodes, all available to watch online now, it wraps up her story beautifully. Life seems to be improving for Bethan. The lies she once told to her closest friends, Lydia and Travis, have become occasional harmless fibs, and the fear of being discovered has waned, after sort-of love interest Poppy learned that Bethan’s mother had been admitted to hospital during a manic episode. Now Bethan is head girl, in her last year of school, thinking about university, and falling for the smart new girl, Cam, who is much more straightforward about her feelings than Poppy ever was. When things are good, it is a cheeky portrait of teenage life and school days. The romance between Bethan and Cam is handled with a light touch and is almost painfully sweet and sincere. The banter that passes between the kids is excruciatingly familiar, from the crude jokes about sex, to the plea from one pupil to another to tell the truth about whether she has BO after PE. Bethan is a straight-A student, in spite of the turmoil at home, and university seems like a dead cert. But as the series unfolds, it becomes clear that the path to leaving home is not as smooth for her as it might be for some. In a show where most of the characters are trying to escape from something, circumstances set different barriers for each of them, and some seem insurmountable. In My Skin is filled with empathy, which makes it easy to care deeply about what happens to everyone in it. If school is more settled, then home is a different story. Bethan’s mother, Katrina (Jo Hartley, convincing and devastating), is out of hospital, working at the bingo hall, and seems stable, for now. But she is also back at home with Bethan’s father, Dilwyn (Rhodri Meilir), a selfish drunk with a cruel streak who instils disgust and fear in his wife and daughter. When Katrina takes her own tentative steps towards a better life, events veer off with a shocking twist, and the tone of the show shifts dramatically. But it can handle those shifts, and it feels true to the sometimes chaotic world Bethan has to navigate. Despite each episode lasting just half an hour, longer dramas would do well to learn from In My Skin. It knows how to tell a story concisely, packing its short instalments with crucial events, traversing emotional highs and lows, but never seeming bloated. There is an overnight trip to a university, and a drive around Cardiff’s extremely local landmarks, and a trip or two to the bingo, but really, it is confident in its ability to depict its small world with precision. The final two episodes are contemplative – the last, in particular, a dense and mature reflection on potential, opportunity and what it really means to leave home – but it never loses its sense of humour, even in the darkness. In My Skin was one of those shows that seemed underwatched when it first appeared, though it did build a strong fanbase as it was slowly discovered. Brief as it is, this second and perhaps final series should cement its reputation as a low-key gem. Already, those involved are excelling elsewhere; creator Kayleigh Llewellyn is working on the new Killing Eve, while Creevy will star alongside Shailene Woodley in Showtime’s adaptation of Lisa Taddeo’s Three Women. This wonderful, touching drama stands as an excellent demonstration of why that is.“That’s our wandering buoy. It slipped its anchor near the dam. It appears and disappears at will.” A light, unfathomable absurdity governs this 2018 fiction debut by Ukrainian documentarian Roman Bondarchuk, set in the area around the city of Kherson; a sun-roasted steppe north of the Crimea where Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) interpreter Lukas (Serhiy Stepansky) becomes stranded. He’s escorting an SUV full of foreign delegates when it breaks down and he wanders off in search of a mobile signal. On his return, both car and foreigners have vanished. Hitching a ride, Lukas is invited to stay with Vova (Viktor Zhdanov), a middle-aged potterer living with his mother and daughter in a capacious ramshackle construction on the banks of the Dnieper river. So begins Lukas’s initiation – like a milder Ukrainian version of Wake in Fright – into the local anomie. Vova enjoys sticking spoons to his forehead using the supply of glue that was his severance payment from the Soviet fish farm he worked for; then Lukas gets an invite to a listless student party where someone nicks his jacket and wallet. Constantly slipping sly details into the frame, Bondarchuk handles the whole farrago with a lovely deadpan poise. Incensed by the theft, Lukas heads to the police station to make a complaint. Cut to him in the cells. This heap of eccentricity makes Volcano an oblique cousin of the vitriolic satire of Sergei Loznitsa’s 2018 film Donbass. Taking place in a weird demilitarised zone between the present conflict and a deeper Soviet hinterland, Lukas’s adventure feels post-historical, post-democratic and – with everyone comically flailing for their bearings on this disorientating new frontier – almost post-ironic. Perhaps in its second half, Bondarchuk lets the drama get a little directionless, and the direction he does pick – Lukas’s fling with Vova’s daughter Murushka (Khrystyna Deylyk) – is a bit obvious. But combining roving vérité-style long takes with grand compositions such as the opening overhead cargo-ship shot, Bondarchuk is able to both immerse and surreally startle en route. • Volcano is released in cinemas on 12 November.Rare indeed is the Welsh rugby autobiography that reveals how a corner of Adolf Hitler’s desk ended up in the family home in Newport or details how the author drove Lana Del Rey around Monte Carlo in a Rolls-Royce Wraith after she and Bono had watched him play paddle tennis with Prince Albert of Monaco. If Jamie Roberts achieved plenty on the pitch, few modern players have a wider-ranging story to tell off it. We have not even mentioned playing guitar on stage with the Manic Street Preachers in Australia during the 2013 Lions tour. Nor Roberts’s impressive academic credentials as a qualified doctor and Cambridge University postgraduate student with four degrees. There are players with a hinterland and then, in a completely different league, there is the nearest thing professional rugby has to a renaissance man. It is to the credit of the 35-year-old and his skilful “ghost” Ross Harries that Centre Stage: My Life in Rugby seamlessly weaves together all these contrasting threads. As a player, the former Lions centre always enjoyed a challenge – “I had a weird obsession with pressure, I only felt at my most complete if my life was full” – and found the book “a cleansing experience” in unexpected ways. “As rugby players you keep a lot in emotionally during your career. Rugby elicits every possible emotion … happiness, sadness, jealousy, resentment. You suppress the ones you don’t think are conducive to team sport.” Now, though, Roberts has much to say on various subjects, not least the Welsh Rugby Union’s 60-cap rule designed to keep home-qualified players in Wales. Having plied his trade in both hemispheres, Roberts calls it “outrageous” and believes it crushes people’s sense of adventure. “It absolutely breaks me. Who are the WRU to deny players that opportunity and basically blackmail them for the Welsh jersey? I hate the thought of a young Welsh player having the chance to experience rugby in France or England and being afraid to do it because he’s not then allowed to play for his country. I think it’s absolutely berserk.” Nor does he have much time, either, for the orthodox view – “It’s bullshit” – that training and thinking about rugby all day, every day is the only way to prepare effectively. In 2009 Roberts was part of a Barbarians side that, after several long days of drinking, beat the All Blacks at Twickenham and the moral of that story has always stayed with him. “I learned that if you flick the switch on a Saturday morning you can deliver, even against the All Blacks at a sold-out Twickenham after you’ve been desperately hungover. Rugby’s a monotonous job. You’re in the gym every day, doing the same weights. If you just do it relentlessly every day you get worn out and bored. For me it was about being busy in the week. The more I thought about rugby, the worse I played.” Fascinating. He is similarly revealing on the subject of Warren Gatland. Roberts played under Gatland for Wales and the Lions for a decade but reckons he “could probably count on less than two hands the number of times I had an in-depth conversation with him”. More normal was a terse one-liner if their paths crossed in Wales’s hotel in the Vale of Glamorgan. “One day he was coming one way down the corridor and I was coming the other. He just looks at me and goes: ‘Jeez, Scott Williams trained well today.’ Before I‘d opened my mouth to reply he’d gone.” He later discovered the management were reluctant to praise him openly, believing he played better if he felt under pressure for his place. “Warren was very smart at pulling the strings. He understood how to get the best out of his players. It was all about winning, there was no room for sentiment. He’s far smarter than a lot of people gave him credit for.” Rugby fans will also be interested in Roberts’s view that England could win the 2023 World Cup if they play Manu Tuilagi at 12 as a hard-nosed arrowhead. “I don’t think you play Marcus Smith, Owen Farrell and Henry Slade. You need a focal point.” If anyone should know it is the centre whose intuitive midfield partnership with Brian O’Driscoll on the 2009 Lions tour was not, he says, quite what it seemed. “He was a wonderful player, one of the best to have played the game. Skilful, quick brave … he had all the attributes. But what set him apart was his ability to communicate on the pitch, to see the picture, process the information and make the right call. I’ve not played with anyone else who’s had that ability.” So, with the bizarre mystery of Hitler’s desk solved – Roberts’s paternal grandfather was in Berlin in 1945 and brought home a keepsake from the Führer’s abandoned office – what about rugby’s most pressing current debate? Given his medical training, few current players are better placed to discuss head knocks in rugby and, sooner rather than later, he predicts concussed players will have to wait longer than six days to return to play. “It doesn’t sit well with me. I think it has to be two weeks, I really do. I’ve been that player fighting all week to pass my protocols because you don’t want to let your teammates down. That decision should be taken out of players’ hands.” But, then again, neither is he convinced that cases of early onset dementia affecting a number of players are yet definitive proof the whole of rugby is on a road to hell. “From an evidence-based medicine approach we’re in very dangerous territory if we’re saying: ‘It was definitely rugby that caused it.’ There are so many other possible factors: dietary factors, genetic factors, depression, lifestyle. On the one hand we have a group of rugby players who have these symptoms. On the other we have a huge cohort of rugby players who’ve had many head collisions who haven’t. “Until the first cohort of professional players donate their brains, there is no way of drawing a direct link. There needs to be more research funding to allow us to better understand it. I am definitely not in denial but we need to work far harder to prove it is rugby that causes this.” At least one thing is already clear. If Roberts ever wants an influential role in rugby administration, it surely awaits him. • Centre Stage by Jamie Roberts is published by Hodder &amp; Stoughton • This is an extract from our rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.“The cow in the room is being ignored at this Cop,” says Carl Le Blanc of Climate Healers. “Animal agriculture has been taken off the agenda and put on the menu.” Le Blanc was one of a number of campaigners who joined climate marches on Saturday in Glasgow to demand action for a new sustainable food system. They fought strong gales to make their point with four giant inflatable animals tethered on ropes above their heads or strapped to the ground. Each symbolised a different problem of the livestock industry: a 40ft cow for methane, a chicken for Covid and health, a fish for microplastics, and a pig for obesity. Many industry representatives and campaigners feel not enough attention has been paid to food and farming at Cop26, despite it being one of the keys to cutting emissions over the next few decades. Food served at the canteen has been criticised – nearly 60% of dishes contain meat or dairy, which campaign group Animal Rebellion described as the equivalent of “serving cigarettes at a lung cancer conference”. During the two weeks of the conference, themes such as finance, energy and transport have been allocated their own days, but there has been no dedicated day for agriculture or food systems. Farming was included in Nature day on Saturday, where there was a lot of talk about protecting forests but less about cutting meat consumption, food waste and firm pledges to change farming subsidy systems. Farming is a complex issue on the journey to net zero, as it is both a source and sink for emissions. About 20% of global emissions come from agriculture and land use, and this rises to more than 25% for the food system as a whole, which includes processing, packaging and transport. Yet huge amounts of carbon can be sequestered by modifying farmland, with the creation of more forests, healthier peatlands and wetlands. Although some argue that we should stop consuming animal livestock altogether, others believe that low densities of grazing animals such as cattle are an important part of creating farmland habitats that produce food and also provide a home for wildlife. In terms of individual action, moving to a more plant-based diet is one of the single most effective ways to reduce emissions, but the UK government appears to be unwilling to put the science on this issue into policy. It quickly deleted research alongside its net zero strategy that encouraged levies on high-carbon foods, such as meat. None of the presidents of the UK’s four farming unions present at Cop26 believe they should reduce livestock numbers in their respective countries, or that people need to reduce their meat consumption. They told the Guardian methane emissions could be dealt with through new technologies rather than reducing the number of cows on farms. Thomas Vilsack, the US secretary of agriculture says he believes Americans can carry on eating the same amount of meat while keeping the world within safe limits on global heating. In a small side room at the Cop26 conference, pro-vegan groups said there was more discussion of meat than at the Cop two years ago, but still policy lagged far behind science. “Animal meat is obsolete, it doesn’t make any sense. It’s from the last century,” says Bernat Añaños, co-founder of plant-based meat company Heura Foods. But others warn it is dangerous to reproduce historical tendencies to tell farmers what their goals should be. “There cannot be a one size fits all,” says Ishmael Sunga, CEO of the Southern African Confederation of Agricultural Unions (SACAU). “I respect that space, but they cannot impose their views on others.” Small family farms produce a third of the world’s food, and hundreds of millions of people depend on livestock farming for their livelihoods. Although farming for animal proteins is a key driver of biodiversity loss, Sunga says it is important to make sure any changes are fair for producers on the front line. “It needs to be a just transition. We know most of the farmers in developing countries are near-destitute. It’s also an irony that food is one of the biggest industries in the world, but it delivers so badly for farmers. They go hungry, they absorb the climate front-risk, while the rest of us carry on walking around smiling.” The only significant agricultural announcement made on farming at the leaders’ summit was the AIM4C declaration unveiled by the US president, Joe Biden, in partnership with the UAE. It promised an extra $4bn for agricultural innovation aimed at reducing emissions. But this has been criticised by many activists who say it is an attempt to reframe destructive intensive farming as part of the climate solution, instead of the problem. “The US and the UAE are presenting a vision for the future of farming that is a future without farmers. Such a form of agriculture is a dangerous fantasy,” says Tom Wakeford, an ecologist and action researcher at ETC Group. There are two main camps when it comes to agriculture’s relationship with wildlife. Some believe in land sparing, which is essentially farming intensively with separate areas for wildlife, while others believe in land sharing, which refers to agroecological approaches where farming and wildlife co-exist. Jyoti Fernandes, a Dorset farmer and policy and campaigns coordinator at the Landworkers’ Alliance, is a proponent of the latter. She believes livestock is an important part of traditional land management. For her, the key is to stop intensive meat farming and focus on producing high-quality meat within smaller, mixed farms that provide high employment for local people. “It’s outrageous that so little time at Cop26 has been devoted to agroecological farmers,” she says. “The programme is very weak. If they are promoting nature we must talk about farming. Agroecological farming can nurture biodiversity, sequester carbon and regenerate the planet by looking after our soil, creating habitat and planting trees.” Subsidies are at the heart of how agricultural landscapes have been shaped. A recent UN report concluded that almost 90% of the $540bn of global agricultural subsidies given to farmers destroy nature and fuel the climate crisis. Subsidies have generally encouraged farmers to produce as much food as possible, but this has been at the expense of wildlife. With habitat destruction due to the expansion of farmland identified as one of the main drivers of biodiversity decline, many are arguing for farming subsidies to be radically overhauled. The UN report found redirecting subsidies to beneficial farming practices could be a “game changer”, yet there was little mention of them in the leaders’ speeches at Cop26. The most significant announcement came on Nature day, when governments endorsed the Policy Action Agenda, signalling their intent to shift agricultural subsidies to better support climate and nature-friendly farming. Although it only involved 16 countries, it included large emitters, such as Switzerland, Nigeria, Spain and UAE; in total these countries represent 10% of world’s greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture. The UK also launched a £65m Just Rural Transition programme to help developing countries move towards more sustainable agricultural systems. The UK farming policy Environmental Land Managements (ELMs), announced earlier this year, will reward farmers for delivering public goods, such as tree-planting, water retention and biodiversity benefits on their farms. Farmers grazing livestock less intensively, with more space for nature on their farms, will also be rewarded. England’s National Farmers Union president, Minette Batters, says changing the subsidy system and harnessing private funds is an opportunity to implement nature-based solutions such as planting trees, using less chemical fertilisers, creating more hedges and enriching soils on farmland. “We’ve got the opportunity to create a new relationship with the land, and new economic value for the land. We all talk about it, but we’re absolutely appalling at delivering the finance back into where it needs to go. Those trillions just circulate in the ether. We’ve got to drive that financial resource back into the soil. “We can’t do anything without farmers, they are the eco-workforce of the future,” she says. While many industries like coal and gas might have felt positive about not being included in the Cop26 programme, many farmers feel they can make a real difference. “What is baffling for us, is why farming is not on the table with negotiators,” says Sunga. “By focusing on other areas and not focusing on food and agriculture you are running away from the problem, and that’s where solutions with the greatest impact are going to be.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresDay after day, Sir Geoffrey Cox, the UK attorney general during the Brexit crisis, has been sitting hunched over a pile of court papers trying to prove to the UK government not that a member of his Torridge and West Devon constituency is innocent of corruption, but the innocence of the prime minister of the British Virgin Islands. His understanding of the complex constitution of the BVI, a British overseas territory, is masterful, including its relationship with London, auditor reports on how the BVI spent hurricane cash, or indeed the procedures for chairing the BVI cabinet. He is acting on behalf of the attorney general of the BVI, but his chief client is Andrew Fahie, the prime minister, who is defending himself and his government from allegations of misgovernance and corruption, at a commission of inquiry held on Tortola, the BVI’s largest island. Ironically, one of the issues in play is the fate of the island’s Integrity in Public Life Act, as well as breaches of the BVI MPs Register of Interests Act. The BVI register is closed to the public and so is, arguably, ineffectual. Cox, his baritone voice familiar to Brexit aficionados, has been nothing but indefatigable, often spending eight hours in front of the commissioner for up to a month at time. His chief strategy is to try to turn the inquiry from an examination of corruption and misgovernment in Fahie’s administration into a cross-examination of the near-colonialist conduct of the now departed governor, Gus Jaspert. It was the governor who set up the commission in January 2021 with the blessing of the UK Foreign Office. Such commissions are rare, and established only when the governor believes there is an issue of concern in an overseas territory. Presiding has been Sir Gary Hickinbottom, a former judge of the supreme court of the Falkland Islands, among other distinguished postings. The hearings have ranged across auditing, corruption, the appointment of friends to public office and the lease of valuable land for as little as $1, not to mention allegations of drug running and the granting of citizenship or “belonger status” to an alleged rapist. Hickinbottom has hinted that, in his view, the commission hearings have unearthed problems. “It’s clear from the evidence that I’ve seen, to put it mildly, that governance in the BVI is not all that it should be. I will have to determine in various areas the state of governance. But the evidence in some areas is pretty clear.” Examples of poor governance pitched by Jaspert include repeated tender waivers, the employment of consultants without competition, and the transparency of appointing people to statutory boards. The terms of a UK government $300m loan guarantee scheme to help the islands recover from Hurricane Irma has also featured, along with a Covid recovery fund, a contract to use barges to protect the islands during the pandemic and, more mundanely, the building of a school wall. At times the exchanges have become heated, with one witness accusing Cox of being reckless in his allegations. Fahie has been indignant at the allegations Jaspert has thrown at him, saying: “When a person of a higher office goes to the public and throws out innuendoes like that – being the governor – without evidence, without proof, the irreparable damage that it does to person’s character and to the territory leaves scars and leaves persons wondering if this person running the country is a drug runner, if this person is in organised crime.” He has also accused the UK government of corruption in the distribution of contracts during the Covid crisis. Very little time has been spent discussing the whys and wherefores of the BVI’s tax haven status, except indirectly through the BVI government’s increasing determination to be constitutionally free of UK demands to publish a register of beneficial share ownership on the islands. The UK has been close to imposing a public register. Cox does not always fly to the BVI, but instead appears on a screen in an office with the background blurred. His salary is not known, but Fahie told the BVI parliament that the government legal costs were capped at $5m (£3.6m), and so far had reached $3m. Sir Geoffrey is formally tasked with leading the government’s inquiry response unit. The commission has nearly completed its evidence-gathering process during 50 different evidence sessions, but Cox wants the former governor to reappear later this month to give further evidence. Because of Covid-19 restrictions, the public were not allowed to attend the commission, but could watch almost all the exchanges on livestreams. The UK taxpayer pays the core cost of the inquiry.What’s happening at the border? More than 1,000 people, many fleeing dangerous conditions in Middle Eastern countries, arrived en masse at Poland’s border with Belarus this week, in a dramatic escalation of a simmering migration crisis on the edge of the EU. They had been escorted to the border by Belarusian authorities. Clashes erupted with Polish police in riot gear. Some in the crowd tried to enter Poland by cutting a border fence or battering it with logs. Police deployed chemical sprays to push people back. In the evening the group set up tents and lit campfires metres from the Polish border. Many are women and young children and conditions are extremely dangerous, with temperatures dipping below freezing overnight. Thousands of others were already spread out across the border region in much smaller groups, playing a cat and mouse game with Polish border officials. At least eight people have died of exposure in the area over the past two months. Polish officials have vowed to prevent anyone from crossing the border. Many of those trying to enter Poland want to travel on to Germany. Why is this happening and how has Poland reacted? Poland, the EU, Nato and others all blame Belarus for intentionally sparking the crisis by allowing people who want to come to the EU from the Middle East and Africa to travel to Minsk, then providing them with transport to the Polish border. European leaders say Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, is motivated by revenge for sanctions and criticism of his brutal crackdown on the Belarusian opposition. Other observers think he wants to extract concessions from the EU and others. Polish authorities have responded harshly to the arrival of migrants, imposing a state of emergency that prevents aid from reaching those trapped in the border area. Newly passed laws have allowed police to ignore asylum requests and summarily expel the migrants back into Belarus. The government has also approved a new, Donald Trump-style border wall to keep them out of the country. According to the government, nearly 30,000 attempted border crossings have taken place this year, including 17,000 in October. Where are the refugees from? Many of those in the border encampment that was set up on Monday are Iraqi Kurds who who started their journey from Minsk on Sunday evening. Flights from Iraqi Kurdistan have been an important conduit for smugglers to bring people from various Middle Eastern countries to Belarus. Nationals from Syria and Afghanistan, as well as African countries like Cameroon and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, have also taken the “Belarus route” to Europe rather than attempting dangerous sea crossings from Turkey or north Africa. What is the international community doing? International and local NGOs have called for Poland to allow access to the border region to provide supplies and medical aid in order to prevent a humanitarian crisis. The government’s state of emergency keeps both aid organisations and journalists out of certain areas. Western countries have increased pressure on Minsk. The EU commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, has pledged greater support for Poland, Lithuania and Latvia to police the border. She said the EU would explore “how to sanction, including through blacklisting, third-country airlines that are active in human trafficking”. What might happen next? Poland has adopted a hardline response and its leaders look unlikely to admit thousands of asylum-seekers from the Middle East, even if most are keen to travel on to Germany. And the EU appears to be balancing its humanitarian values against its political considerations, including a difficult relationship with Poland. Meanwhile, temperatures in the forested no man’s land between Belarus and Poland are falling and becoming more dangerous every day. And hundreds more desperate people are arriving in Minsk every week. The crisis seems unlikely to end soon.A man with learning disabilities who is facing the death penalty in Singapore for smuggling a small amount of heroin has had his appeal adjourned and been given an indefinite stay of execution after testing positive for Covid. Nagaenthran K Dharmalingam, a Malaysian man arrested in April 2009 when he was 21 for attempting to smuggle 43 grams of heroin into Singapore, has been on death row since 2010. His execution had been scheduled for Wednesday. His lawyer had applied for a reprieve on Monday on the basis that his client has “severe mental disabilities” and that his execution would be unlawful. The application was dismissed, but the execution was stayed since Dharmalingam had a right to appeal. The appeal was scheduled for Tuesday afternoon, with Dharmalingam’s supporters fearing the execution would still go ahead on Wednesday. But it was announced on Tuesday that Dharmalingam had tested positive for Covid, prompting the court to adjourn the hearing. It ordered an indefinite stay of execution, according to Nagaenthran’s lawyer M Ravi. The case has caused global outrage, with Singaporean activists, UN experts, international rights groups and legal groups asking for the execution to be halted. The businessman Richard Branson, who has previously campaigned against the death penalty, also issued a statement condemning the sentence. “Proceeding with the execution of a man who may not have fully understood the consequences of his actions, nor his rights in court, would cast serious doubts on Singapore’s willingness to uphold international law,” he said. Dharmalingam has an IQ of 69, a level recognised as indicating a learning disability, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, according to campaigners. His supporters say there is evidence that he was forced to courier drugs as a victim of human trafficking. Dharmalingam’s older sister, Sarmila, said she was relieved the execution had been stayed, but pointed out it was only temporary. In a statement shared on Twitter by the journalist Kirsten Han, she said: “It took me a long time to be able to get to sleep last night because I was worrying about my brother, and when I woke up in the morning, I couldn’t stop thinking about him and crying, just waiting until 2.30pm for the court hearing today … “I’m only a little bit happy, because I know they haven’t stopped the execution, only given it a temporary stay … I’m worried that all this will repeat again.” Dharmalingam’s family is no longer allowed to visit him and will only be permitted phone calls. “We don’t know yet how often we will be able to have these phone calls,” Sarmila said. A group of 11 British MPs and peers have written to the Singaporean high commissioner, asking that Dharmalingam’s life be spared. In the letter, they state they have learned that Dharmalingam is “seemingly unaware of the fact he faces execution, due to his mental condition, and that he is hallucinating, incoherent, and imagining his prison cell as a garden in which he is safe”. UN experts have urged Singapore to definitively halt the execution. “We are concerned that Mr Nagaenthran K Dharmalingam did not have access to procedural accommodations for his disability during his interrogation. We further highlight that death sentences must not be carried out on persons with serious psychosocial and intellectual disabilities. “We are also concerned that his past 11 years on death row has reportedly caused further deterioration of his mental health,” a statement said. It was signed by five UN experts including Morris Tidball-Binz, special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions. In a statement released after Monday’s hearing, the attorney general’s chambers statement said: “The high court reiterated that Dharmalingam has been accorded due process in accordance with the law. The high court stated that it is not open to Dharmalingam to challenge the court’s findings pertaining to his mental responsibility, whether directly or indirectly, in yet another attempt to revisit and unravel the finality of those findings.”Dean Stockwell was the child actor in numberless studio movies of the 1940s, who arguably never quite got over that brutal apprenticeship, especially as the system soon saw that audiences loved it when he cried. Stockwell was always having to burst heart-rendingly into tears – he remembered being told by Elia Kazan to think of a puppy dying just before a take. He outgrew his cherubic sweet looks into the closed and somehow damaged handsomeness of a young actor who didn’t entirely fit either the leading man model of the old-fashioned studio system, nor the new wave and counterculture scene in which his contemporary Dennis Hopper made a splash. Despite briefly quitting showbusiness in the 60s to explore his hippy side, Stockwell took a regular pay cheque in TV for the rest of his life and for all his periodic depression about the state of his movie career, found that he was continuously in demand as a rugged character actor in his middle years, achieving cinephile respect for working with Wim Wenders, David Lynch, William Friedkin, Jonathan Demme, Robert Altman and Francis Ford Coppola. He was the kind of supporting actor who lent texture and authenticity to a movie, especially for a certain kind of indie American gothic. Perhaps the starting point for Stockwell’s cult iconic status was his child-star role in the deeply weird and intriguing The Boy With Green Hair (1948), directed by Joseph Losey (in the era before the McCarthyite witch-hunt drove Losey out of Hollywood): he is the kid who is bullied because his hair turns green, apparently as a result of the trauma of being a war orphan, and the ostensible point of this strange story is its anti-war message. And yet this fantastical fable (the sort of film that might perhaps have interested Powell and Pressburger) is susceptible to many variant readings. The unmentionable hell of being “different” in conformist America? Green as a metaphor for being … red? Or black? Or maybe it is a parable for the freak-visibility of fame, especially child-actor fame, the green-hair trauma that Stockwell took with him into a brooding adulthood. Later, Stockwell played Billy the Kid in Dennis Hopper’s controversial and experimental The Last Movie in 1971, a film whose countercultural trippiness maybe underscored Stockwell’s sense of his own alienation, despite his own fierce advocacy of this film, and of Dennis Hopper’s talent generally. It was in the 1980s that Stockwell’s movie career resurfaced as a character player, probably most notably in Wim Wenders’s Paris, Texas – that most European perspective on Americanness – in which Stockwell played Walt, the longsuffering brother of the runaway, haunted Travis, played by Harry Dean Stanton. Stockwell’s Walt is the straight-arrow guy who is concerned and irritated by his brother’s mute strangeness: Stockwell was destined to be upstaged of course by Stanton and the role could be (uncharitably) seen as another indicator of Stockwell’s not fitting in to either the straight or transgressive worlds – and yet he brought a real presence to the part: his concern and own tacit emotional pain were the bedrock on which Travis’s story was placed. It was also true of his performance as Dr Yeuh in David Lynch’s flawed version of Dune in the same year, the film that was effectively his cinema comeback: the personal doctor to the Atreides household that he is to betray under duress. In 1985, he was the shifty criminal attorney Grimes in William Friedkin’s To Live and Die in LA, the lawyer who is working for the counterfeiter whom the police are trying to bring down and ends up reluctantly assisting law enforcement, while retaining his essential amoral indifference to either side. But it was one year after that that Stockwell achieved what might be his masterpiece: his role as Ben in David Lynch’s Blue Velvet, who performs a compellingly bizarre lip-sync version of Roy Orbison’s In Dreams. The 1980s ended with Stockwell’s brush with Oscar glory and perhaps the nearest he ever came to a conventional Hollywood-glamour showcase. His Academy Award nomination for best supporting actor for his role as mafia boss Tony “The Tiger” Russo in Jonathan Demme’s 1988 black comedy Married to the Mob came alongside that other haunted former child actor River Phoenix, nominated for Sidney Lumet’s Running on Empty. Stockwell is the wiseguy who whacks the gangster-husband of Michelle Pfeiffer; she finds herself under investigation by the police, and also has the Tiger taking an interest, perhaps sexual, perhaps simply to make sure she doesn’t rat anyone out. This was a strong, confident performance by Stockwell who, despite his “supporting actor” status, was in the unusual position of upstaging all the other men on the screen. In some ways, it was a pity he couldn’t cultivate the comedy career comparable to that of the actor who played his murder victim here: Alec Baldwin. The 1990s saw Stockwell taking solid supporting roles in Robert Altman’s The Player and Francis Ford Coppola’s The Rainmaker, although they didn’t tap into that reserve of pain and emotional woundedness that Wenders or Lynch saw. But Stockwell was to be the face of a certain strain of alternative American cinema: the alienated outsider.It took Josephine Baker five volumes of autobiography to recount her life as a stage sensation, French resistance fighter and civil rights activist. Writing duo Leona Allen and Jesse Briton have just one hour to do her story justice in their vibrant, stylish production for over-sevens. That’s a tall order, which they are quick to acknowledge, as the show directly questions what is omitted or exaggerated when we appraise legends and their legacy – particularly for children. The play’s nuanced dialogue about the banana skirt Baker wore in her most famous dance is a testament not just to fine scriptwriting but also to the duo’s regard for how perceptive young audiences are. And any gaps in the show can be filled with the sprawling digital learning portal that has been created alongside it. Our setting is a failing New York cafe devoted to Baker. The owners are in the process of packing up when a mysterious visitor arrives. It’s Baker herself, back from the dead (“I don’t look too bad for 115,” she quips). Bizarre, then, that the owners don’t recognise her but maybe they’re just shocked to welcome any customer. The framing device is a collection of skits that the cafe used to put on about the performer’s life, now replayed with Baker herself, who steps in and out of scenes to comment on their veracity. Choreographer Ingrid Mackinnon and composers Nadine Lee and Simon Lee keep it swinging and Briton directs with a similar vim to the charleston dance sequences that are studded throughout. Designer Debbie Duru’s New York brasserie has a mural of dancers that is well incorporated into the finale and she symbolises Baker’s “rainbow tribe” of adopted children with a bouquet of blooms in a vase. In the title role, Ebony Feare provides plenty of humour while maintaining Baker’s self-awareness. From her silhouetted entrance onwards, it’s a brilliantly physical performance with one arresting sequence capturing the rise of shame and anger in her body. Feare conveys the aura of a visitor from another era while Sadi Masego and Daniel Kofi Wealthyland jostle as the modern-day cafe staff and rip through enough supporting characters to make you question it’s a cast of three. Perhaps more of an escapade could be spun from Baker’s wartime efforts smuggling messages written on sheet music in invisible ink. But this is a drama with a seriousness of intent and commitment to Baker’s life story, chillingly evoking the riots she witnessed as a child and the systemic racism she encountered through poverty and fame. The result is a toe-tapping show wise to the adage that you cannot enjoy the rhythm and ignore the blues. Josephine is touring the UK until 20 November.Moving home is such an intense and often melancholic experience. Nothing forces you to assess the events of your life, and the effects they’ve had on you, more than packing everything you own into boxes and then trying to find new places for them on the other side. Often there are difficult choices about what to leave behind. Sometimes you find things you thought were long lost, sometimes painful memories are exhumed in the process. All of these emotions are beautifully and wordlessly explored in Unpacking. The set-up is perfectly simple. Between 1995 and 2015 our unnamed narrator makes a number of house moves, and the player has to help her unpack in each new location. We begin with her first solo bedroom as a child, cramming cardboard boxes full of toys and books, and we follow her from there, through her college years and into adulthood. At each stage, we’re given an isometric view of each room in her home and the piles of boxes waiting there. You simply click on one to open it, then click on each object inside, choosing a suitable place to put it. You can place things where you choose, but certain objects have specific homes. You have to put your cutlery in the cutlery drawer; you have to put your laptop somewhere accessible. You learn as you go. The pixel art is simple but brilliantly designed so you’re rarely stumped on what an item is. However, getting everything to fit is an engrossing challenge, especially when she begins to live with other people and there is someone else’s life to squeeze in. There are items she keeps for the long run – cuddly toys, D&amp;D figures, books – but others fall away, and yet more crop up as she matures. It’s always a relief when you pull her cuddly plush pig from a box to see that she still has it. There is no dialogue and very little text, yet through the objects our character brings through her life, we’re able to piece together her story – although it remains wonderfully open to interpretation. From all the coloured pens she keeps, and her numerous sketchbooks, we know she loves art – and it’s wonderful to see how this shapes her life. But we also see moments of darkness. For a couple of years, she lives with a man, and somehow that whole period is permeated with sadness – his flat is cramped, city traffic roars past outside, and he has left very little room for her things. There is no space on the grey-painted walls for the high-school diploma she’s proudly displayed in every place she’s lived: you end up having to store it under a bed. This apparent examination of a personality being crushed and constrained is truly poignant. Her next move is back home with her parents, and you wonder what they have had to help her recover from. Throughout the game, players are also rewarded with stickers for experimenting with object placement in interesting ways. I got a reward for putting the cookie jar on the top shelf in the kitchen, keeping it out of habitual snacking range. There was also a love-heart sticker for seating two cuddly toys on an armchair together. These little moments of player recognition have so much more value in these constrained and emotional domestic interiors. You can finish Unpacking in four hours or so, but there’s scope to come back and do things again to complete those sticker sheets. There’s also a photo mode to take pictures of your houses, and a replay mode, which players are already using to make funny little animated films. Even without these extensions, Unpacking is easily worth the entry money, for the relaxation and pleasure it provides, and the interesting, innovative ways it imparts narrative and meaning. For a single-player game, it has also proved highly social. I’ve played with my son, comparing our interior design choices, and I’ve messaged friends about favourite objects, and theories on the life and relationships being portrayed. This is a small game, but its meaning and intent are large. Like any domestic drama, it tells us as much about our own lives, tastes and experiences as it does about the characters we are bonding with. One thing is certain: learning about the relationships this protagonist has with her possessions, her lovers and her family, and how they affect her, is one of the most profound and touching experiences I’ve ever had playing a video game. Unpacking is out now; £15.49A change of personnel means major upheaval for any ensemble, and when that ensemble is as finely balanced an organism as a string quartet, the upheaval can assume seismic proportions. Three years ago, Harumi Rhodes took over as the second violin in the Takács Quartet in what seemed from their subsequent concerts to have been a seamless transition, one in which the qualities of ensemble and instinctive musical understanding that set the group apart from almost all their peers seemed to have been effortlessly preserved. Last summer there was another change: Geraldine Walther, who had been the viola player in the Takács for 15 years, retired; her replacement is Richard O’Neill, and the quartet are now making their first tour of the UK with their new lineup. On the evidence of the first of their two Wigmore recitals, a programme of Haydn, Janáček and Beethoven, the configuration is still settling down. By the very high standards that the Takács have set for themselves over the last 20 years and more, a group to which I owe some of my greatest musical experiences, these performances seemed surprisingly uneven. What has always been one of the fascinations of the quartet’s interpretations is how their four musical personalities were always distinct yet combined into such an overwhelming whole. Here, though, it seemed as if it was just the first violin, Edward Dusinberre, who was really contributing ideas. Technically the performances were as immaculate as ever, and intermittently everything did snap into sharp focus – powered by shimmering detail, the fugue that ends Haydn’s F minor quartet Op 20 No 5 had the lightest touch, while in the closing pages of Janáček’s second quartet, Intimate Letters, the threads of the whole work were suddenly pulled together to utterly thrilling effect. But in Beethoven’s A minor quartet Op 132 such transcendent moments were rare. Yes, it was all played with huge assurance and perfect pacing, but the sense of the whole great edifice seemed uncertain, its Heiliger Dankgesang less hymn-like, its rondo finale less comforting than one might have expected, as if the performance had not quite gelled. • The Takács Quartet repeat this programme at West Road Concert Hall, Cambridge, on 10 November.The UK became the latest country to introduce vaccine mandates on Tuesday after the government announced all NHS workers would need to be jabbed by next spring. Although obligatory shots have been ordered in many other countries, some have balked at the measures and resorted to protests and legal action. In the US, which is struggling with very slow rates of vaccine take-up, the Biden administration’s plans to get US companies with 100 or more workers to vaccinate their staff or bring in regular tests have been opposed by Republicans and trade groups. On Saturday, a federal appeals court in Louisiana temporarily halted the vaccine requirement for affected businesses. The administration says it is confident that the requirement will withstand legal challenges in part because its safety rules preempt state laws. About 4 million federal workers are to be vaccinated by 22 November under the president’s executive order. Some employees, like those at the White House, are nearly all vaccinated. But the rates are lower at other federal agencies, particularly those related to law enforcement and intelligence, according to the agencies and union leaders. Around 9,000 New York City municipal workers were put on unpaid leave last week for refusing to comply with a Covid-19 vaccine, while thousands of firefighters had called in sick in apparent protest at the move. Italy was the first country in Europe to make the Covid-19 vaccine mandatory for healthcare workers, but amid rising cases and a slower vaccination uptake, debate is rising over the possibility of extending the obligatory requirement to other groups. The deputy health minister, Andrea Costa, said last week the idea of making the vaccine compulsory for some categories was “not taboo”, adding: “Let’s face the next few weeks and see what the vaccination data is.” Italy is hoping to reach its target vaccine coverage of 90% of the population soon. As of Tuesday, almost 84% of the population aged over 12 had been fully vaccinated. However, the country’s controversial health pass, required by all workers to prove vaccination, immunisation or a negative test result before entering the workplace, hasn’t triggered the desired boom in vaccine uptake since being enacted in October. In September, the prime minister, Mario Draghi, mooted the idea of making the vaccine compulsory for the entire population. On Tuesday, the former prime minister Romano Prodi said: “When there is a plague, vaccines should be mandatory.” Demonstrators gathered outside the New Zealand parliament in Wellington on Tuesday to protest against the government’s vaccine mandates and government lockdowns. New Zealand has struggled to fight off a highly infectious outbreak of the Delta variant this year, forcing the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, to move from a strategy of elimination through lockdowns to living with the virus with higher vaccinations. Last month, Ardern said the country would require teachers and workers in the health and disability sectors to be fully vaccinated against Covid-19, and has said restrictions will end only after 90% of the eligible population are inoculated. While the demonstration was peaceful, many people carried signs and placards with messages such as “Freedom” and “Kiwis are not lab rats” and shouting slogans as they demanded the government roll back compulsory vaccination and lift restrictions. At the beginning of October, the Canadian government said it would require all those working in the federal public service and federally regulated transport sectors to get vaccinated. Any core federal public servants – including members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police – who are unwilling to disclose their vaccination status or to be fully vaccinated will be placed on administrative leave without pay from 15 November. Two months ago, France suspended 3,000 health workers without pay for refusing the Covid vaccine. The health minister, Olivier Véran, said the staff had been notified in writing before the government-imposed deadline to have at least one dose. Véran said “several dozen” had resigned rather than have the vaccine, but with an estimated 2.7 million health workers in France, “continued healthcare is assured”, he said. Singapore, meanwhile, has opted for a financial incentive to get people vaccinated, announcing that from 8 December, it will no longer pay the Covid-19 medical bills for people “unvaccinated by choice”. The government currently covers the full Covid medical costs for all Singaporeans, as well as permanent residents and long-term visa holders, unless they test positive soon after returning home from overseas. It said unvaccinated people “make up a sizeable majority of those who require intensive inpatient care and disproportionately contribute to the strain on our healthcare resources”. Indonesia announced mandatory vaccination in February, with heavy fines for those who do not comply.“Taming, civilizing, and minimalizing the filthiest, dirtiest, and nastiest word in the human language”. I thought of this quote from Randall Kennedy, author of a book about the N-word, while reading last week’s ESPN investigation into the workplace culture at the Phoenix Suns. In the story, former Suns coach Earl Watson alleges Robert Sarver, who bought the franchise in 2004, asked why Golden State Warriors star Draymond Green was allowed to use the N-word but he wasn’t (Sarver is white and Green is Black). Watson, who is Black and Hispanic, told Sarver it was unacceptable for him to use the word but claims Sarver went on to use it several times anyway. The article alleges Sarver used the N-word on other occasions to employees and also used misogynistic, inappropriate and “racially insensitive” language, which is the new term people use instead of saying racist. Dozens of employees interviewed for the article describe a toxic atmosphere at the Suns that took a toll on their personal lives. Some said they had to seek professional help as a result, including one female staffer who said she contemplated suicide. These allegations are incredibly serious, and go far beyond the workplace micro-aggressions which far too many Black people have to deal with. Suns employees were, according to the ESPN story, forced to endure this type of language and behavior on a regular basis. Because Sarver wields huge amounts of influence over staff at the Suns, the imbalance of the power dynamic means such misconduct amounts to abuse. Sarver denies the allegations in the ESPN story, including ever using the N-word. But if Sarver did indeed wonder why he couldn’t use it I’m more than willing to explain. I personally don’t believe anyone of any color should use the word. But the subject comes up quite a bit when a white person is caught using it. It takes me back to the stories my Grandpa Freddy used to tell me of the world he grew up in during the era of segregation. He – and nearly every other Black person –wasn’t allowed to look a white man in the eyes while talking to him, instead diverting his gaze to the ground (that’s why he told me to always look a man, especially a white man, directly in the eyes when speaking to them.) He told me of having to cross the street if a white man was walking in his direction. He told me of sundown towns where Black men would literally be lynched if they were caught in the town after dusk. He told me how white people never gave him the respect of calling him “mister” but instead referred to him as “boy”. Which is why he told me never to allow a white man to ever refer to me as “boy”, even in jest, but to always correct them. And he would emphasize always. And always in the background was the N-word. It was used against our ancestors for centuries and against Grandpa Freddy by white men, women and children throughout his life. He told me how it was hurled at him as if it was a pronoun like “he” or “him”. He had no choice over the matter, in those days the N-word had been assigned to him and every other Black person. And it’s that legacy that explains why I don’t think anyone – whether it’s Sarver, Green or anyone else on earth – should ever use the N-word. Indeed, in my first anthology, I explored these feelings, and the lessons my grandfather taught me, in a poem called N-Word, a part of which is below: They’ve been spearing our ancestors with these six letters Rolling so easily off their tongues since they stole us from our native lands Pressed into the depths of our minds by wicked hands Drowning in a never ending quick sand of hate It exists as a scar from centuries of racism refusing to heal A full course meal of poison served fresh Employed to impose installments of an inferiority complex Why won’t we let this word die? How can it still caress our everyday lives? Massaged into young minds while creating mental genocide Murdering the pride our ancestors died fighting for Destroying the mind our forefathers tried defending Ignoring the cries our people suffered The stolen dignity Now, many of us don’t see it as being that serious Civilizing the work of barbarians They minimize it with ridiculous notions Drinking potions of hypnotic contempt for themselves Different spellings meaning different things As the argument goes We can take the power away and make it our own Forming some non-derogatory version Ignoring the history of its undertones It’s screamed into microphones nationwide Blistering sounds piercing the ear on every street corner Ignorant mind states are created Once stronger than steel become heavily sedated Duplicated eyes seeing the word as a magic sword only cutting in the hands of certain people They think the word doesn’t offend, but only the person does The hatred for the history of the word becomes lost like self pride As a word aimed to dehumanize becomes part of everyday language I stand mesmerized at how a word once a signal of hostility became a term announcing affection A piece of clay shaped into different meanings I’m only seeing one way to view a swastika Or a confederate flag -- That is the insidious power of the N-word. We are in 2021, and Black people should not be subject to the scenes described in the ESPN story, whether it’s in the NBA or any other business in the United States of America. NBA commissioner Adam Silver has rightfully developed a reputation as being the most progressive commissioner in US sports. When he banned Donald Sterling from the NBA and stripped him of authority over the Los Angeles Clippers following racist remarks, he showed he was unafraid to take a strong stance. If the NBA’s investigation into Sarver’s time at the Suns finds him guilty of misconduct, Silver needs to take another stand against racism and misogyny. Etan Thomas played in the NBA from 2000 through 2011. He is a published poet, activist and motivational speakerFears are growing for the welfare of Richard Ratcliffe, the husband of the detained Iranian-British dual national Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, who is on the 17th day of his hunger strike outside the Foreign Office. Some of his allies are urging him to stop, saying they are concerned he may damage himself permanently. Ratcliffe is also aware of his responsibility to look after his seven-year-old daughter, Gabriella. But after five and a half years of no tangible progress, and most campaigning avenues exhausted, Ratcliffe, who is spending his nights outside the Foreign Office in a tent, does not yet want to back down. Admitting he felt weaker, he said: “I’m definitely looking rougher and feeling rougher. I don’t feel hungry but I do feel the cold more. It’s a short-term tactic. You can’t take it too long or you end up in a coma.” Under one plan, he will end the hunger strike when the Iranian delegation leave Cop26 in Glasgow later this week. He ended a previous hunger strike outside the Iranian embassy in London after 15 days, but it took place in the summer. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, and his deputy, Angela Rayner, visited Ratcliffe outside the Foreign Office on Tuesday, joining a steady stream of well-wishers, including MPs from all parties that are giving solidarity to his campaign. The former foreign secretary Dominic Raab said the government was doing everything it could to secure Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s release. Asked on Sky News whether he believed payment of a £400m debt owed by the UK to Iran over a weapons deal would bring Zaghari Ractliffe and other dual nationals home, Raab said: “It is not clear to me at all and I do not think there should be a quid pro quo.” A former Conservative minister told the Guardian: “As I understand it, the prime minister, the foreign secretary and the defence secretary all want to pay the debt, so unless they are not telling the truth, what under the British constitution is holding them back?” He said mechanisms had been agreed with the Iranians for the money to be paid through humanitarian channels, and commitments had been given, valuable or otherwise, that the money would not be transferred to the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps. Some of Ratcliffe’s friends fear he is becoming more inflexible, and unless the Foreign Office comes up with some tangible sign of progress, he could continue to a point of self-damage. It is generally accepted that after two weeks, dizziness, difficulties standing, low heart rate and chills start to intensify. Three weeks can lead to long-term complications. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, on a trip to the far east this week, spoke on the phone to the Iranian foreign minister, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, on Monday in what the latter described as “a useful call”. He reiterated his demand that the UK urgently repay the “long overdue” £400m debt to Iran, outstanding since the 1970s. Truss has been privately advised by at least two former Conservative Foreign Office ministers that Zaghari-Ratcliffe, who is out of prison on furlough but due to serve another year’s sentence, will not be returned to the UK unless the debt is repaid. She has been detained since April 2016. In a meeting with Ratcliffe shortly after he began his hunger strike, Truss was not able to give him any news on payment of the debt, leaving him frustrated at the secrecy and apparent lack of progress. News of the call between the foreign ministers was released by the Iranians. The deputy foreign minister, Ali Bagheri Kani, will visit London, Paris and Germany later this week as part of preparations for resuming the long-delayed talks in Vienna on 29 November over the US’s return to the nuclear deal. The Foreign Office has assured families of British nationals that officials and ministers will raise their plight with Bagheri. It said it would use Kani’s visit “to press firmly for the immediate release of our unfairly detained British nationals”. At a weekly press conference in Tehran on Monday, the Iranian foreign ministry spokesperson Saeed Khatibzadeh was asked by Iranian reporters about Ratcliffe’s hunger strike. He said: “Humanitarian issues must be pursued within a humanitarian context. We are sorry that some people in the UK and other countries have made humanitarian issues hostage to other political issues.”In both life and art, Emma Ruth Rundle has been running. For the past 15 years, the Los Angeles-born musician has gone from project to project, living nomadically while she played guitar in post-rock bands before branching out into a gothic folk solo career. Now, though, with her fourth solo album Engine of Hell, she seems to have come to a stop. Rundle sings and plays piano on eight devastatingly intimate songs that confront her drug and alcohol addiction – everything is exposed. “As I age, I’m realising the true value of what I have to offer as an artist is the ugliness of things,” she says. The 38-year-old operates on the fringes of metal, but often shares more with the folk music she was raised on than with her heavier peers. However, the darkness in her music constantly draws fans from the metal community, and led to an acclaimed 2020 collaboration with sludge band Thou, May Our Chambers Be Full. Inspired in part by time she spent alone on Wales’s stark Pembrokeshire coast before the pandemic, Engine of Hell is a complete departure from that noisy predecessor – not just sonically, but philosophically. Her lyrics have never been so detailed or naked; no words are minced when Emma sings about being “down at the methadone clinic” as a child, watching someone she loved suffer the consequences of heroin. She says that seeing addiction close at hand in her youth ended up fuelling her own, beginning at age 12, rather than warding it off, though she is keen not to implicate or blame anyone. A blunt anonymity pervades the whole record, giving us tiny yet unflinching glimpses into her own battle for sobriety while maintaining distance and privacy. “I was forced to confront certain things,” she says, adding that the piano, which she hadn’t played since she was a teenager, allowed her to sit still and reflect. After more than 20 years, she is now sober. Rundle also divorced her husband Evan Patterson earlier this year, in a creative as well as romantic split: he was in her backing band on her previous album. “I take what I do very seriously and I won’t ever mix romance and artistic collaboration again,” she says. “There was always a sense of contention in our relationship because [Patterson] felt gratification having a creative partner but it didn’t work for me.” Her addiction issues weren’t helped either: “Our rock’n’roll lifestyle wasn’t good for me, or my body.” Her self-reliance on Engine of Hell also comes from her experiences as a woman. “I’m apprehensive about involving other people in my work, because I’ve spent a long time getting out from behind men. Engine of Hell is a statement that I’m not going to involve people in making aesthetic choices, or compromise on the emotional content.” Working with producer Sonny DiPerri, the record has a stripped-back feel, and the majority of it was performed live to create an imperfect, humanising tone. “I always knew that was going to be flawed, because I’m not a trained musician. For me it’s not about the technique as much as the catharsis.” This catharsis saturates the record, from Rundle’s lyrics to the “anti-production” (her words). “The way I knew I was going to record it – warts and all – helped to inspire me and made it feel safe.” Shaking loose her past traumas via Engine of Hell has been healing. “Healthy, positive ways are presenting themselves, and my life continues to change since I finished the record.” As well as getting sober and checking herself into a psychiatric hospital as part of the process, she has taken up dancing, including in two self-directed music videos she has released so far from Engine of Hell. “I’ve spent my whole life numbing my body,” she says. “Dance gave me permission to experience my own physicality in a more lighthearted, creative, playful way.” With the last line of the album, “… and now we’re free,” Rundle hints at some of the redemptive rewards she would reap following the album’s completion. In returning to her past trauma, she’s begun to heal herself. “Part of what Engine of Hell set out to do was to look for myself. Where did that go? Why is it so grey? Why is everything dead? Whatever went into making this album, it’s left me in an objectively better place. It’s been a great, magical transformation.” Engine of Hell is out now, on Sargent House. Emma Ruth Rundle will tour next year. In the UK, Action on Addiction is available on 0300 330 0659. In the US, SAMHSA’s National Helpline is at 800-662-4357. In Australia, the National Alcohol and Other Drug Hotline is at 1800 250 015; families and friends can seek help at Family Drug Support Australia at 1300 368 186The world is on track for disastrous levels of global heating far in excess of the limits in the Paris climate agreement, despite a flurry of carbon-cutting pledges from governments at the UN Cop26 summit. Temperature rises will top 2.4C by the end of this century, based on the short-term goals countries have set out, according to research published in Glasgow on Tuesday. That would far exceed the 2C upper limit the Paris accord said the world needed to stay “well below”, and the much safer 1.5C limit aimed for at the Cop26 talks. At that level, widespread extreme weather – sea-level rises, drought, floods, heatwaves and fiercer storms – would cause devastation across the globe. The estimate stands in sharp contrast to optimistic forecasts published last week that suggested heating could be held to 1.9C or 1.8C, thanks to commitments announced at the talks, now in their second week and scheduled to end this weekend. Those estimates were based on long-term goals set out by countries including India, the world’s third-biggest emitter, which is aiming for net zero emissions by 2070. By contrast, the sobering assessment of a rise of 2.4C from Climate Action Tracker (CAT), the world’s most respected climate analysis coalition, was based on countries’ short-term goals for the next decade. Bill Hare, the chief executive of Climate Analytics, one of the organisations behind CAT, told the Guardian: “We are concerned that some countries are trying to portray [Cop26] as if the 1.5C limit is nearly in the bag. But it’s not, it’s very far from it, and they are downplaying the need to get short-term targets for 2030 in line with 1.5C.” Emissions will be twice as high in 2030 as they need to be to stay within 1.5C, based on promises made in Glasgow, CAT found. Scientists have warned that beyond 1.5C, some of the damage to the Earth’s climate will become irreversible. The analysts also found a chasm between what countries have said they will do on greenhouse gas emissions and their plans in reality. If current policies and measures are taken into account, rather than just goals, heating would rise to 2.7C, based on the CAT analysis. The findings should serve as a “reality check” to the talks, said Niklas Höhne, one of the authors. “Countries’ long-term intentions are good, but their short-term implementation is inadequate,” he told the Guardian. The 197 parties to the 2015 Paris agreement were asked to come to Glasgow with two aims: a long-term goal of reaching global net zero emissions around mid-century; and shorter-term national plans, known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs), pegging emissions reductions to 2030. Scientists say greenhouse gas emissions must fall by about 45% this decade for global temperatures to stay within 1.5C of pre-industrial levels. Countries responsible for about 90% of global emissions have signed up to net zero goals, mostly by around 2050 for developed countries, rising to 2060 for China and 2070 for India, but the NDCs for actions in the next decade do not match up. The climate responds to the cumulative carbon in the atmosphere, so if emissions are high enough in the next two decades the world could surpass the 1.5C limit even if carbon reaches net zero later. “It’s great that countries have long-term net zero targets, but they need to close the gap with short-term measures,” said Hare. The first week of the Cop26 talks was dominated by a rush of announcements, including commitments on preserving forests, private sector finance for clean energy, and countries phasing out coal. Some of these quickly started to unravel as countries appeared to renege or clarify some of their commitments. At the start of the second week of the fortnight-long talks, sharp rifts are appearing between countries that want tougher action, specifically to force countries to revise their NDCs annually if they are not in line with 1.5C, and others wanting to stick to the Paris timetable of five-yearly revisions. There are also disputes about how countries should monitor emissions, and over climate finance for poor countries. Hare noted there was no contradiction among the varying assessments, published last week by Melbourne University and the International Energy Agency, as they came to similar conclusions based on long-term goals. CAT also found in its “optimistic scenario” that if all targets countries had promised were fully met, temperatures would rise by 1.8C. The UN environment programme updated its analysis of the “emissions gap” between the cuts needed to stay within 1.5C and those offered by governments. Unep found that with the recently announced pledges by China, Saudi Arabia and others, temperatures were likely to rise by between 1.9C and 2.1C, but like the IEA and Melbourne estimates, that depended on long-term pledges being fully implemented. Hare said many of the long-term goals countries had set out lacked credibility. He pointed to Brazil, Australia and Russia. “We are concerned that there is not a seriousness of purpose at Cop26. It’s very hypothetical, getting to net zero in 2050,” he said. Höhne said countries must agree to revise their NDCs every year if they were found insufficient, adding: “If we came back every five years that would be a very bad choice. If countries agree to come back every year, they would have a chance of closing the gap.” Jennifer Morgan, the executive director of Greenpeace International, said: “This new calculation is like a telescope trained on an asteroid heading for Earth. It’s a devastating report. We have until the weekend to turn this thing around. That means countries agreeing how they’re going come back next year and every year after that until the gap to 1.5C is closed. The ministers shouldn’t leave this city until they’ve nailed that.” A Cop26 spokesperson said: “We know that the window to keep 1.5C alive is closing but the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is clear that it is still achievable. As today’s reports make clear, we’ve seen genuine progress in the first week of Cop26, but we have a lot more to do.” Labour’s Ed Miliband, the shadow business secretary, said: “The test of Cop26 has always been what concrete commitments it would deliver by 2030, the decisive decade to keep 1.5C alive. This report is an important reality check on the government’s attempt to greenwash Glasgow.” Green party co-leader Adrian Ramsay said: “Today was the day the sugar coating fell off the Cop26 talks to reveal the bitter pill that world leaders are going to force us to swallow if they don’t take much stronger action. This report shows that action in the next 10 years is vital. Long term targets, promises and non-existent technofixes, with no actual policies to get us there, are worth nothing. It shows that most global leaders have been asleep at the wheel. This is their wake-up call.”Here’s a spirit-lifting documentary about black transgender electronic music pioneer Glenn Copeland. It begins with the story of how he was “discovered” a few years ago, aged 72. At home in Canada, Copeland reads the email he got in 2015 from a record shop owner in Japan: the guy offered to buy any spare copies of Keyboard Fantasies, an album Copeland self-released in 1986 on cassette. At the time he was known as Beverly Glenn-Copeland, and the album is a trippy mix of electronica, folk and new age, overlaid with Copeland’s sumptuous contralto tenor; it’s now seen as his masterpiece. He had pressed 200 tapes and sold around 50. I could watch Copeland talking for hours. With his smiling eyes he radiates life and happiness, basking in autumnal success – the world has finally caught up with him. He was born Beverly Glenn-Copeland into a middle-class family in Philadelphia. At 17 in the early 60s, he was one of the first black students at a prestigious Canadian university, studying classical music. Homosexuality was still illegal in Canada, but Copeland was open about his relationship with another woman. His parents carted him off to a psychiatric hospital for electroshock “therapy” but he escaped. After dropping out of college, Copeland recorded a couple of albums, both commercial disasters. Then in the early 80s he discovered computers – “and I was off to the races”. Copeland recorded Keyboard Fantasies using an Atari computer, a synth and a drum machine. It was decades ahead of its time, and the film mostly follows Copeland on tour playing to young audiences who have just discovered him. His band is an adorable ragtag of musicians in their 20s (they look younger, like the kind of A-level students who hang around the art room at lunch). Often music documentaries feel padded out with filler but honestly I could have spent another hour in Copeland’s company. • Keyboard Fantasies is released on 12 November in cinemas.Every autumn, we’re urged to eat more game, but my local supermarket has only venison and pheasant, both of which always end up dry when I cook them. Help! David, London EC2 “Ethically, wild game is a good choice for meat-eaters, because the animals live free and for much longer than farmed or managed animals,” says James Lowe, chef and co-founder of Lyle’s in London. “It also has an incredible flavour.” Game is a lean meat, and so, as David has found, can easily dry out. “Things running through the forest are not sitting there being hand-fed buttermilk, whey, oats and barley to put on a layer of fat,” says chef and restaurateur Richard Corrigan. “If you whack a whole pheasant in the oven, you’ll never get the result you’re looking for.” The best approach for game birds, Corrigan says, is to treat the breasts and legs differently. He removes the latter, adds coriander, black pepper and orange zest (you could also chuck in some pancetta, squash and chestnuts), then “roasts at 175C for 45-50 minutes, checking to see when they’re tender”. For Lowe, meanwhile, the key is a digital probe or oven thermometer: Pheasant crown goes in a hot pan with foamy butter to colour, then you transfer to a rack and “roast at 110C until the core temperature hits 57C, which will give you slightly pink meat – think dreamy roast chicken.” Lisa Goodwin-Allen, executive chef of The Game Bird at The Stafford in London and Northcote in Lancashire, also subscribes to the low-and-slow mantra, setting her oven to 120C: “Use a flavoured or herb butter under the skin, so the bird roasts and poaches at the same time, then turn up the heat to 210C for the final 10 minutes, to crisp the skin.” Corrigan sprinkles the breasts with warmed, crushed peppercorns, grated chocolate and orange zest, puts the lot in a freezer bag and adds orange juice, butter and calvados. “Leave that to marinate for about three hours, then gently steam/poach the breasts in the same bag for eight minutes.” Cool, pat dry, seasonand lay skin side down in a hot pan with olive oil and butter. “Brown it as much as you can – the meat should be cooked through – then put in a 190C oven for a final blast for three to four minutes.” Venison, on the other hand, should be cooked “rare to medium-rare”, says Lowe, who sears loin, fillet or haunch in veg oil on the hob first. “Once it’s got a bit of colour, add butter and keep rolling the meat in that.” Transfer to a rack and pop in a 110C oven until the core temperature reaches 51C – “It won’t be dry, guaranteed.” Goodwin-Allen also sears venison loin before transferring it to the oven, because it ensures even cooking. Her top tip? “Finish in a hot pan with a touch of icing sugar to caramelise.” Corrigan, however, prefers his venison carpaccio-style: sprinkle a seam-boned haunch (ask your butcher) with a mix of coriander, cumin, black pepper and lemon zest, “colour the outside, rest, then slice paper-thin”. Essentially, he says, when it comes to game, “treat it with lightness and respect – but be slightly eccentric, too”. • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comFood price inflation reached a 14-month high in October with the prices of favourite snacks such as crisps and soft drinks rising the most, according to new figures. Annual grocery price inflation reached 2.1% last month which is the highest since August 2020, according to grocery market analysts Kantar. Fraser McKevitt, the Kantar head of retail and consumer insight, said that faced with higher prices shoppers could start to quit their normal supermarket for a cheaper store. Shoppers already on average visit more than three different stores every month to find the best deals, he said. “Grocery prices are rising and this month inflation hit its highest rate since August 2020, when retailers were still cutting promotions to maintain stock on the shelves,” said McKevitt. “As prices increase in certain categories, we can expect shoppers to continue to visit several supermarkets and shop around to find the best deals.” The grocery price inflation figure of 2.1% is based on Kantar’s survey of 75,000 products. While prices are rising fastest in the crisps and soft drinks aisles, it said the price of bacon, vegetables and cat and dog treats were falling. The most recent official data reported consumer price inflation (which also tracks other things including clothing and transport costs) was 3.1%. The Bank of England has predicted inflation could rise above 5% by early next year. After last year’s lockdowns Kantar said shoppers were keen to make the most of calendar milestones this year. An unrestricted Halloween drove sales of pumpkins up by more than a quarter in the four weeks to 31 October and, with trick or treating back on the cards, seasonal confectionery grew by 27%. After 2020’s cancelled Christmas, Britons appear determined not to have another one ruined. They are stocking up on long-life foods such as puddings and frozen turkeys, as well as gifts, with John Lewis launching its festive advert a week early, after seeing a rise in searches for festive products. “With Christmas ads out earlier than ever and Christmas stock on the shelves, we’re keen to prepare early this year,” said McKevitt, who added that 4.7m households bought mince pies in October while 1.6m bought their Christmas pudding which was 400,000 more than last year.EU citizens living in Britain are nearly three times more likely to experience rough sleeping than the general population, according to research from the homelessness charity Crisis. The joint research project, led by Heriot-Watt University and the Institute for Public Policy Research, is the first of its kind to explore the scale, causes and impact of homelessness experienced by people from the European Economic Area (EEA) who have made their home in Britain. It found that job loss was the main reason for Europeans living in Britain ending up homeless. Of all those homeless across Britain, 22,200 are originally from EEA countries – about 9% of the total. EEA citizens in Britain have been disproportionately affected by job losses over the last 18 months, according to the research. In March 2020, before the pandemic, 25% of homeless EEA nationals were unemployed. This figure jumped to 52% in the winter. For those recently experiencing rough sleeping, about half cited job loss and financial difficulties as a cause. For homeless Europeans who were in employment, insecure and exploitative work was a common problem, with 28% of people forced to put up with unacceptable employment conditions such as working without a contract and having an abusive employer. Many were paid below the minimum wage or were not paid at all. For those with recent experience of homelessness, nearly half had no income, with 87% living below the standard poverty line. Jon Sparkes, the chief executive of Crisis, said: “This research shines a light on the fact this foundation just isn’t there for many people who have made Britain their home. It’s unacceptable people originally from other European countries are experiencing homelessness here and aren’t able to access the system of support when something like a job loss or a health problem hits. “They want to contribute to their communities and given the shortage of workers in some industries right now, enabling people to do so will not only make a difference to our country, but will also make a difference to these individuals and make sure they can leave homelessness behind for good.” The research also identified specific barriers to support including rules limiting access and entitlement to housing and welfare support. Crisis is urging the government to provide a package of emergency accommodation and specialist employment support. The researchers said an estimated £32m funding for long-term specialist support for EEA nationals living in Britain and experiencing rough sleeping was needed. The charity is also calling on government to stand by its commitment to end rough sleeping for all by 2024. One EU rough sleeper who took part in the research said: “I worked for a person for seven months and that’s where I slept and received food. However, I didn’t get any money. I didn’t get the money after seven months of work. So that’s why I was basically forced to live on the street … it was very hard.” A government spokesperson said: “We are spending over £800m this year to tackle rough sleeping and homelessness, including a £10m winter pressures fund to provide accommodation for a further 3,500 rough sleepers during the coming months.”Most of the former Conservative party treasurers elevated to the House of Lords in the last 25 years have made very few spoken contributions once there, Guardian analysis has found. One former treasurer, Philip Harris, who like many of the recent incumbents is also a major Tory party donor, has made just one speech since entering the upper house in 1996, parliamentary records show. Two other former party treasurers put in the Lords, Michael Ashcroft and George Magan, made no spoken contributions at all across their combined 25 years in the house. Ashcroft stepped down in 2015 and Magan is not eligible to sit after a bankruptcy and associated court case. Of the 14 former treasurers or co-treasurers moved to the Lords since 2014, 11 are still peers. While a number of these still regularly vote, almost none appear to currently sit on committees, the other main legislative business of the Lords. The Conservatives have faced accusations of peerages being in effect for sale after an investigation by the Sunday Times and Open Democracy showed 16 of the Tories’ main treasurers in the last 20 years, who made donations to the party of £3m or above, had been made peers. A Scottish National party MP wrote to the Metropolitan police urging the force to open an investigation into “potential criminal misconduct regarding the procurement of … membership of the House of Lords” which he said were “deeply undermining public trust and confidence”. In response, Scotland Yard confirmed on Tuesday that it had “received correspondence relating to recent media reports concerning the awarding of peerages” and was “considering the contents” of Pete Wishart’s letter. It stressed no formal assessment of the allegations had been undertaken. Speaking on Monday, the international trade secretary, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, rejected any wrongdoing, saying such people were put in the Lords because of the expertise they could bring to it. “It’s a mix which brings a real depth of voices to our political parties,” she said. However, Guardian analysis of official Hansard records, which examined the Lords contributions of 14 Tory treasurers in the Lords between 1996 and 2021, uncovered only a few outliers who appeared regularly involved over a sustained period of time. Michael Farmer, a former City trader and party treasurer made a peer by David Cameron, has spoken 222 times since joining the upper house in 2014. Howard Leigh, also made a peer by Cameron, has made 260 spoken contributions since 2013. Jonathan Marland, a businessman made a peer in 2006, spent nearly three years working unpaid as a minister under Cameron, in the energy and business departments. Another of the group, Peter Cruddas, a businessman, party donor and former co-treasurer, has spoken twice since he wasmade a peer late last year against the advice of the House of Lords Appointments Commission. Cruddas said he was a “fully committed” peer who had one of the best voting records since joining, and was serving on a cross-party committee to improve charity laws. Apart from Harris, the treasurers-turned peers with the lowest level of spoken contributions were Stanley Fink, a hedge fund manager who has spoken four times since becoming a peer in 2011, and Stanley Kalms, a businessman with eight contributions since 2004, the last in 2017. All the serving peers have been emailed for comment. Angela Smith, the Labour leader in the Lords, said the bulk of the former treasurers were unfamiliar faces: “I wouldn’t recognise them. If I bumped into them in a corridor I wouldn’t know if they were a member of the House of Lords or if they were just there to have lunch with someone. “We’ll probably be sitting until midnight tonight. But there’s some people you’ll never see here at midnight, or even another time.” The Lib Dem leader in the Lords, Richard Newby, said: “The appointment of Tory treasurers, who typically contribute very little, if anything, to the house, is simply the most disreputable part of a thoroughly rotten system.” A Conservative Lords spokesperson said: “Conservative peers play a vital role in scrutinising and revising legislation, whether that be through speaking in the house, voting, serving on committees, working with all-party groups, or raising important issues with ministers. “Many peers balance their work in the house with roles outside of it, deepening the experience and expertise they bring to their parliamentary work.” • This article was amended on 15 November 2021. Howard Leigh has made 260 spoken contributions in the House of Lords since 2013, not 153 as an earlier version said.The collective will of golf’s establishment to swat aside challenges by Saudi Arabia means the European Tour will be renamed from the start of next year. DP World, the Dubai-based logistics company, will take on title sponsorship of the tour, with prize funds to increase as a direct result. The European Tour, formed in 1972, will keep its name as an overarching corporate entity only. Saudi Arabia’s manoeuvres in the professional game have met staunch resistance from the European and PGA Tours, who are now in strategic alliance. Greg Norman was recently confirmed as the public face of a Saudi-based series of 10 events on the Asian Tour. The Saudis have long-held aspirations of a golf super league but, as yet, have no formal buy-in from leading players. The DP World Tour will lead to prize funds – including major championships and World Golf Championships – totalling more than $200m (£147m) for the first time. Tournaments solely sanctioned by the DP World Tour must have a minimum purse of $2m. Next year will feature a minimum of 47 tournaments in 27 different countries, including new events in the United Arab Emirates, Japan, South Africa and Belgium. Neither the European Tour nor DP World would detail the length of their partnership or its total monetary value but it is understood the latter runs into hundreds of millions of dollars. “This announcement is momentous and will herald a new era in global golf,” said Keith Pelley, the European Tour’s chief executive. “When I joined [in 2016] I told the board I felt the name of the tour was a misnomer and did not reflect our brand. We are definitely a world tour. “The DP World Tour is a natural evolution of our decade-long partnership, and the presence of ‘world’ in our new title better reflects our global reach. We will always remember our heritage and those who have gone before us who helped us shape our tour but we also rejoice in our global footprint.” Pelley refused to reference directly the Saudi/Asian Tour alliance. However, this will inevitably be viewed as the further closing of ranks by the PGA and European Tours. Rory McIlroy, speaking via video conference to a media event held in Dubai, branded the deal “great news for global golf”. The four-times major winner has previously spoken out against Saudi plans for his sport. Jay Monahan, the PGA Tour’s commissioner, said: “I’ve said before that our respective tours are positioned to grow – together – over the next 10 years faster than we ever have at any point in our existence and today’s announcement is another point of proof in those efforts.”Ireland has begun making contingency plans for a possible trade war between the EU and the UK in the event that Boris Johnson walks away from the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol. Ireland’s deputy prime minister, Leo Varadkar, also confirmed that suspending the trade deal struck by Lord Frost last December was the EU’s likely response should the UK trigger article 16 of the protocol. Her told RTE News at One on Tuesday that such a move would in effect undo the entire Brexit deal and precipitate a collapse in relations with the EU. “I don’t think anybody wants to see the European Union suspending the trade and cooperation agreement with Britain,” he said. “But if Britain were to act in such a way that it was resigning from the protocol, resigning from the withdrawal agreement, I think the European Union would have no option other than to introduce what we call rebalancing measures to respond.” Varadkar, who as taoiseach negotiated the protocol with Johnson during a meeting in the Wirral in October 2019, added: “I really hope that Britain doesn’t go down this road. Prime minister Johnson always spoke about wanting Brexit done. “Brexit is kind of done, but [this] potentially undoes it and I don’t think it would be good for us, for Great Britain, and I don’t see how it would be good for Northern Ireland. And bear in mind the protocol is broadly supported by people in business and most political parties in Northern Ireland, and nobody is yet putting forward a preferable alternative to that.” Talks between the EU and the UK over the protocol have entered their fourth week but sources in Brussels remain pessimistic. Varadkar told RTE there was a cabinet sub-meeting on Brexit on Monday to “essentially dust down and restart our contingency preparations should we get into difficulty”. The EU would have to serve notice it was suspending the trade deal so there would be no immediate barriers imposed on exporters. However, this would send alarm bells throughout business and potentially damage the UK’s relationship not only with the EU but also the US. There are also fears that countries with significant trade links with the UK, including France, Ireland and the Benelux countries, could immediately impose 100% physical checks on lorries entering from Great Britain, causing traffic chaos on the roads in Kent. Last December, thousands of lorry drivers were forced to spend Christmas in their cabs in Kent lorry parks and at roadsides after France demanded each driver have a negative Covid-19 test before boarding a ferry or Eurotunnel train.Since the Paris agreement in 2015, countries around the world have promised ambitious action on climate change. Six years later, it is clear that they haven’t followed through on that promise. In the latest analysis carried out by Climate Action Tracker, published today, we find that the vast majority of states’ proposed 2030 actions and targets to reduce emissions are inconsistent with their longer-term net zero goals. There is a nearly one degree gap between governments’ current policies and what would be required to actually achieve their stated 2050 targets. While much has been made in Glasgow over recent days of the calculation by the International Energy Agency that the latest wave of net zero targets would keep warming to 1.8C, we shouldn’t lean back and celebrate. It is dangerous, and gives false hope on climate action when there is such a massive function and ambition gap. Countries have made the commitments, but most of them haven’t begun the actions needed to achieve them, especially in the near term. The stark reality is that we are far from solving the climate problem. With the policies governments have in place on the ground right now, warming is expected to reach 2.7C. Even if they meet their 2030 targets (but not their long-term targets), warming would still reach 2.4C by 2100 – and, given the uncertainties in the climate system response, there is a substantial chance of exceeding 3C. And, with the current proposals, in the short term we would emit around twice as much in 2030 as we would if we were holding to a 1.5C trajectory. It should also be noted that 1.8C is still far from the Paris agreement’s 1.5C limit. At the Climate Action Tracker, we assess the climate action of 40 countries totalling more than 80% of global emissions, and as part of this we also assess net zero targets. While we find that all the net zero targets announced so far could theoretically hold warming at about 1.8˚C – this is our “optimistic” scenario if they are fully implemented – the problem is that without stronger concrete near-term action, this would be physically impossible to achieve. Of the 25 net zero targets we have so far analysed, only four countries get an “acceptable” rating (Chile, Costa Rica, the EU and the UK). That’s only 6% of global emissions. Four are “average”, four “poor”, and the rest are “target information incomplete”. Ambitious words and promises are good, but one must ultimately judge governments by their actions. Their action on near-term targets so far falls well short of what’s needed, and is indeed inconsistent with most of the net zero targets on the table. Australia, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates have put forward net zero targets that lack critical details on scope, target architecture and transparency. These targets will only be credible if followed by robust legislation and detailed plans as to how they’ll achieve net zero, as well as stronger 2030 targets to get them on track to meet them. These governments and others use these vague, aspirational targets to distract from inadequate action. They’re just lip service to real climate action. What’s driving this inaction? In our view, it’s the continued commitment to coal and gas. The world seems reluctant to kick the coal habit: Glasgow’s coal pact isn’t going to solve the problem, as countries such as the US, China and India haven’t signed up, and the phase-out date is woolly. We know that coal extraction must end in the OECD by the end of this decade. While China has committed to stop funding new coal plants overseas, it refused to sign the Glasgow deal to stop funding gas overseas. Gas is the new coal, and is not the answer to climate change. It’s still a fossil fuel, and needs to be phased out almost as fast as its dirty cousin. Despite this, the World Bank, multilateral development banks, and the European Union are still planning to fund new gas plants. The world’s largest gas exporter, Australia, is also going full steam ahead on new plants. As things stand, we’ll end up with is either warming well above 2C or a lot of stranded assets – investments that could be better used on actual low-carbon projects. Looking at our Climate Target Update Tracker, 11 countries of the 40 we look at haven’t increased the ambition of their targets at all since Paris. Leaving the 2030 targets to languish in their current sorry state for another five years until the next round of Paris agreement updates in 2025 – which is to set targets for 2035 – is far too late for the climate. It could lose us the 1.5C world. Governments need to come back next year for Cop27 with stronger 2030 targets, and again the next year, until they measure up to something that will actually move the dial. • Bill Hare is chief executive of Climate Analytics; Prof Dr Niklas Höhne is from NewClimate Institute; their organisations collaborate on the Climate Action Tracker projectMalaika Jabali: ‘Woke has become distorted beyond recognition’ It’s mostly people who don’t understand the original connotation of “woke” who still say woke. They can have it. Whether we’re talking about “critical race theory” from Black scholars, “identity politics” from Black feminists, or “woke” from Black slang, terms indigenous to our way of thinking or advocating get co-opted and distorted beyond recognition in mainstream society. Woke was another way to say “conscious”: having awareness of our conditions and history in an America that lulls us with myths of a post-racial, colorblind, meritocratic society. Amid police killings in that “post-racial” society, these myths became untenable. Slang is organic. It arrives from particular conditions. There is no authoritative body of people who get to determine what terms get used and why. And just as “woke” evolved into a call to action to keep fighting, Black Americans will continue to birth terms that define what we do. And others will continue to co-opt and distort. Malaika Jabali is the senior news and politics editor at Essence Magazine Laura Kipnis: ‘Wokeness is about style, not substance’ The term “woke” wasn’t around in 1921, when Somerset Maugham wrote his short story Rain about the downfall of a professional rebuker – the Christian missionary, Mr Davidson, whose public fulminations against sin masked less-than-upstanding private impulses. But I think Maugham was animated by similar instincts as mine when I deploy “wokeness” against contemporaries who I find too full of their own rectitude. The instinct is that something’s going on with you, the rebuker, that you can’t see in yourself; all this hectoring and exhorting is compensatory in some way. Excessive. “Woke” is a one-word hermeneutics of suspicion, shorthand for the sort of characterology Maugham was performing, dissecting a fulminator’s self-relation and self-delusions. I believe it’s more useful as applied to political style than political substance, however: I can agree with the woke on politics – I’m for social justice too! – though I may be warier about righteous vanguards and missionary zeal. Mr Davidson says things like: “If the tree is rotten it shall be cut down and cast in to the flames,” referring to the South Sea Islanders he and his wife mean to convert. “We had to make sins out of what they thought were natural actions,” says she, his equal in uprightness. Note the punitive rigidity underpinning the “good works”, the authoritarian streak, the self-congratulatory religiosity. Compare to your Twitter feed. Laura Kipnis is a writer. Her new book, Love in the Time of Contagion: A Diagnosis, will be out in February Rebecca Solnit: ‘Woke was kidnapped and has died’ Once upon a time, the past tense of “wake” left its life as a verb and became an adjective of sorts, a term for describing the quality of having awakened, especially to injustice and racism. Like other vernacular words in the English language, Woke’s youth was among young Black people but its illness and decline came after it was kidnapped by old white conservatives. They were often angry at words, especially new words, most particularly words that disturbed their rest – awakened them, you could say – and Woke was such a word. This fairy tale ends badly. Rather than kill Woke, they tried to turn him into a zombie mercenary sent out to sneer at those who were concerned about racism and other injustices. This backfired and “woke” became a marker of the not-OK Boomer, a bilious word whose meaning was more in who said it than in what it meant or mocked. In other words, Woke died. Cool young people were not sad that Woke was dead, because he was no longer their word, and mean old people were not sad because they did not know he was dead. The end. Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist. Her most recent books are Recollections of My Nonexistence and Orwell’s Roses Bhaskar Sunkara: ‘Language on the left can be a problem’ To be “woke” once meant to be alert to the continued realities of oppression, particularly the oppression faced by Black Americans. But today, its meaning has shifted. To be “woke” is to lack urgency about building the coalitions that can win over working-class people and actually redistribute money and power to the oppressed. This isn’t to say that progressives have to avoid questions of social justice to win a mythically conservative working-class, but that we need to acknowledge the reality that working-class people of all races want basically the same things: good jobs, secure housing, dependable health care, and the ability to provide for themselves and their families. Framing universal concerns with identity-focused messaging or language stolen straight from academia is a huge mistake. James Carville absolutely has a point when he talks about Democratic party messaging being too far removed from ordinary voters — including the party’s base of black and brown voters. But he’s quick to conflate unpopular rhetoric with popular demands like Medicare for All pushed by the figures he maligns like Alexandria-Ocasio Cortez and Bernie Sanders. Our language on some parts of the Left is a problem. But that’s an easier problem to fix than the fact that Carville and Clintonite Democrats have lost the trust of millions of Americans with their defense of elite interest and decades of unpopular policies. Progressive have a program that can win — we now just need the right way to communicate it and new approaches to organizing people around their most pressing economic concerns. Bhaskar Sunkara is the editor of Jacobin and a Guardian US columnist Thomas Chatterton Williams: ‘Woke is not a viable descriptor’ Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is right. “Woke” is not, and has not been for some time now, a viable descriptor for anyone who is critical of the many serious excesses of the left yet remains interested in reaching beyond their own echo chamber. The term has been co-opted and diluted of meaning by lazy ideologues and bad-faith actors on the right, which is a shame, since it’s more poetic and evocative than any pithy substitute I can think of. The challenge for anyone interested in something deeper than culture-war point scoring is to develop new language that is specific enough to persuade those who don’t already agree to consider the same old questions from new angles. Fairly or not, “woke” and “wokeness” now overwhelmingly signal that you’re not fundamentally interested in that rhetorical labor, and those who need the most convincing give themselves permission to stop paying attention. Thomas Chatterton Williams is the author of Self-Portrait in Black and White. His next book, Nothing Was the Same, will be published by Knopf Zaid Jilani: ‘You’re either with us or against us’ The word woke loosely refers to a social media-fueled, leftwing political ideology that emerged in the English-speaking world in the early 2010s. The term is derived from the state of being awake to or conscious of structural inequalities in society and being hyper-aware of one’s own role in those inequalities. Someone who is woke is constantly inspecting every institution in society, looking for the presence of racism, sexism, and other forms of pervasive prejudice. What separates someone who is woke from someone who is merely progressive is not only this vigilance and awareness but a fervent belief that everyone must be enlisted into their social causes at all times and that the end justifies the means when battling injustice. Unlike traditional liberals, woke Americans place very little stake in value-neutral norms like freedom of speech and non-discrimination. As the antiracist activist Ibram Kendi says, “The only remedy to racist discrimination is antiracist discrimination. The only remedy to past discrimination is present discrimination.” Kendi also informs us that you can only be racist or anti-racist, there is no middle ground, echoing former president George W Bush’s instruction that “either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists”. Zaid Jilani is a journalist who has worked for UC Berkeley’s Greater Good Science Center, the Intercept and the Center for American Progress Derecka Purnell: ‘You have to wake people up – then you get action’ From street corners to kitchen tables, friends and I have laughed and shouted each other down about the state of Black America. We argue about whether our people are “asleep” - unaware of, uninterested in, unconcerned with the violence that white people inflict upon us. Such violence can be found in demeaning interpersonal interactions with individual white people, and in the structural white supremacist violence in our housing, hospitals, jobs and schools. If “sleep” prevents us from collectively resisting this savagery, then one must remember Malcolm X’s message: “The greatest mistake of the movement has been trying to organize a sleeping people around specific goals. You have to wake the people up first, then you’ll get action.” Political expressions derived from Black activism, including “stay woke”, “Hotep”, “Black Lives Matter”, have strange careers. Like our heroes, they are lauded, branded, dehistoricized, co-opted and caricatured. For example, the Democratic strategist James Carville bastardizes “wokeness” as a “stupid”, inflexible commitment to ideas that seek to drastically improve society. His usage robs the term of its value to make us more politically aware and active on our terms. Why? James Baldwin explains that “to be a Negro in this country and to be relatively conscious is to be in a state of rage almost, almost all of the time.” This rage threatens the status quo, what Carville and other wealthy, politically powerful people fight to protect. Ironically, Carville’s condemnation is exactly why Black people continue to tell each other to stay woke: elite white actors and institutions benefit from exploiting Black votes, activism and culture while telling us to bury our grievances about their violence. It’s how the Democratic party scribbles “Black Lives Matter” on banners for their conventions yet give more money to the police who kill Black people quickly. I suspect that, like his rightwing counterparts who are antagonistic to “critical race theory” and “white privilege”, Carville refuses to learn why Black people historically use wokeness to inspire our activism. I suggest he starts with Langston Hughes: “Negroes Sweet and docile, Meek, humble, and kind. Beware the day They change their minds!” Or Malcolm X: “… there will come a time when black people wake up and become intellectually independent enough to think for themselves … this type of thinking also brings an end to the brutality inflicted upon black people by white people and it is the only thing that will bring an end to it. No federal court, state court, or city court will.” Derecka Purnell is a Guardian US columnist and the author of Becoming Abolitionists: Police, Protests, and the Pursuit of FreedomHugely encouraging to find Boris Johnson treating Monday’s emergency debate on sleaze like the birth of a lovechild. Which is to say, he was unfortunately washing his hair. Metaphorically, of course. I get a strong “Mate, after eight weeks, hair cleans itself” energy from the prime minister. The House of Commons isn’t going to clean itself, unfortunately, which makes it all the more regrettable that Johnson always feels the need to get away from his mistakes. By next year, he’ll have billed the taxpayer for a full-scale Fortress of Solitude, with the only locked-on certainty being that Kwasi Kwarteng will assure us the £38bn crystal cave is a non-story. Yesterday, though, we had Anne-Marie Trevelyan defending outside earnings. The trade secretary didn’t think the ability to maintain lucrative consultancies should be removed, she said in one interview, because it brought a “richness” to the Commons. Jesus, Anne-Marie: YOU HAD ONE JOB. Unlike half the Tory backbenches, obviously, who have three jobs. Good to know that ongoing performance art piece Chris Grayling takes a full £100,000 a year from Hutchison Ports Europe, where I imagine his advice runs to “Quick one: did you remember to acquire some ports? Seems obvious but I once ballsed up on this front with ferries.” The latest emanation from the WTF files is the revelation that Torridge and West Devon MP Geoffrey Cox has spoken once in a single parliamentary debate since February 2020, and spent part of this year working and voting remotely out of the British Virgin Islands, where he pocketed £150,000 of his £900,000 extra-parliamentary earnings for advising the tax haven’s government on Foreign Office corruption charges. I mean … Just get an OnlyFans, Geoffrey. It’s so much more dignified. Incidentally, it’s nice to remember how many people wanged on about what a nice voice this #massivelegend had, back when he was a scenery-chewing attorney general for Theresa May. You can bet they feel pretty ahead of the curve now. They could get Cox to record their voicemail greeting for them. He’s bound to be on Cameo. Indeed, perhaps that’s the logical next step in democracy’s voiding of its bowels: Boris Johnson charging a grand a pop to gibber “Build Back Birthday!” for paying members of the electorate. Amazingly, Cox is just one element in what’s becoming a category 5 shitstorm for Johnson. There are honestly too many fronts to fit in here, from Johnson’s own byzantine arrangements for paying for £840-a-roll gold wallpaper, to the grotesque racket of Tory treasurers donating £3m and reliably ending up in the Lords. (Johnson has appointed a full 96 peers in less than two years, meaning the Lords itself now runs to nearly 800 members and is bigger than the entire EU parliament.) All this is before we even get to Delyn MP Rob Roberts, who has somehow just been allowed to rejoin the Conservative party and sit as an independent in the Commons despite an investigation having found he sexually harassed a junior member of staff. Mind you, I’ve very much enjoyed the gentlemen across Fleet Street who’ve been pontificating along the lines of: “Can you imagine a sexual harasser in any other workplace simply being allowed to carry on working there?” Yes, guys. I can. ANYHOW. In the absence of Johnson, you might have ordinarily expected Monday’s debate to be opened by leader of the house Jacob Rees-Mogg. As one of the architects of the catastrophic Paterson amendment, however, Rees-Mogg was evidently deemed too much of an oratorical liability. He and his fellow blunderer, chief whip Mark Spencer, could instead be found sitting boot-faced and silent on the frontbench like Crabbe and Goyle – a pair of not-very-hench men who knew their blond ringleader wasn’t going to show up. At the dispatch box, honours were instead done by Cabinet Office minister Steve Barclay, a political entity I find it very difficult to have an opinion about one way or the other. Ever since he was appointed from the ether as Brexit secretary in 2018, Barclay has somehow always seemed a placeholder minister, who materialises only as a temporary proxy – the human equivalent of the apologetic parenthesis [sorry this bit to follow later]. But look: Steve didn’t exactly have great material to work with – and it should obviously never even have been his script. The bottler who should have done it had instead spent the morning at a hospital in Northumberland, floundering to the cameras that he couldn’t get back in time. Boris Johnson is the most extraordinarily bad liar, which is really embarrassing for him considering how long he’s spent practising. I heard if you spent 10,000 hours doing something you were supposed to be an expert in it. In which case, Johnson should be able to compete intergalactically in this particular discipline. He should be good enough to be Earth’s tribune in the Bullshit Games. Instead, we found the PM skulking in a radiology department, trying to change the subject to Covid. That in itself tells you quite how bad things are. Changing the subject to talk about something he’s handled as badly as Covid has the ring of “Can we talk instead about how I can’t live on £160,000 and two free houses?”, or “Can we talk instead about how my wife’s five years older than my daughter?” I suppose you have to concede the quality of the white goods he’s hiding in has improved. He’s graduated from a fridge to a CT scan machine. Arguably the darkest news this week, though, is the discovery that the standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, now requires increased security after threats against her. What a moment for pause. It was barely two weeks ago that some in the Commons were calling for “David’s Law”, in memory of the brutally murdered MP David Amess, explaining that sky-rocketing abuse of members was fuelled by the internet. And yet, what is abuse of the previously pretty anonymous standards commissioner fuelled by, if not some hugely unnecessary and disgracefully targeted attacks on her led by some MPs themselves? If only they’d spend a little less time on the second jobs, and a little more considering the duties and honour of the first. In the meantime, Johnson has reminded his MPs he’s a weak man masquerading as a strong one, which is why serving ministers are now giving quotes to the Times like: “We put up with him as long as he’s popular. As soon as he’s not, we should get rid.” Oof. That time may not have come. But I’m reminded of a great Hemingway line from The Sun Also Rises. “How did you go bankrupt?” “Two ways. Gradually and then suddenly.” Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist“I’m not legally allowed to throw these any more,” says a remorseful Dave Bayley to a roar of disappointed boos. Glass Animals’ lead singer weighs up a pineapple in one hand. “It would knock you out!” As the four-piece band launches into the historically pineapple toss-inducing Pork Soda, their lead singer cautiously slips it into the front row. The legal repercussions of fruit fights has been a recent consideration for the band. Formed in Oxford in 2010 and, soon after, signed by Adele’s producer, the quartet of childhood friends have gone from being indie club night staples in the UK to talkshow regulars in the US. With their third album Dreamland, Glass Animals’ hallucinogenic synth-pop has subtly shifted gear, relying more on conversational rap vocals from Bayley and the sort of tropical hip-hop production that has been ubiquitous in pop since Drake dropped Hotline Bling in 2015. On stage, the band’s Dreamland is represented as a pastiche idea of America. Neon signs reading Hotel and Pool blare their light to the beat, while a pair of tennis shoes dangle off an oversized basketball hoop. Chain bouncing off his red sports shirt, Bayley conducts these light-up, Americana signifiers with glee, flanked by his more cautious, stationary bandmates. Played live, Dreamland’s songs slip and slide into a gelatinous blend of synth-pop, early 2000s R&amp;B and poolside hip-hop. There’s little to differentiate the band’s recent tracks, especially when Bayley’s voice – which, on record, moves with smooth cadence – occasionally fights to be heard against a rush of crescendo bass and a crowd more than enthusiastic to sing along. It’s the earworms that cut through the wavy sonic homogeneity. Throwing his head back to The Other Side of Paradise’s opening woofs, Bayley pulls at his shirt with melodramatic intensity, while Tokyo Drifting’s trap beat gets a short-lived mosh pit going under bloody red lights. Finally letting loose, the band close their set with a sweaty rendition of Heat Waves (a slow-burn Top 5 hit after a year in the Top 40). “You can’t fight it / You can’t breathe,” croons Bayley, hair plastered to his forehead. As the Barrowland Ballroom’s doors fog with condensation, Glass Animals have certainly brought the heat to their first live show in nearly two years. Glass Animals are on tour in the UK and Ireland until 25 November. Details here.Nikki Haley should have joined the circus, because she is great at walking a tightrope. Ever since she left her position as Donald Trump’s ambassador to the UN in 2018, Haley has kept on the right side of the former president, while simultaneously keeping a safe distance from Trumpism. She has criticised Trump just enough that she can cut ties with him should he become a liability; she has also backed him just enough to count him as an ally should he prove useful. Haley, who is expected to run for the Republican presidential nomination in 2024, alternates between throwing red meat to Trump’s base and keeping one foot in polite society. Hers is a very polished populism. Haley’s balancing act was on full display last week, during an interview with the Christian Broadcasting Network, during which she was asked about the mental health of Joe Biden. Haley cannily avoided commenting directly on Biden, who turns 79 this month, but did make pointed remarks about the need for cognitive tests for ageing politicians. She was rude under the guise of reasonableness. “Let’s face it, we’ve got a lot of people in leadership positions that are old,” Haley said. “That’s a fact … this shouldn’t be partisan. We should seriously be looking at the ages of the people that are running our country and understand if that’s what we want.” Buried within the ageism, Haley has a point. Biden is the oldest sitting president in US history. Meanwhile, the current US Senate is the oldest in history, with an average age of 64.3 years. Dianne Feinstein, the oldest senator, is 88 and has held her California seat since 1992. She is closely followed by the Iowa senator Chuck Grassley, also 88, who has been in his job for four decades. Six senators are at least 80; 23 are in their 70s. There is nothing wrong with politicians being in their 70s or 80s. Experience can be an important asset, and, while we tend to associate youth with energy and innovative thinking, some of the oldest politicians in the US have the most dynamic ideas. Senator Ed Markey, 75, co-sponsored the green new deal. Bernie Sanders, 80, captured young people’s passion like no other US politician in recent years – as did Jeremy Corbyn, 72, in the UK. Meanwhile, fresh-faced Pete Buttigieg, 39, whose 2020 ambitions made him the first competitive millennial presidential candidate, ran on stale ideas. He is a McKinsey millennial, whose status quo platform resonates better with older voters than with his peers. You can sell out at any age. That said, it is worth asking if there is a reason why US leadership skews so old, particularly as the US is an outlier among the countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in this respect. The New York Times noted last year that the average OECD leader is almost 25 years younger than Biden. Again, while it is good to have politicians above retirement age – there is a problem if it is because the political structure is making it hard for a new generation to rise to the top. The US system massively favours incumbents: members of the US Congress are typically re-elected about 90% of the time. That breeds complacency. It can also breed myopia. Barack Obama, for example, has admitted that fundraising for his 2004 Senate campaign made him more like his wealthy donors: “I spent more and more of my time above the fray, outside the world of immediate hunger, disappointment, fear, irrationality and frequent hardship of the other 99% … I suspect this is true for every senator: the longer you are a senator, the narrower the scope of your interactions.” Ultimately, it is not the age of our politicians we need to worry about. What matters is having a government that represents the people it serves. Age limits won’t solve that, nor will cognitive tests, but reassessing our ideas about leadership might. Truly great leaders are not the people who cling to power the longest; they are the ones willing to pass the baton to a new generation. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistThe unusual rains began to fall in Shanxi on 3 October, and the torrential downpours lasted for three days. According to Chinese media, the 59 observatories across Shanxi province all recorded historic levels of rain. According to the local weather bureau, the average rain in the province reached 120mm (4.7 in) between 2 and 7 October. The average rainfall across the US over a whole month is 71mm. But when the rain finally stopped more news began to emerge about the damage it had caused. A week later, the Communist party newspaper Shanxi Evening News reported that an estimated 190,000 hectares (470,000 acres) of crops had been inundated and destroyed. For 47-year-old Yu Jianhua (not her real name) in the village of Yaocheng, an hour’s drive south of Taiyuan, this loss has been devastating. Her two dozen greenhouses – the family’s main source of income – have all been destroyed by the floods. In the last few days, she was busy rescuing the remaining celery with the help of fellow villagers, in a hope that it was still fine to be sold on the market in the weeks to come. Yu, who lives there with her two elderly parents-in-law and her husband, was evacuated during the rain. But when she went back after the downpours, she found that small cracks had begun to appear all over her house, where a portrait of Chairman Mao hung at the centre of the barren wall above a Chinese character, fu (meaning good fortune). “I didn’t think too much about it at the time. But then, cracks started to expand day after day and I began to worry. So my husband and I moved away to stay at our friends’ last Friday.” But she’s also in a dilemma: her in-laws insisted on staying in their old home, even though it is becoming a bit wobbly. “They are very stubborn – they don’t want to leave the house they spent most of their lives in.” Two weeks after the rain, local officials came to inspect her house, and they are now talking about a mixture of compensation and subsidy. But it takes time to rebuild. “I’m really exhausted,” said Yu, adding that what she had just experienced “definitely has to do with climate change”. It is not the first time China has had such a dramatic scene this year. In July, the heavy rainfall and the deadly floods in the central province of Henan – one of the country’s largest agricultural provinces – killed more than 300 people, with a few dozen still missing. Chinese meteorologists link such unpredictable weather patterns to the climate crisis, which exacerbates the frequency and severity of climatic extremes and variations. “This year, in particular, extreme weather in the north of China’s Yangtze River has been common,” said Prof Faith Chan of the University of Nottingham in the eastern Chinese city of Ningbo. “In Shanxi, monthly rainfall is normally about 31mm in October, but this year [it is] at least three times more than usual, reaching 119.5mm, to be precise. It’s alarming. “Although we still need more scientific research into this phenomenon, so far it all indicates a trend that extreme weather and intense rainfall will be a norm in northern China. China has to act fast.” Beijing has already taken steps to tackle the climate crisis. In 2013, President Xi Jinping promised to achieve “ecological civilisation” in China. Before Cop26, Beijing promised to reduce fossil fuel use to below 20% by 2060. In the last couple of years, Chan said, cities across China have also been beefing up their emergency response capability. Still, critics say more can be done on the part of the government in building resilience. They include, Chan said, allowing the media to get the message out soonest possible and establishing a protocol for disaster relief. “More importantly, Beijing should work closely with communities, and communities also need to engage and participate closely co-produce flood resilience practice to reduce loss and damage from disasters.” Yan Tan, an associate professor in human geography at the University of Adelaide in Australia agrees. “What we saw in China this year is not unique, in particular in developing countries across Asia Pacific. Think about Bangladesh and the Philippines,” she said. “As a result of increasing climatic extremes, unfortunately, a lot of people will have to be displaced or forced to migrate if governments could not make effective policy and programs that avert, minimise, plan for, and put proactive and contingency arrangements into place for human mobility in a climate-resilient, sustainable future.” But to many flood victims leaving is unrealistic, said Luo Qiang (not his real name), 38. Luo was born in Nanzuo village, Qi county, 20 miles south of Yaocheng village. He moved away years ago but says: “Most of our villagers are over 60 years old here. This is where they were born, bred and where they plan to be buried in the future. They don’t want to go anywhere.” Nanzuo was only just officially lifted out of the national poverty level last year. For generations, Luo’s family worked as farmers here, planting corn and raising pigs for a living. But the recent rain and floods destroyed their main sources of income and livelihood. “This is so rare. I’ve never seen it,” he said. He rushed back home to help immediately after the rain had stopped, only to find many villagers had already been relocated to a school in the county because their homes were flooded. “Clothes, quilts were all soaked. Pigs killed. Our corn, too.” “I’m 1.73 metres tall. When I came back on 7 October, the water could reach my chest. Now the water is receding, but in some fields, it still reaches my knees,” Luo said. “Meanwhile, cracks are appearing in many of our villagers’ houses. They are really worried about what could happen next.” It’s a double whammy for villagers across the flooded areas in Shanxi this month. By now, their main sources of income and livelihood have been ruined by the rain and the floods. Worse still, winter has arrived in Shanxi, and the price of coal has become too high after a recent national crackdown on its use, in an effort to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. “Last year, we spent 3,000 yuan [£346] on heating for the duration of five months. This year, it’d reach 8,000 to 9,000 yuan. There are new energy options, but we cannot afford them,” Luo said. “We cannot plan ahead any more.”Jane Noury’s coming of age journey is similar to many suburban American teens: anchored by family and friends but impatient to expand beyond a small town, selfies and insecurities and confidence, so much incipient energy, waiting to begin. As captured in Always Jane, a four-part series premiering on Amazon Prime Video this week, Noury’s life in 2019 and 2020 was marked by the classic emotional rollercoaster of friendships, family and figuring out who you are – on top of the upheaval of the pandemic and alongside the journey and challenges of growing up trans in America. The series, directed by Jonathan C Hyde with Noury as an executive producer, embeds in both mundane and remarkable moments in Noury’s life between the ages of 18 and 20, a time in which she graduated high school, began modeling, weathered quarantine, underwent gender-affirming surgery, and moved away from home in Sparta, New Jersey, to college in New York City. It’s also an intimate, at times unvarnished, portrait of a close-knit, affectionate family, one committed to supporting Jane and learning with her. There’s moments of deep vulnerability – Noury’s parents, David and Laura, discussing how they came to understand their child’s gender dysphoria, oldest sister Emma remembering her fury at a school bully targeting Jane – and plenty of nuclear family staples: ribbing at the dinner table, bickering, battles over homework. But “we all saw the bigger picture in the fact that we wanted to show a very positive, loving and accepting environment, and what that could be like for a transgender person specifically, and how that could relate to anyone else,” Jane Noury told the Guardian. “It’s not just about being trans.” The series offers a compassionate and understated window into a late adolescent experience still massively underrepresented on-screen and under siege in several states. At a time when a Terf (trans-exclusive radical feminist) belief system that polices trans bodies and folds transphobia into warped, exclusive feminism continues to go mainstream, when Netflix stands by a Dave Chappelle special laced with transphobic jokes, and when state legislatures pursue a persistent and evolving assault on trans rights from bathrooms to sports, Always Jane offers light in the hyper-specific: one loving, supportive family with a trans daughter, figuring things out as they go along. The hostile context occasionally filters into the Nourys’ household – a news clip about Trump’s ban on transgender participation in the military, recollections of the difficulty the Nourys faced getting Jane’s hormone treatments covered by insurance – but is not explicitly debated or discussed at length; there’s not much to say when the stakes are so personal and the answers so obvious. “I hope people see this isn’t a political issue, this is a human rights, civil rights issue,” said Hyde. “It shouldn’t be one side versus the other – if you watch this story and you meet Jane Noury and you empathize with this, how can you deny her of everything that your kids have and everything that the rest of us have?” “The story is about loving your kids – that’s the story,” he added. “What is political about loving your children?” Though a film-making student in high school and now at the School of Visual Arts in Manhattan, Noury, now 20, had “no intention of making a docuseries about my life,” she said. She first met Hyde with her mother in 2019, at a brunch for competitors in a model search by Slay Model Management, an all-trans modeling agency based in Los Angeles. Hyde originally intended to document the model search, which forms the bulk of the second episode, as an affirmation of trans beauty and the first occasion, for many of the models, to be a in room of majority trans people. But he switched plans upon meeting Jane, who was upfront about her experience and eager to tell a story whose relative positivity and tenderness could offer a crucial model for other families with trans members. According to a Glaad study, 84% of Americans don’t personally know someone who is transgender; media representations thus hold disproportionate power over information and impressions about transgender people, including for transgender people sorting through their own self-perception. “If you don’t know a trans person, you don’t know necessarily how to relate to their experience,” said Hyde. “A lot of people could see Jane, and see the Nourys, and maybe understand something that they don’t really understand much better.” Hyde provided Jane with a few handycams to self-document the few months leading up to the competition in February 2020 – the anticipation of a new horizon, the drudgery of school, moments of boredom, excitement and play with her sisters, parents and friends. “This was never planned to happen. It was not supposed to be an Amazon show,” said Noury. “It is a transgender coming of age story but it’s also more about just the behind the scenes of my life and trying to figure out what I want as I get older.” “We didn’t feel like we should be trying to tell the perfect trans story, or tell the perfect trans narrative,” said Hyde. “We wanted to tell a perfect Noury story, and to tell the family story.” There was, however, much discussion over whether and how to depict Jane’s gender-affirming surgery in 2020, owing to the long-running trend in media of obsessing over transgender bodies and surgery (see: any 90s talkshow segment on transgender people, as summarized in the Netflix documentary Disclosure, on the history of trans on-screen depictions). The title of the series reflected an explicit rejection of before/after binaries and fixations on transition as a strictly surgical change. Hyde, the Nourys, and a trans consultant worked to avoid building the series around Jane’s surgery – no before and after pictures, no detailed images of the procedures beyond Jane’s emotional experience. “We didn’t want to make [it] a focal point of the story,” said Hyde. But some inclusion of Jane’s anticipation and emotional recovery, in the third and fourth episodes “gave the series a more in-depth side to what some trans people go through”, said Noury. “For me, personally, I needed to have surgery to help me along the road. For me, personally, I needed that in my transition. But a lot of people don’t need that.” Gender-affirming surgery, though crucial and intensive healthcare for many trans people, is “not the overall goal, and your life still continues after surgery”, said Noury. “I didn’t want to create this idealistic journey so when other people, especially people in my community, see this, they think this is the end-all goal, but it’s not. It’s your journey, you decide.” A goal instead is presenting more representation of trans life, still burdened by a litany of long-running stereotypes and the double-edged sword of visibility mistaken for material change in the lives of trans people, particularly trans women of color. Always Jane is a step toward the goal of “more content that caters to trans experience and that is accurate”, said Noury. “There needs to be more people in the writing room that are trans or that actually know what the experience is like for some people.” The series is “definitely for my community”, said Noury. “But it’s really just about the love and acceptance of my family, and how that can really help a transgender child flourish.” Such continuous support, the faith in one’s child to articulate their desires, is worthy of celebration “regardless of being trans”, she added. “I feel like that could be said for any child, just being accepted and loved and heard.” Always Jane is available on Amazon Prime on 12 NovemberThe family of a British special forces corporal believed to have taken his own life after suffering years of mental health issues has described the care he received as “casual and incompetent”. The mother of Alex Tostevin, 28, a member of the Special Boat Service (SBS), told his inquest that his commanding officers and medics knew he was a suicide risk and needed more help. Alison Tostevin said: “The thing that disturbed me, traumatised me the most, was that everybody knew. The MoD knew, his commanding officers knew, welfare knew, his medics knew. Everybody knew that my son had sat in his flat in a darkened room with a noose around his neck. “I think that life must be cheap to people who think it’s OK to leave someone with their dog and 999 and the Samaritans as security and safety measures and all the boxes are ticked. That’s a fine job of care. Our precious son has gone. His care was casual, incompetent and careless and it has destroyed us.” Tostevin said her son was a kind, bright, fun-loving boy who grew up on Guernsey. He joined the Royal Marines thinking it would be an adventure but within months of passing out was sent to Afghanistan. He was shot in the head at the age of 21 while on sentry duty in Afghanistan, the inquest in Bournemouth heard. The bullet ricocheted around his helmet and he was knocked the ground but he continued to hold Taliban gunmen off so that his colleagues could reach safety. He received a mention in dispatches for his bravery. When he returned from Afghanistan, he took to keeping a cricket bat next to his bed for safety and was frightened of children because in Afghanistan youngsters had led troops into ambushes. Tostevin said he became volatile, got into financial difficulties and suffered “night terrors”. He joined the SBS in 2015 and went on an overseas operation with the unit in 2016. In one message to his mother in the month he died – March 2018 – he told her: “I’ve been risk taking since I got shot in my helmet.” He also said: “I feel like I have expired … I can’t stop crying.” Tostevin told his mother he was accepting all the help but added: “There isn’t that much.” Tostevin began to worry that he had bipolarity and his mother said he wanted to be admitted to hospital. “He wanted to get better, he wanted to be made safe,” she said. “Hospital would have been a relief to him.” Tostevin said that at her son’s funeral, the wife of a colleague had told her he had been put on an “informal suicide watch”, which involved him staying at their house and sleeping on a sofa. The Ministry of Defence had argued that the SBS should not be named during the inquest because of national security but the coroner Brendan Allen said the unit he served with was “relevant and of legitimate public interest”. Tostevin’s family said the inquest had been delayed for years due to a “constant stream of legal submissions and applications from the MoD”. The inquest continues. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Leilah Babirye is describing what it’s like to go on a pride march in her native Uganda. “It never ends peacefully,” she says, laughing grimly. “It’s always police raids, everybody scattering.” The artist and LGBTQ+ activist made costumes for one event in 2012, including masks for friends too frightened to show their faces. “But as soon as we step on to the beach, there’s police everywhere. So we have to go back home.” Babirye talks to me over Zoom from the place where she spends most of her time: her basement studio in Brooklyn. It’s populated by her artworks: boldly coloured, sensuous paintings of imaginary heroes; giant ceramic sculptures of faces glazed in jewel-like shades; and her signature pieces, chiselled wooden figures a bit like totem poles, lovingly painted and buffed, decorated with objects Babirye has found in the street ranging from bike chains to an old chandelier. They are bold (as tall as 15ft), idiosyncratic, and full of personality. She points her camera at one, which she hopes is heading to a prestigious New York museum. More work can currently be seen in two locations in the UK. Babirye has a green and cream ceramic head in the biennale rounding off Coventry’s year of culture; meanwhile a nine-foot figure will preside over the London flagship store of fashion house Celine, commissioned by its creative director Hedi Slimane, the first work Babirye has ever made to order. “I wanted it to be very simple,” says Babirye. “I just put a little bit of sheet around it – and it’s the first piece where I didn’t attach wooden ears. I just used metal.” With closed eyes, a strong nose, and chain and rope hanging from head to toe, the sculpture radiates gentleness and peace. Babirye was born in 1985 and brought up in Kampala, the capital of Uganda, a nation where gay sex carries a life sentence, public attitudes are overwhelmingly hostile, and LGBTQ+ activism is illegal: “You can be in prison if you’re even caught with a person talking about gay issues.” Not that this stopped Babirye, a lesbian active in the underground LGBTQ+ (known in Ugandan as “kuchu”) scene. In a clandestine gay bar, she says, “you have a back door so if you hear that police are coming you all rush out. We always knew how to get away.” By 2015, however, Babirye was running out of options. She had been outed in Uganda’s virulently homophobic press, and when she told her tutors on her masters course at Makerere University that she wanted to explore her sexuality in her art, they refused to supervise her. A working artist by then, she applied for residencies in the UK, Sweden and the US, and got one in Fire Island, the gay holiday enclave 60 miles from New York. The artist Kehinde Wiley paid for her ticket. “By then I wasn’t talking to my father any more, so it didn’t make any sense going back home after the residency,” says Babirye, whose family have since disowned her. Do they know she’s a successful artist? “I don’t know, probably they’re watching somewhere. I don’t bother looking for them.” Babirye applied for asylum in the US, got it in 2018, and has lived in New York ever since. She tells me she works five days a week, and takes weekends off to watch TV (her current favourites are Queen of the South and “Squid”). She says she hasn’t got many friends – “People here are a little bit crazy” – and avoids going to other art shows. “There’s a lot of artwork in New York and a lot of galleries. I don’t want it to get into my mind – it’s a lot.” Like all her sculptures, the Celine piece carries the name of a Ugandan clan – in this case the crested crane. There are 52, named after “animals, plants, mountains, objects”. Babirye is from the antelope clan. The point is, she explains, that every LGBTQ+ person in Uganda has been given a clan name at birth – and even if those clans disown them, they still can’t take away their names. In other words, her sculptures represent Uganda’s queer community, who continue to be born, exist and aren’t going anywhere, no matter how much they’re persecuted. There’s an irony Babirye relishes in showing her work in the UK. Before the British colonised Uganda in 1894, bringing Victorian Christianity with them, no one cared about same-sex activity. Even King Mwanga II, who was ruling before the British protectorate, was bisexual. It’s tempting to think that Babirye’s work alludes to a pre-colonial, indigenous Ugandan sculptural tradition, but she says there isn’t one: “The only sculptures we have are just ceramic ware for cooking, or spears for fighting wars.” The masks, meanwhile, are a West African thing (Uganda is in the east) used in her work to nod to those friends forced to hide behind them, for fear of hostile exposure. “You’re always running, trying to be safe,” she says of her life being a lesbian in her home nation. An expert with a chisel, Babirye aspires to make sculptures from the wood of the jacaranda tree, as she says it’s the best to carve with, but her sculptures are mainly made from pine bought from New York lumber yards, usually used in building construction. “You don’t want to tell them you’re an artist,” she says, “or they’ll increase the price.” The fact that such imposing sculptures have been made from lumber and scrap is significant. Queer people are often referred to in Uganda as “ebisiyaga”, the husk of a sugarcane – in other words, worthless rubbish. With her magnificent monuments to Uganda’s hidden LGBTQ+ community, Babirye shows that trash can have power, and be beautiful. Leilah Babirye’s sculptures are at Celine, 40 New Bond Street, London, and Herbert Art Gallery, Coventry.Eoin Morgan has said that beating New Zealand in Wednesday’s T20 World Cup semi-final “would be a hell of an achievement” given the injuries that have forced five key players out of his squad and the last-minute tactical rethink forced upon him after Jason Roy’s withdrawal on Monday with a torn calf muscle. Morgan confirmed that “within the group we’ve made a decision” on who will open the batting with Jos Buttler, and without identifying the player chosen said the choice had not been a difficult one. He said, however, that further success in this tournament would be all the more impressive because of the absences of Ben Stokes, Jofra Archer, Sam Curran, Tymal Mills and now Roy. “It would be a really strong representation of what the white-ball side has achieved since 2015,” Morgan said. “We had a glimpse of that [depth] during our summer when we had to replace 15 players against Pakistan and they ended up beating Pakistan’s strongest ODI team 3-0. I think that was a good [demonstration] of the next generation of English cricketer. “I think it’s a compliment to the changing room and all the players and maybe more the support staff and the coaching staff, who create an environment where young players can come in and thrive. It’s seemed to work for us for some time. We’ve always talked about having strength in depth within our squads. But if the right environment isn’t set up, it doesn’t matter what XI you pick.” The New Zealand captain, Kane Williamson, also highlighted the depth of talent available to England when asked about the missing players. “I think one of the strengths of the England side is their depth that they’ve managed to produce over a period of time,” he said. “Having spent some time at the Birmingham Phoenix and being a little bit involved in the Hundred, you can tell that there’s a huge amount of talent. They’re still very much a strong side who have been playing some really good cricket.” Since the 2015 World Cup, the 50-over tournament where New Zealand thrashed England by eight wickets with more than 37 overs to spare, the nations have met at the 2016 World T20, the 2017 ICC Champions Trophy and twice at the 2019 ODI World Cup, with England prevailing on each occasion including in the final. “We’ve played each other a number of times. We’ve had some really good games in really good series,” Williamson said. “The evolution of the England white-ball side has been significant over a number of years. As a collective, they’re playing some really good cricket. We know it’s a nice challenge that we’re looking forward to. “This format is fickle in its nature and both teams will look to put their best foot forward and what will be will be at the end of it. We’ve been ticking over reasonably nicely and watching from afar England have been doing something very similar, so it should be a really good contest.”The actor Dean Stockwell, who has died aged 85, enjoyed periods of acclaim punctuated by bouts of sometimes self-inflicted obscurity, but found his widest audience in a recurring role on television in Quantum Leap (1989-93). The series followed a physicist, Dr Sam Beckett (Scott Bakula), on time-travelling expeditions to correct historical injustices. Stockwell played his sidekick, Al, who appears in hologram form. While the series used Sam’s endeavours to facilitate social commentary, the cigar-chomping Al served as a comic pick-me-up: world-weary, witty, charismatic. In 1990 Stockwell won a Golden Globe for his performance. His acting career began when he was seven. As a child, he was praised for performances including the title role in Joseph Losey’s antiwar allegory The Boy With Green Hair (1948). As a young adult, he received awards for work such as the thriller Compulsion (1959), based on the Leopold and Loeb case. During his late-period comeback, he was used by film-makers such as Robert Altman (The Player, 1992), David Lynch (Dune, 1984; Blue Velvet, 1986) and Wim Wenders (Paris, Texas, 1984). But throughout his working life, he regarded his profession with ambivalence; this contributed to his unpredictable quality. “He’s such a chameleon,” said Jonathan Demme, who cast Stockwell as a flamboyant mafia kingpin in the 1988 comedy Married to the Mob, a performance for which the actor received his only Oscar nomination. “That’s what makes him special – he has such mercurial presence.” Stockwell recognised his own off-kilter appeal: “In my work, I’m dealing with something that is essentially mysterious, and I prefer and am inclined to deal with it in a mysterious way.” He was born in Los Angeles to Harry Stockwell, an actor who provided the voice of Prince Charming in Disney’s Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, and Nina Olivette, an Italian-American vaudeville entertainer sometimes known as Betty Veronica. They separated when he was six; he and his elder brother, Guy (also an actor), remained with their mother. Both siblings were appearing on Broadway in the play The Innocent Voyage when the seven-year-old Stockwell was spotted by a talent scout. He was put under contract by MGM and schooled on the studio lot in between making several films a year, including Anchors Aweigh and Abbot and Costello in Hollywood (both in 1945). At 14, he played the lead in an adaptation of Kipling’s novel Kim, and was befriended by his co-star Errol Flynn, who, according to Stockwell, asked, in front of his mother, “Have you had your first fuck yet?” Stockwell spoke frequently of the “extreme psychological and emotional pressure” to which he was subjected as a child star. “A lot of demands were placed on me that should not be placed on a child, at all, ever … I resented the whole thing.” Celebrity brought Stockwell no succour. “I was under siege, under attack. At the end of the day, when I left MGM, there were hundreds of people waiting for me. It was a dreadful experience.” After graduating from high school, he travelled and took menial jobs for five years, but returned to acting in 1957 because “there was nothing else I could do”. He landed one of the leads in the Broadway production of Compulsion, and reprised the role two years later on film. He starred in adaptations of DH Lawrence’s Sons and Lovers (1960) and Eugene O’Neill’s Long Day’s Journey Into Night (1962); the latter, directed by Sidney Lumet, won Stockwell his second Cannes film festival acting prize, shared with his cast members. (The festival had already honoured him with a solo award for Compulsion.) But his behaviour became self-destructive. He split from his wife, the actor Millie Perkins, after two years of marriage; she alleged mental cruelty. He destroyed his Cannes awards in a drunken rage. He quit acting again for three years, and embraced the hedonistic culture of 1960s California, fraternising with like-minded friends including Dennis Hopper, Jack Nicholson and Neil Young (with whom he would co-write and co-direct the ramshackle 1982 comedy Human Highway). “The flower children and the love-ins … were the childhood I didn’t have,” he said. When he returned to acting in the late 60s, he was more of an outsider than ever. After several films for Roger Corman’s AIP (American International Pictures), and a part in Hopper’s The Last Movie (1971), film work grew scarce. During the 70s, when not appearing in curiosities (The Werewolf of Washington, 1973; Henry Jaglom’s post-Vietnam drama Tracks, 1977), Stockwell could be found performing on the dinner-theatre circuit. His financial situation became so dire that he decamped to Santa Fe with the intention of making a living in property. (An ad placed in 1983 reads: “Dean Stockwell will help you with all your real estate needs …”) But in 1984 a role in Lynch’s science-fiction extravaganza Dune distracted him from that path. In the same year, Harry Dean Stanton, who was about to play the lead in Wenders’s Paris, Texas, suggested him for a supporting part. The film won the Palme d’Or at Cannes, and helped revive Stockwell’s career. His fortunes changed dramatically. He starred in three films for Francis Ford Coppola, Gardens of Stone (1987), Tucker: The Man and His Dream (in which he played Howard Hughes, 1988) and The Rainmaker (1997). He was also a sinister, enigmatic presence in Lynch’s Blue Velvet (1986), for which he devised his character Ben’s drugged, dandyish look. “To me it was the high point of the film,” said his co-star Hopper. “The white makeup, the batting eyelashes – Dean has ways no other actor can touch.” These movies, and others including William Friedkin’s To Live and Die in LA (1985) and Altman’s The Player, made definitive Stockwell’s return to cinema. Though he continued to work in that medium, his most noteworthy latter-day appearances came in science-fiction television: following Quantum Leap he had guest roles in Star Trek: Enterprise and Stargate SG-1 (both 2002), and was a regular on the highly regarded Battlestar Galactica (2006-09). He also enjoyed a career as an artist, using the name Robert Dean Stockwell to distinguish his art from his acting. He is survived by two children, Austin and Sophia, from a second marriage, to Joy Marchenko, which also ended in divorce. • Robert Dean Stockwell, actor and artist, born 5 March 1936; died 7 November 2021There is a three-way tie for the most nominations at the annual European film awards, with Titane, Quo Vadis, Aida? and The Father each scoring four. All three films have already achieved a high profile on the festival and awards circuit. Titane, a body-horror thriller written and directed by Julia Ducournau, won the Palme d’Or at Cannes, making Ducournau only the second female director after Jane Campion to take the honour. She is nominated here for best director, with her two leads Agathe Rousselle and Vincent Lindon up for the acting categories. Quo Vadis, Aida?, a drama set during the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 and described as “almost unbearably brutal and shocking” by the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw, was previously nominated for the Oscar for best international feature and the Bafta for best film not in the English language. Its writer-director Jasmila Žbanić is now up for the EFA for best director and best screenwriter, while the film’s lead Jasna Đuričić is nominated for best actress. And The Father, which won a best actor Oscar for Anthony Hopkins as well as best adapted screenplay for Florian Zeller and Christopher Hampton, has scored nominations in similar categories here: best actor for Hopkins, best director for Zeller, and best screenwriter for Zeller and Hampton, as well as best film. Other films to pick up multiple nominations include The Hand of God, Paolo Sorrentino’s well-received rumination on his own childhood, Finnish-Russian romance Compartment No 6, directed by Juho Kuosmanen, and Berlin’s Golden Bear winner Bad Luck Banging or Loony Porn, which receives two nominations for its writer-director Radu Jude. The winners will be announced on 11 December at a ceremony in Berlin. Full list of nominations Best film Compartment No 6 Quo Vadis, Aida? The Father The Hand of God Titane Best comedy Ninjababy The Morning After The People Upstairs Best documentary Babi Yar. Context Flee Mr Bachmann and His Class Taming the Garden The Most Beautiful Boy in the World Best animated feature Even Mice Belong In Heaven Flee The Ape Star Where Is Anne Frank Wolfwalkers Best director Julia Ducornau, Titane Radu Jude, Bad Luck Banging or Loony Porn Paolo Sorrentino, The Hand of God Jasmila Žbanić, Quo Vadis, Aida? Florian Zeller, The Father Best actress Jasna Đuričić, Quo Vadis, Aida? Seidi Haarla, Compartment No 6 Carey Mulligan, Promising Young Woman Renate Reinsve, The Worst Person in the World Agathe Rousselle, Titane Best actor Yuriy Borisov, Compartment No 6 Anthony Hopkins, The Father Vincent Lindon, Titane Tahar Rahim, The Mauritanian Franz Rogowski, Great Freedom Best screenwriter Radu Jude, Bad Luck Banging or Loony Porn Paolo Sorrentino, The Hand of God Joachim Trier and Eskil Vogt, The Worst Person in the World Jasmila Žbanić, Quo Vadis, Aida? Florian Zeller and Christopher Hampton, The FatherA former Conservative minister has accused the government of blacklisting dissenters in contests for senior public jobs after claiming she was overlooked for high-profile roles at Ofcom and the Charity Commission. Anna Soubry, whose ministerial career ran from 2012 to 2016 and spanned three departments, told the Guardian she believed her opposition to Brexit and criticism of the prime minister, Boris Johnson, meant her applications for the jobs were ignored. The former TV journalist, who now works as a criminal defence barrister in the east Midlands after losing her Commons seat in December 2019, said she had not been called for interview for jobs as the chair of the broadcasting regulator Ofcom or the chair of the Charity Commission, which regulates good causes. Both appointments are being made by ministers. She said she had also been overlooked for a non-executive director role at Channel 4. The recruitment process is managed by Ofcom with the final decision made by ministers, the regulator said. “I have no doubt I have been blacklisted because of my views on Boris Johnson, which are well known, and because of my views on Brexit,” she said. “I think it is shocking and disgraceful.” Soubry believes she was sufficiently qualified to at least be interviewed for the jobs. Channel 4 has been looking for a non-executive director with a job advert that said relevant skillsets include “news/journalism; broadcasting; regulation; legal; government/parliament”. She felt her experience as a former broadcast journalist as well as steering regulation as a minister at the Ministry of Defence from October 2013 to May 2015 and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills from May 2015 until July 2016 made her a plausible candidate. In addition, she said she had experience taking bills through parliament and that this would be useful for the future Ofcom chair given the likely need to reform the regulation of online safety and social media. Soubry has previously said she would “never forgive” Johnson for campaigning for Brexit, because she did not think he believed in it. She quit the Conservatives in February 2019 and joined disaffected Labour MPs to form the Independent Group for Change. Her claims come after Jonathan Evans, the chair of the committee on standards in public life, called for reform of the public appointments process and cited concerns about ministers “seeking to pack assessment panels with majorities of political affiliates”. The Guardian reported on Monday that the government recently tried to select a Tory peer as an “independent” panel member for one significant appointment. That came after it was revealed that the public appointments watchdog had to step in to prevent ministers breaching a code on appointments in competitions for the chairs of the BBC, British Film Institute and Office for Students. Soubry said she understood the public appointments system because she was involved in picking candidates during the David Cameron-led governments. The policy then was that if candidates “were supporters of the Labour party they would not be appointed”, she said. “It has gone beyond that and there are people who are on a blacklist,” she said. “I am told that anybody who is applying for any form of public role, their social media will be checked out and if they have tweeted anything anti-Brexit or anything anti-Boris Johnson they are out. Even if they are ably qualified, they don’t have a cat in hell’s chance.” After failing to get an interview for Ofcom, Soubry also applied to be chair of the Charity Commission, but again was overlooked. “I really understand the charity sector. How could they not offer me an interview?” she said. She added that she wanted to “put something back” and would have done it for no salary. The job advert states that significant political activity including holding office, public speaking, and standing for election are likely to present a conflict of interest, but Soubry has not been an elected politician since December 2019. Candidates were asked to provide detail of political activity over the last five years so conflicts of interest could be explored in the context of their ability to perform in the role, only if selected for interview. “Again, week after week went by and I got the email saying I didn’t get an interview,” she said. “Then I applied to be on the board of Channel 4. They were looking for a non-executive director with political and media experience. I mean, hello, all those years as a journalist and a politician at a senior level. Again I wasn’t offered an interview.” A Whitehall source said Soubry “didn’t meet the required standard” for their roles. “She can cry conspiracy all she wants, but in the same way that politicians should respect the results of referendums and elections, she should learn to respect the result of job applications,” they said. Ofcom said it ran “a fair and impartial process involving independent interview panellists”. A government spokesperson said: “None of these public appointments processes have concluded. Public appointments are made in line with the governance code which clearly sets out that assessment panels must be objective when deciding which candidates meet the criteria for a role.”An Italian glam pop band formed in 1970 has accused Måneskin of “copying our look” after the Eurovision song contest winners wore glittery costumes depicting the American flag during their opening act at a Rolling Stones concert in Las Vegas. Ivano Michetti, the guitarist with I Cugini di Campagna (Country Cousins), said Måneskin were “looking for visibility” in trying to imitate their look and encouraged the band to “be more original”. Måneskin are enjoying phenomenal success since the band’s show-stopping performance of Zitti e Buoni at the Eurovision song contest in May. The quartet from Rome were jubilant after their performance at the Rolling Stones concert on Saturday night, posting a photo on social media with Mick Jagger, who in turn shared a photo with the group on his Twitter account alongside the message: “Great night with @thisismankesin”. But it didn’t go down well with I Cugini di Campagna, a band formed in Rome and known for their eccentric look. Michetti said he was unable to relax after a gig in Naples on Sunday night as messages from fans about Måneskin’s outfits came flooding in. “I went to see what it was all about and, in effect, Måneskin were dressed as we were in the 1970s,” Michetti told La Stampa. “We chose that look to celebrate America. The stars and stripes of the flag made clear that even if we were very romantic, there was a touch of soft rock in our DNA, similar to that of the Eagles.” Outraged, the band shared a photo taken of their frontman, Nick Luciani, donning a sparkly outfit in the colours of the American flag and compared it with the one Måneskin lead singer, Damiano David, wore during his performance. “Måneskin performed in the USA, before the Rolling Stones, IMITATING the clothes of I Cugini di Campagna,” the band wrote in a message accompanying the photos across their social media accounts. “STOP COPYING OUR CLOTHES.” They then challenged Måneskin in a later post, encouraging the band to “do something better, like we did with your Zitti e Buoni”, while sharing their cover version of the song. Måneskin have been approached by the Guardian for comment. The band supported the Rolling Stones at the end of their month-long tour of the US, which included a performance of two of their songs on The Tonight Show with Jimmy Fallon. The band, which has had three hits in the UK’s top 40 and has been praised by everyone from Iggy Pop to Simon Le Bon, also performed triumphant concerts in New York and Los Angeles. I Cugini di Campagna were successful in the 1970s and early 1980s with songs including Anima Mia. They disappeared by the late 80s before re-emerging with a new line-up in 1997. Michetti said Måneskin needed to “grow musically” while criticising their choice of performing a cover song at the Rolling Stones event. Italians reacted to I Cugini di Campagna’s post with a mix of amusement and incredulity. “They can say what they like,” said Michetti. “This year we’re celebrating 50 years since Anima Mia and the Cousins have existed since 1970. Soon we’ll do our own maxi-tour of the USA.” • This article was amended on 10 November 2021 to show Måneskin as having three, rather than two, hits in the UK top 40 singles chart.Name: Curry. Age: According to plant remains found at the bottom of ancient pots at archaeological sites in north-west India, about 4,500 years old. Appearance: It varies. What’s that supposed to mean? Curry is an umbrella term covering related culinary traditions developed over centuries, spreading across numerous continents and cultures. Yes, I read all that on the back of your menu. Do you do a chicken tikka masala? Of course. In that case, I’d like to overorder some of that, along with too much rice. Very good. Do you have plenty of money? Why do you ask? Because the price of tikka masala is going up, as is everything else on the menu. By how much? In restaurants, possibly by as much as £1 a dish, according to Yawar Khan, the chair of the Asian Catering Federation. What is the reason for this? There are many. The wholesale prices of spices such as cumin and coriander have risen by 50%, while the cost of garlic and ginger has soared, as Thomas Cropper of the ready meals and food-to-go brand Tuk in Foods told the Grocer. The ingredients are more expensive, so the meals are, too. I get that. That’s just the start. Chronic staff shortages have led to rising wage costs, while higher utility bills make it more expensive to run a restaurant. I was just going to order a takeaway, to be honest. Good luck. The price of cardboard packaging has gone up by 28%. So do we blame Brexit for this, or what? Along with higher energy prices, the continuing HGV driver shortage and Covid, Brexit is probably a factor. You know what? I didn’t vote for this. You mean you never suspected that voting to leave the EU would have a negative impact on the price of a curry? No, I mean that I didn’t vote. Ah. Well, some of those higher costs, such as the rise in the price of cooking oil, could affect the price of takeaways across the board. Does Boris Johnson know what’s happening out there? The PM is in the habit of having the cost of his takeaways defrayed by the wife of a Tory donor, so possibly not. It’s one menu for them and another for the rest of us. It certainly is. Do say: “If the food is good and the staff are fairly compensated, I’m more than happy to pay a bit extra.” Don’t say: “How much is it without the spices?”Boris Johnson rejects the idea of a blanket ban on lucrative second jobs for MPs but believes they must be “visible” to their constituents, No 10 has said. In what appeared to be an implied criticism of the Conservative MP Geoffrey Cox, a spokesperson for the prime minister said he “thinks an MP’s primary job is to serve their constituents”. The intervention came as Cox, who is a former attorney general, was criticised for being paid £150,000 for working for a month in the British Virgin Islands (BVI) during lockdown. In his second job as a lawyer, the Torridge and West Devon MP advised the Caribbean tax haven in relation to corruption charges brought by the Foreign Office. The Daily Mail reported that Cox spent up to a month in the BVI working for the international law firm Withers. At the time, when he was working 4,000 miles away from his Devon constituency, Cox voted in the Commons by proxy. Cox’s register of interests entry shows he is being paid £400,000 a year by Withers law firm, and Labour has called on Johnson to disavow his extra work that it says is taking time away from representing constituents. Johnson’s spokesperson said on Tuesday it was “incumbent on MPs to be visible: to demonstrate to constituents that they are active on behalf of them”. Asked whether Cox had failed to act in that way, he said, “it is up to constituents to make that judgment”. Asked whether there should be changes to the rules on what extra earnings MPs can have from work outside parliament, he said it would be a matter for parliament, but “the prime minister doesn’t back an outright ban on second jobs”. In a fresh shift of position in the parliamentary standards crisis, the government will table a motion to be voted on next week rescinding last week’s moves to protect Owen Paterson. “It will rescind the committee that was part of the amendment and allow the house to vote on the report,” Johnson’s spokesperson said, referring to the standards committee report on Paterson’s conduct. The spokesperson repeatedly declined to say whether the prime minister was sorry about last week’s attempt to protect Paterson from censure over paid lobbying. He said: “We fully recognise the strong feelings on this issue on both sides of the house; the government has been listening carefully to the concerns raised and has expressed regret over the mistakes made last week.” Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister sent to defend the government over its handling of the sleaze row, had also avoided apologising, saying only that it was a matter of “regret”. Meanwhile, Chris Bryant, the chair of the standards committee, announced he had appointed a “senior judicial figure” to advise on potential reforms to the system that investigates allegations of rule-breaking against MPs. He said he was confident the current practice “guarantees a fair hearing”, but that the committee would “consider suggestions for improvement”. Anneliese Dodds, Labour’s chair, has written to Johnson about the latest revelations concerning Cox, and said his “behaviour raises serious questions about the conflicts of interest between MPs having second jobs that involve them lobbying or otherwise directly engaging with the government”. “It’s time to show leadership,” she said. “In fact, it’s past time – you should have come to the House of Commons yesterday to answer questions, apologise and act to clean up the sleaze that is drowning your party and toxifying public life.” Johnson dodged an emergency debate in parliament on his botched bid to save Paterson by ripping up existing anti-sleaze rules, instead saying he had a longstanding engagement at a hospital in Northumberland – where he was seen not wearing a mask while meeting medical staff. Dodds said it was incredible Cox had voted “by proxy from the other side of the Atlantic” and added: “The irony is not lost on me that he arrived in the Caribbean on the day that those MPs who actually feel a sense of duty to their constituents were debating global anti-corruption standards. The people of Torridge and West Devon must be wondering if Geoffrey Cox is a Caribbean-based barrister or a Conservative MP.” Cox’s office has been contacted for comment.A decorated second world war and Korean war veteran who died of Covid-19 was dissected in front of a paying audience – without his widow’s knowledge. David Saunders died on 24 August, aged 98. His wife, Elsie Saunders, tried to carry out his wishes by donating his body to scientific research. But instead of being delivered to a medical facility, Saunders’ body ended up in front of a paying audience in a hotel ballroom in Portland, Oregon, on 17 October. Spectators paid up to $500 a ticket to attend a session held by DeathScience.org and promoted as a collaboration with the Oddities &amp; Curiosities Expo. The Oddities &amp; Curiosities Expo is a touring exhibition which says it attracts “lovers of the strange, unusual and bizarre” with “taxidermy … horror/Halloween inspired pieces, antiques, handcrafted oddities, quack medical devices … skulls/bones … and much more”. In a statement, however, Oddities &amp; Curiosities Expo distanced itself from the live dissection, saying it “provide[d] a ticketing platform for Death Science, which was the proprietor of the class” and that it “made no profit from this demonstration”. “The cadaver class has never been a part of the traveling expo,” it said. Elsie Saunders said she learned about the dissection when she was tracked down by a Seattle-based reporter from King-5, a local television station. “As far as I’m concerned, it’s horrible, unethical and I just don’t have the words to describe it,” she told the Advocate, a New Orleans newspaper. “I have all this paperwork that says his body would be used for science – nothing about this commercialization of his death.” Elsie Saunders tried to donate her husband’s body to Louisiana State University, which she said would be his last act of patriotism. But LSU declined the donation due to the Covid-19 diagnosis. As a result, Saunders contacted a private Las Vegas company, Med Ed Labs, which says it was “established to provide medical and surgical education and training for the advancement of medical and surgical innovation”. Med Ed Labs sold Saunders’ body to Death Science. Obteen Nassiri, a Med Ed Labs administrator, said DeathScience.org’s founder, Jeremy Ciliberto, was “beyond” dishonest about his dealings with the body. Ciliberto pushed back, telling King-5: “I can guarantee that that man knew his body would be used for medical research.” Ciliberto also said donor consent was not his responsibility, writing in an email: “Any concerns about the cadaver have always been addressed by the lab. Again, I am not the lab. I am the host.” He also apologized to Elsie Saunders, saying: “We respect our donors and their families, and appreciate their generous gift. I told Ms Saunders, ‘I’m sorry, I’m on her side.’” Elsie Saunders now hopes to have her husband’s remains returned. Church Funeral Services and Crematory, a Louisiana business which prepared David Saunders’ body before it was given to Med Ed Labs, promised her it would cremate her husband’s remains for free and return them to her. “It makes me really feel saddened that this gentleman was not given the dignity and the respect that he deserved, and what he thought and his family thought that would be happening to his body,” said Mike Clark, owner of Church Funeral Services. Clark said Med Ed Labs did not tell him or Saunders’ family the remains would be used for a paid public dissection, and said his funeral home had stopped working with the company.Clarice Cliff was the working-class girl who left school at 13 destined for a life of menial work in the Staffordshire potteries; instead she rose to become a celebrated ceramicist. Her journey from the factory floor is told in this entertaining feelgood period drama, a bright and upbeat film that perhaps comes over as just a bit strenuously cheerful in places. The director is Claire McCarthy and there is a lovely performance by Phoebe Dynevor (Daphne the debutante in Bridgerton), who brings a breezy mischief and stubborn defiance to Clarice, who we meet in her early 20s working as a “paintress” – hand-painting patterns on to the pottery. Well, to hell with all that. Clarice sees no limits to her talent; she sets her sights on becoming a “modeller”, a more skilled role, traditionally men’s work. Her huge talent is spotted by factory owner Colley Shorter (go-to posho Matthew Goode); and you know from the moment these two clap eyes on each other that romance is on the cards. So Clarice gets her promotion, working under a sensitive art director (nicely played by David Morrissey). Some of her male colleagues make sarky digs – “what if she is one of them suffragettes,” one sneers when Clarice is handed keys to the factory – but there’s nothing too off-putting. Here and elsewhere I wondered if the film-makers have softened the edges too much, not wanting to risk making us feel bad or uncomfortable. Even the smoke chugs picturesquely out of factory chimneys. Clarice lives at home in a two-up two-down with her mum and sister. Every second of her spare time she paints: art deco-inspired patterns on china in sunshiny bright bursts of colour. Old duffers in the industry mansplain why women won’t buy her cheap and cheerful pottery (“you’ll find the modern woman has a more refined taste”). But Clarice knows exactly what women want (her Bizarre collection eventually sold more than 8.5m pieces). The film catches the excitement of this moment for Clarice, and Dynevor’s performance is wonderful. • The Colour Room is released on 12 November in cinemas, on Sky Cinema and on NOW.Removing plaster in an old house and being surprised by what you find is not unusual. But discovering 16th-century paintings of fantastical laughing birds, roaring griffins, and little torsos of men sitting on vases, all based on a decoration that Nero had in his Golden Villa is, historians have admitted, jaw-dropping. The Landmark Trust has announced that it has found one of the most sophisticated schemes of Tudor wall paintings found anywhere in Britain. It is, said its director, Anna Keay, “the discovery of a lifetime”. The paintings, dating from the Elizabethan period, were discovered on three walls of a room at Calverley Old Hall between Leeds and Bradford. During a routine restoration investigation, a small section of plaster was removed from the wall of what appeared to be “a very undistinguished little bedroom”, said Landmark Trust historian Caroline Stanford. Using a torch some colour was tantalisingly glimpsed. “We thought hang on, there might be something more here.” Subsequent investigation has revealed that the paintings, essentially Tudor wallpaper, are on a scale and of a quality that is almost unheard of. “We were completely gobsmacked to see these,” said Stanford. “You are always alert to the possibility that there might be painted decoration but it is astonishing to find a whole Elizabethan painted chamber in such pristine condition, it is just really exciting.” The designs can be traced back to the Roman emperor Nero’s Golden Villa, sensationally discovered in the 1480s when a young man was exploring the hills and fell down a hole. The fantastical designs inside the villa soon became famous and popular in the houses of the educated elite across Italy. The scheme, known as “grotesque work”, came to England in printed books from the Low Countries and Germany. They were mostly painted on the rooms of houses in the south of England and were often quite crude. That is not the case with the Calverley discovery. “I haven’t seen, anywhere else, such carefully planned grotesque work,” said Stanford. “What these wall paintings tell us is that the people who lived at the old hall, the Calverley family, were not country bumpkins. They were highly educated, very cultured and wanted to make their home up-to-date with the latest designs.” The trust has now launched an appeal to raise £94,000 to conserve the red, white and black paintings. Calverley Old Hall dates back to the medieval period and is considered among the most at-risk buildings in England. On the outside the building seems unassuming but the actual complex site is “awe-inspiring in scale” said the trust, a conservation charity which rescues at-risk structures, restores them and then lets them out as self-catering holiday accommodation. Stanford said most Tudor house walls decorated in this way would have been painted or lime washed over. In this case someone, most likely in the 19th century, decided to plaster. “Thank goodness,” she said. “Someone obviously realised that the paintings were things of wonder and beauty and deserved to be treated carefully and maybe one day somebody would come along and find them again. That’s us.”“The world as designed by men has destroyed many things,” Cop26 delegates have been told, as leaders and campaigners warned that the climate crisis could not be ended without the empowerment of women. Women and girls around the world suffer disproportionately from the impacts of climate breakdown, as they are on average poorer, less educated and more dependent on subsistence farming. A UN report found 80% of those displaced by the climate emergency are women. The focus on gender equality on Tuesday saw indigenous women and politicians including Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, and Nancy Pelosi, speaker of the US House of Representatives, demand increased investment. Angelica Ponce, executive director of the Plurinational Authority for Mother Earth in Bolivia, said: “The world as designed by men has destroyed many things. The world should begin thinking like women. If it was designed by a woman, it would end violence against women and children. “We want to be in the corridors of power and take part in decisions at international level to end this struggle of climate justice,” she said. “As indigenous women, we live day-by-day the cruel reality of climate change in our land.” Sturgeon said: “When world leaders gathered here last week, of the 120 or so, a tiny minority were women – that needs to change and it needs to change quickly. There is no doubt, we must ensure that climate change is a feminist issue. [But] women are not pleading to be supported. We’re demanding to be empowered.” Alok Sharma, the UK minister and president of Cop26, said: “We know from our efforts to tackle climate change that it is more effective when we put women and girls at the heart of those efforts.” Climate-related events will prevent at least 4 million girls in lower-income countries from completing their education in 2021, he said, citing a Malala Fund report. On current trends, the climate crisis will contribute to at least 12.5 million girls not completing their education each year, the report said. “That is an absolute travesty and a dangerous one,” Sharma said. “Because, as well as being a fundamental good in itself, education empowers girls and equips them to deal with the effects of climate change and to take climate action.” He announced that the UK was giving £165m to tackle climate change while addressing gender inequalities. Per Olsson Fridh, Sweden’s minister for international development cooperation, told Cop26: “Women are not the polluters of this world, yet, they carry the consequences of climate change on their shoulders. Without a gender perspective, we miss out on invaluable knowledge needed for a sustainable green transition. A feminist approach is simply the only smart thing to do.” Pelosi said: “If I ruled the world, the one thing that I would do is invest in the education of women. When women succeed, the world succeeds.” Åsa Regnér, from UN Women, said: “Only 3% of the climate overseas development aid actually targets women’s rights and gender equality specifically. The UN, with its convening power, should really address that because as long as we don’t have the resources, little will happen.” Some countries announced the climate projects they funded would have to incorporate gender equality. Patricia Fuller, Canada’s climate change ambassador, said: “As part of the doubling of Canada’s climate finance pledge to C$5.3bn (£3.1bn) over five years, Canada will apply the target of 80% for projects that will target gender equality outcomes. If we are to win the fight against climate change, we need to have women participating equally in climate action.” Germany also announced that gender justice was to become a “guiding principle” for its €4.5bn (£3.8bn) International Climate Initiative. Diaka Selena Koroma, an ActionAid climate activist from Sierra Leone, witnessed the devastating mudslides that hit Freetown in 2017 and was meant to attend Cop26, but her visa did not arrive in time. “If women and young people who are most affected by climate impacts are not represented at platforms like Cop26, leaders will not feel the pressure to commit to climate targets,” she said. Sophie Rigg, also at ActionAid UK, said: “It is all well and good hosting a dedicated ‘gender day’, but the UK government must commit to making sure that all UK financing on climate also tackles gender inequality.” Sharma said: “We have the [UN climate convention’s] Gender Action Plan, agreed back in 2019. But what we actually need is for every single country to implement this plan and to be guided by the UN Women-convened Feminist Action for Climate Justice Coalition, which launched earlier this year.”Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel tore into Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers on Monday evening for trying to hide his unvaccinated status, revealed last week when he tested positive for Covid-19 and missed Sunday’s game. On a podcast called the Pat McAfee show last Friday, Rodgers defended himself, saying he tested negative 300 times before testing positive, “which is the same kind of logic your 95-year-old grandmother uses to justify keeping her driver’s license,” Kimmel said. The football star also blamed the “woke mob” for demanding his vaccination status. “If the vaccine is so great, then how come people are still getting Covid and spreading Covid and unfortunately dying of Covid?” he asked. “Right, right, and if parachutes are so great, how come 11 people died skydiving last year?” Kimmel responded. “The fact of the matter is the risk of dying from Covid is 11 times higher if you aren’t vaccinated. This is a dumb conversation, but you’ll never guess who this wack Packer has been getting his medical advice from.” That would be Joe Rogan, the popular podcaster and noted vaccine skeptic, who according to Rodgers recommended he take the livestock dewormer ivermectin, which has not been recommended by the FDA and can be dangerous. “Here’s the thing I don’t get: you won’t take the vaccine, but you will take ivermectin?” Kimmel wondered. “Good ole ivermectin, there’s a product I can trust.” “How does someone who almost hosted Jeopardy come up with 40 incorrect responses in a row,” he added, pointing to Rodgers’ invocation of Dr Martin Luther King Jr: “The great MLK said you have a moral obligation to object to unjust rules and rules that make no sense.” “But you didn’t object; you pretended you were vaccinated and snuck around,” Kimmel responded. “Always a good move for a white millionaire to half-quote Dr Martin Luther King, by the way.” Trevor Noah On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah also criticized Rodgers for not getting vaccinated, especially after he told reporters in the preseason, when asked directly about his vaccination status, that he’d been “immunized”. “That was a pretty slippery answer, looking back at it,” Noah said. “This is like your girl asking if you’re wearing a condom, and you put on a bike helmet and are like, ‘Yeah, yeah, I’m wearing protection.’” Rodgers defended his answer on the Pat McAfee podcast, saying “I’m not some sort of anti-vax flat-earther. I am somebody who’s a critical thinker.” “So Rodgers basically said that he’s an independent thinker who doesn’t want to be told what to do with his body,” Noah recapped. “You ever notice how all the independent thinkers are doing the exact same thing? It’s not like they’re all coming up with different ideas, like ‘I’m an independent thinker! What are my thoughts, Joe Rogan?’” “You can tell how politics has just infected the entire vaccine debate, he added, “because you’ll never see Aaron Rodgers doing this to anything else. He’s never applying independent thinking to the rest of his body. Just once I’d love to see him out there on the field being like ‘forget pads and helmets, I’ve decided to cover myself in Manuca honey.’” Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert celebrated the passage in Congress of Biden’s $1.2tn infrastructure bill. “They did one thing!” he mocked. “After months of dragging their feet, I think we’re all shocked that the Democrats got this done. The party has gone from ‘Yes We Can’ to ‘Wait, We Did?!’” The bill will bring a massive upgrade to America’s roads, bridges, airports, seaports and rail systems. “Not to mention, much-needed relief to late-night hosts who don’t want to try to make jokes about possibly passing an infrastructure bill any more,” said Colbert. It also includes $47bn to withstand the devastating impacts of climate change. “OK that’s good. You know what would’ve been better? Billions of dollars to prevent the devastating impacts of climate change,” Colbert added. “This is the equivalent to showing up to a car crash and handing out seat belts.” Seth Meyers And on Late Night, Seth Meyers discussed the revelation that Trump personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani did not review debunked election fraud claims before broadcasting them to the general public in 2020. In a taped deposition, Giuliani said, “it’s not my job in a fast-moving case to go out and investigate every piece of evidence that’s given to me.” “No, of course not, that’s what lawyers are for,” Meyers deadpanned. “As everyone knows, you’re just the events coordinator for a landscaping company.” “Sweet Rudy, that is your job!” he continued. “Or at least, it’s supposed to be your job – although in fairness, Rudy looks less like a guy who would investigate a crime and more like the guy sitting on a park bench who just tells the cops what they’re doing is wrong.” “You really don’t think it’s your job to verify information before you announce it to the world? Is this how you operated when you were mayor?” he added, imitating Giuliani’s New York accent: “Thank you for coming to this press conference everyone, I have huge news for the city of New York: today I received an email with the subject line FWD: FWD: FWD: FREE BONER PILLS FOR LIFE! And that’s not just for me, it’s for life for the entire city.”The Morrison government will invest $500m into a new $1bn fund to help commercialise low emissions technology, including carbon capture and storage (CCS) and soil carbon. The fund will be administered by the Clean Energy Finance Corporation after the Coalition legislates new rules allowing it to invest in CCS, a controversial technology experts warn can’t be relied on to do the heavy lifting of Australia’s emissions reduction. The low emissions technology commercialisation fund will consist of a $500m injection of new capital from the government and a further $500m raised by the CEFC from private investors to support Australian early stage companies to develop new technology. The energy minister, Angus Taylor, said the fund will “address a gap in the Australian market, where currently small, complex, technology-focused startups can be considered to be too risky to finance”. However, it will also be expected to earn a positive return, meaning the investment does not hit the budget bottom line. Legislation will be required to set up the fund and alter the CEFC mandate, setting up a potential stoush with Labor which opposes attempts to use the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (Arena) to invest in CCS and clean hydrogen made using gas. In September the Morrison government released its technology investment roadmap listing CCS as a “priority technology”, which the recently adopted pathway to net zero by 2050 assumes can together contribute 40% of the required emissions reduction. Examples of technology the new fund can invest in include direct air capture and permanent storage of carbon dioxide underground, materials or techniques to reduce emissions in the production in steel and aluminium, soil carbon measurement, livestock feed technologies, and improvements to solar panels and batteries. Experts have warned carbon capture and storage can help reduce emissions but should not be used to prop up further fossil fuel developments. Fortescue Metals Group boss Andrew Forrest has criticised the technology, saying it has failed “19 out of 20 times” and the general population is entitled to feel sceptical about its use. At the Glasgow Cop26 summit Australia finally committed to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 but refused to increase its 2030 target. The government is yet to release modelling underpinning the new target, which Scott Morrison has said will be made public “soon”. In a statement, Morrison said the Coalition’s plan to reach net zero is “focused on technology”. “Australia can become a world leader in creating low emissions technology that is both affordable and scalable, helping get emissions down while creating jobs,” he said. Taylor said that “together with other new initiatives, like the increased investment in establishing seven clean hydrogen industrial hubs around Australia, [the fund] brings our commitment to more than $21bn of public investment in low emissions technologies by 2030”. Labor is yet to announce its full suite of climate policies, but has ruled out a carbon price. Instead, it is proposing investment in the grid to accommodate more renewables and considering using the existing safeguard mechanism to reduce emissions. Labor and the government have been in an ongoing arm-wrestle over use of renewables funding for unproven technologies including CCS. Anthony Albanese has accused the government of attempting to “emasculate” Arena by overhauling the mandate of the organisation so there is less focus on solar and wind, and more investment in hydrogen, CCS, microgrids and energy efficiency. After the Senate voted down new Arena investment rules in June, Taylor remade them, which some environmental groups have warned leaves them vulnerable to a court challenge. On Tuesday as Morrison unveiled the government’s new clean car policy, he was forced to defend accusations of hypocrisy, and denied he attacked electric vehicles before the 2019 federal election when he said Labor would “end the weekend”.When New South Wales exited lockdown in October, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, warned that with extra freedoms would likely come extra cases and hospitalisations. Modelling predicted up to 1,900 daily cases during the state’s first easing and a second, larger peak around Christmas. The Burnet Institute forecast hospitalisations would peak between 2,286 and 4,016 in Sydney by the end of September. Instead daily cases have continued to drop after “freedom day” on 11 October when 446 cases were reported and 769 people were being treated for Covid in hospital. Almost a month later, NSW’s 14-day reference rate is below one, hospitalisations have dropped by more than two-thirds, and just 222 new Covid cases were reported on Tuesday. Health experts name five key reasons why NSW has managed to keep case numbers so low while reopening its economy to the world. 1. Vaccine effectiveness underestimated Gregory Dore, an infectious disease physician and epidemiologist at the Kirby Institute, said the main reason case numbers were much lower than predicted was the effectiveness of the vaccine at containing outbreaks had been underestimated. Doherty Institute modelling that informed the national plan predicted even high levels of vaccination would not be enough to contain Covid, with 300 to 1,000 cases a day expected with “medium seeding” occurring. “Models underestimated the impact of the vaccination on transmission, and the rate of the vaccine take-up in those first few months, particularly targeted vaccination spreading to broader geographical areas,” Dore said. “There was a phenomenal uptake.” A vaccination blitz in hard-hit hotspots in NSW pushed some LGAs in south-west and western Sydney from having the lowest first-dose rate in the city to the fastest vaccination pace nationwide. On 1 August, just 33% of south-west Sydney had received a vaccination dose. Just two months later, the figure was 91.8%. 2. Real-time protection University of Sydney researchers have coined the term “protection in real-time” to explain how the rapid pace of vaccine uptake may have offset the impact of waning vaccine immunity. Optimal immunity after vaccination comes around a fortnight after receiving a second dose. But protection against severe disease may only require a lower level of immune response, and clinical trials have found the Pfizer vaccine provides partial protection just two weeks after the first vaccination dose. With a large proportion of recently vaccinated people circulating in the population, immunity levels were high, as was protection against severe infection. Dore said the NSW government’s decision to keep a short interval period between Pfizer doses also allowed NSW Health to vaccinate quickly. “That optimised the impact in preventing infection,” he said. “Within the first few months you get the best bang for your buck and reduce infectiousness if breakthrough cases occur.” 3. Delta’s severity overestimated Dore said as well as underestimating the effectiveness of the vaccine, modelling may also have overestimated the severity of the Delta strain. “I think we overestimated how badly it affects your risk of developing serious disease, and overestimated the duration of stay in hospitals. The spectrum of cases in hospital were less severe than they may have originally envisaged.” Doherty modelling predicted the Pfizer vaccine was 93% effective at reducing overall transmission of the Delta variant, and AstraZeneca was 86%. Later data from overseas has suggested Pfizer and AstraZeneca are between 94% and 96% effective at reducing hospitalisations. “Compared to the original strain … we thought Delta would make it much more likely you’d end up in hospital, putting vaccination aside,” Dore said. “It’s variable data, and it’s not straightforward. But the virulence and severity of the strain was thought to be much greater, and that can have a marked impact … once you shorten the duration of the stay (in hospital) that has a cumulative effect.” 4. Maintaining health measures The University of NSW epidemiologist Dr Abrar Chughtai said NSW Health had managed to keep on top of outbreaks by keeping key health measures in place after restrictions eased. Chughtai said continuing to mandate masks in public places had prevented the spread of the virus. Testing rates, contact tracing and isolation requirements were also maintained despite caps lifting for venues. “While many models predicted very high case numbers, NSW Health is still doing aggressive testing, tracing and isolating,” he said. The University of Sydney School of Public Health professor Alexandra Martiniuk cited the state government’s “gradual reopening, with vaccination being a requirement for entry in most indoor venues and social distancing measures” as key to keeping cases low. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She said NSW had also maintained “excellent” testing rates, with low test positivity compared with other countries with similar vaccination levels. About 0.3% of tests were coming back positive in NSW, while tests had continued to exceed 50,000 a day. Martiniuk said warm spring weather was likely encouraging people to socialise outdoors more than they may in other countries, but contact tracing was also key to the low positive rate. “Eighty-three per cent of results are available within one day of sample collection, and 93% of positive cases interviewed by NSW Health within 24 hours of notification,” she said. 5. High vaccination rate NSW has one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, with first doses exceeding 93% and second doses passing 90% on Tuesday. The “phenomenal” speed at which the nation ramped up the rollout is counter to countries like the US and the UK, which stalled after approaching the 50% mark. The Doherty Institute’s final report, released this month, said ongoing public health measures including testing, tracing, isolating and quarantine combined with public health and social measures were “critical interventions” to achieve low case numbers. But the report also acknowledged the pace of the vaccination rollout had “exceeded expectations”, particularly in NSW, the Australian Capital Territory and Victoria which had high community transmission, placing the nation on track to reach 90% targets “much faster” than original simulations predicted. Martiniuk said the high vaccination rate in NSW, coupled with the stages at which it had emerged from lockdown, had managed to keep cases under control. “NSW reopening has occurred fairly, and was done gradually, whereas the countries we often compare to reopened much sooner and more restrictions were taken away all at once, like England in July,” Martiniuk said. “Singapore (where case numbers are rising) has a higher proportion of fully vaccinated population (82%), but the majority of Singapore’s vaccines were given earlier. “Singapore also had more vaccine hesitancy in their older populations, so greater case severity and hospitalisations.”The technology in the Coalition’s cut-down version of the NBN cost up to three times more than originally forecast and was closer to the initial estimated cost of a revised version of Labor’s full-fibre plan, according to figures the government has sought to keep secret for almost a decade. The previously redacted 2013 figures detailing the estimated cost of the Coalition’s alternative model – relying on trouble-plagued pay-TV cables and fibre-to-the-node technology – show the true scale of the NBN cost blowout over the past eight years. When the Coalition won government in 2013, then communications minister Malcolm Turnbull commissioned a strategic review into the national broadband network to validate switching from rolling out fibre-to-the-premises for 93% of homes to a mixture of older technology using Telstra and Optus cable networks and fibre-to-the-node which then utilised existing copper lines to premises. The report, released in December 2013, claimed the former Labor government’s model would cost $74bn and not be completed until 2024, while the Coalition’s model would cost $41bn and be finished in 2020. For years large sections of the report have been kept secret, including crucial estimates on how much it would cost to build each type of technology out to each home. But the redacted figures, obtained by Guardian Australia, show NBN Co in 2013 estimated the cost of using the hybrid fibre-coaxial (HFC) pay-TV cable networks was between $800 and $850 per premises. The cost of building fibre-to-the-node was estimated to be $600 to $650 per premises. In reality, as NBN Co encountered upgrade issues with both types of technology, the cost has been up to three times higher. The average cost per premises for fibre-to-the-node is sitting at $2,330 and HFC is at $2,752, according to the latest figures detailed in the company’s 2021 corporate plan. NBN Co argues the current cost should not be compared to the 2013 estimate because the current methodology is “more comprehensive and includes additional cost elements”. “Since 2015, NBN Co has reported fully allocated costs for its … calculations, which has included all material costs of building a connection from the transit network to customers’ premises, incorporating costs such as payments to Telstra to lease duct infrastructure,” a spokesperson said this week. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In 2015, NBN Co began including a $700 infrastructure cost in determining the cost per premises, according to its corporate plan. Taking this cost away from the 2021 figures, both HFC and fibre-to-the-node are still more than double the original estimated cost. The review numbers have been a closely-guarded secret within NBN Co and the government for years. NBN Co has claimed “commercial sensitivity” to obstruct the release of the unredacted strategic review, arguing it would put the company at a competitive disadvantage if contractors knew the company’s estimates. Earlier this year, the company refused to provide the figures to the Senate, arguing it would “require a significant diversion of resources” to determine what could be released almost eight years on. Guardian Australia asked the office of the communications minister, Paul Fletcher, about the cost blowout, and whether the strategic review had vastly underestimated the cost of the multi-technology mix. A spokesperson for the minister did not address the questions directly, but said up to 75% of premises would be able to access ultrafast broadband by 2023, through upgrades building on the current model. “This will occur via a continuation of the ‘multi-technology model’ that has been used to deliver this enormous project efficiently and economically – and in time for the extra demands placed on the network due to Covid-19,” they said. During the 2016 election campaign, the Australian federal police raided the home of a Labor staffer and parliament offices over the leak of documents related to delays and cost blowouts associated with the Coalition’s version of the NBN. The cost of a “radically redesigned” fibre-to-the-premises NBN was also estimated in the report but was also redacted. The figures show it was estimated that design changes to the NBN would generate savings of $850-$1,150 per premises for full-fibre, with the final cost totalling $1,950-$2,250 per home. This confirms reporting by Nine newspapers earlier this year that the radically redesigned fibre network could have been at least $10bn cheaper than initially estimated – costing as little as $60bn when taking into account lower interest rates NBN has been paying on debt. The cost of building fibre networks has come down since 2013. In New Zealand, Chorus was able to reduce the cost per premises from A$4,753 in 2014 to A$2,598 in 2019. In Australia, the 2013 strategic review claimed it would cost $4,777. Under the Coalition government, NBN Co has now taken on a mix of government and private debt worth more than $57bn, as costs for constructing and maintaining the older technology went up. NBN Co has abandoned much of the cable network and is replacing fibre-to-the-node with fibre-to-the-premises in up to 1.6m homes, as part of a $4.5bn upgrade plan to provide gigabit speeds unachievable on the legacy copper lines. Under this upgrade, NBN Co is estimating the cost for replacing copper lines with fibre will be $1,500 per premises at most. The government has continued to justify overhauling the NBN rollout by referring to the strategic review. Fletcher told the National Press Club in September 2020 the government based its plan on the review and “the plan worked”.National disability insurance scheme providers used unauthorised restraints on clients – such as sedating or strapping down a person, or depriving them of their personal belongings – more than one million times in 2020-21. The new figures, reported to federal parliament by the NDIS quality and safeguards commission, show a 240% increase on the previous 12-months and have prompted calls for an investigation. The federal government last year said the commonwealth and states had agreed to “work to reduce, and ultimately eliminate, the use of restrictive practices on people with disability”. But Guardian Australia can reveal the NDIS quality and safeguards commission received 1,032,064 reports of unauthorised restrictive practices in 2020-21, a 240% increase on the 302,690 reports from the previous 12 months. In 2020-21, there were 585,847 (56%) reports of unauthorised “chemical” restraint, such as the use of sedatives to manage client behaviour, a 229% increase on the 2020-21 figure. The NDIS commission’s own guidelines note “an over-reliance for the use of medication to address behaviours of concern in people with disability” and warns of the possibility of long-term negative side-effects. The commission said there were also 376,575 reports of the unauthorised use of “environmental” restraints, which can refer to restricting a client’s access to part of their own home or denying access to personal possessions like a mobile phone or television. It was notified of 63,795 instances where an unauthorised “mechanical” restraint was used (for example strapping a person down, or forcing them to wear splints, gloves, a helmet or other equipment) and 4,794 instances of unauthorised physical restraint. This might include physically holding a person down while they display “behaviours of concern”. Providers also reported 789 instances of unauthorised seclusion, which refers to locking an NDIS client in a room which they can’t leave. In all these cases, a total of 788 NDIS providers failed to gain the proper authorisation to employ these restraints on 7,826 NDIS participants. The watchdog’s compliance register shows it has issued only eight compliance notices and two fines to providers that have failed to comply with restrictive practice rules. The commission’s annual report also shows there were a marked increase in the number of “reportable incidents” logged during 2020-21, including alleged abuse and alleged unlawful physical/sexual contact. Restrictive practice is a broad term and its use is subject to a patchwork of federal and state laws and regulations. Under NDIS rules, a provider must lodge a behaviour support plan with the watchdog. However, they may also need to gain permission from a state oversight body, normally known as the senior practitioner. The aim of these rules is to ensure any use of restraints is subject to oversight and legal challenge. Behaviour support plans are also intended to reduce the future need for restraints, which already should be employed as a last resort. An NDIS Commission spokesperson said the figures were “completely unacceptable”. “This volume of reports demonstrate the shocking prevalence of these practices in the disability sector in Australia and is one of our highest priorities,” the spokesperson said. “Targeted compliance action with providers who preside over significant numbers of these arrangements is under way now.” Providers must report to the NDIS commission every time they use a restricted practice without authorisation. A person being sedated three times a day for an entire year without authorisation would count as 1,095 reportable incidents over 12 months, the commission says. The disability royal commission says restrictive practices are mostly likely to be used in group homes, though they can also be employed in public settings. Children and Young People with Disability Australia has reported students experiencing restraints including seclusion and being restrained with belts, while a high-profile 2015 case involved an autistic student being placed in a specially made cage. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning More recently, the Age reported last week that a young disabled man was shackled by a hospital for five months because there was no alternative treatment or supported accommodation available. The opposition’s NDIS spokesperson, Bill Shorten, told Guardian Australia: “There must be an independent investigation into this.” “I appreciate it’s not as simple as it should never happen, but the number seems way too high,” he said. “The Morrison government should not walk past this confronting and disturbing evidence.” “Where are the behavioural plans to stop unauthorised restrictive practice that should be in place?” Jordon Steele-John, the Greens disability rights spokesperson, called for a national plan to address the problem, saying “elimination of unauthorised restrictive practice must be the goal and it must be achieved urgently”. He said the practices particularly affected “people with intellectual disability and those who are neuro-diverse”. The increase in the figures likely reflecting increased use and reporting from providers, Steele-John said. “The use of these practices, authorised or unauthorised, is a violation of someone’s human rights,” he said. “The critical difference is without authorisation you are simply using them with no plan to stop using them.” The NDIS minister, Linda Reynolds, said it was a “complex issue” and she was working with the commission to “gain a greater understanding of the nature and scale of these practices across Australia”. She said the commission had done important work by shining a light on the increasing use of unauthorised restrictive practices and noted it was stepping up its compliance. “The commission commenced reporting on these practices at a national level as this did not occur under the previous fragmented state based approach,” she said. Senior manager of policy at People with Disability Australia, Giancarlo De Vera, also called for a national plan to address the issue, saying he had “grave concerns about the data”. It suggested people with disability were “not receiving adequate supports”. A National Disability Services spokesperson said the peak body for providers also supported uniform legislation across Australia to “reduce the compliance complexity”. “The use of restrictive practices is a serious infringement of a person’s rights, nonetheless there are limited circumstances where there may be no other way to ensure the safety of the person or another,” the spokesperson said. Do you know more? luke.henriques-gomes@theguardian.comAt 6am on a crisp Melbourne morning in 2019, Australian author Sally Hepworth, still in her pyjamas, sat in her parked car in the garage to take a call from Amy Poehler. The US comedy powerhouse was interested in optioning Hepworth’s latest New York Times bestseller, The Mother-in-Law – about a matriarch found dead and a family riddled with secrets – for television. It was a once-in-a lifetime opportunity, but Hepworth was plagued by two fears: her children walking in and ruining the moment, or ruining it herself. “My agent said to me: ‘Don’t do that thing where you blurt, play it cool,’” Hepworth recalls. “But with someone like Amy, you lose your whole power.” Cut to a few months later and Hepworth was meeting with the actor, comedian, producer and director over breakfast at the Beverly Hills Hotel in Los Angeles on her way back from a whirlwind trip to New York, where she was promoting her book on Good Morning America. “Amy came with wet hair, no makeup, and she was warm and personable” Hepworth says. Before long, she lost an internal battle and asked for a selfie. “I couldn’t not get the selfie,” Hepworth says. “I just had to. She told me all the things she loved about the book. I hate the word surreal, but it was surreal.” Despite a succession of pinch-me moments, Hepworth insists she was far from an overnight success. She describes faltering considerably in her early days, when she was writing on maternity leave after the birth of her first child. “I was like the proverbial duck with furious legs under water, trying to make it,” she says. “There were several failed books even before my first book [Love Like the French] was published, and it was published in German. Only in German, and I am so so grateful, because I hate it so much.” Since then, Hepworth has released a novel a year – all of them, remarkably, bestsellers. Buzz was building before her latest, The Younger Wife, was even released, with Australian sunglasses brand Sticks &amp; Sparrow designing sunnies inspired by the book’s cover illustration and naming them after the main character, Heather Wisher. (Hepworth, who has very engaged Instagram followers, models a pair for me over Zoom.) The Younger Wife, which features a hot water bottle stuffed with cash (inspired by the antics of Hepworth’s own great aunt Gwen), follows sisters Tully and Rachel Aston as they grapple with their father’s decision to marry the much-younger Heather after their mother, Pam, moves to a nursing home with end-stage Alzheimer’s. It’s an addictive, easy read, with idiosyncratic characters and, like all Hepworth’s novels, suspense at every turn. Nowadays, she has a Davitt crime fiction award to her name (for 2020’s The Good Sister) and many comparisons to fellow Australian author Liane Moriarty. “She’s the one that everyone wants to be compared to, so actually I’m very happy about it,” Hepworth says. “Our publisher knows I am obsessed with her and, when we talk, I always ask ‘How’s my best friend, Liane? Can I have her home address?’ And when Apples Never Fall came out, I emailed Liane to congratulate her, and I asked her to tell our publisher that I was standing outside her house. We just egg on our publisher. “But you know, she is in my genre, so it’s natural for publishers to position newer authors in that vein – you know, every thriller writer is like Paula Hawkins, and every domestic suspense author is going to positioned as the next Liane Moriarty. But my Australian editor said that with this new cover design [Hepworth’s Australian publisher has repackaged her previous novels to match the latest release], it almost signals a step away to [my] own personal brand.” And that brand is booming, if the fact her husband, Christian (who now has his own fanbase as Mr Sally Hepworth), recently quit his job as an accountant to become her full-time assistant is anything to go by. Hepworth has leaned into it, knowing it defies the housewife-author stereotype. “I think there probably was a few housewife-type comments but I was really strong about not buying into them,” she says. “I either asked not to be asked about being a housewife, or I answered it in a way where I implied that unless you’re asking it of Trent Dalton, then you shouldn’t ask it of me. “Christian and I are both passionate feminists, but I also want to be careful and say I was also once the primary carer of our children. We have both played every role in our relationship. We’re a partnership and we always have been.” It seems to be working: Christian works on her website, reads her drafts, deals with the returns for her online clothes shopping and leaves Hepworth to focus on her “seasonal” approach to her job – writing a draft in three months, editing it in the next three months, and then working on a promotional cycle (accounting for an Australian release in November and an American release in April) and the “business” of writing, including invoicing, interviews, contracts and so on. Hepworth says her first-draft routine is very regimented – she writes in 350-word bursts six times a day – a strategy she implemented when her confidence was low and 2,000 words seemed “too scary”. Editing, on the other hand, is an “ugly, gnarly process” that is far less regimented. “Writing is still my favourite thing,” she says. “I struggle though the parts I don’t like – the bad reviews, the dip period where you feel insecure – but every time I am in that first-draft period, I love it. There is a craft, there is hard work, but it’s what I’m good at. I am terrible at sport, my parenting is very subpar and my editing is shocking, but creating characters with wisdom and truth, fostering empathy through telling stories, that makes me happy.” The Younger Wife by Sally Hepworth is out now through Pan Macmillan Australia (A$32.99)Days after flying into Glasgow to catch the opening of the Cop26 climate summit, Santos CEO Kevin Gallagher headed over to Edinburgh to watch the Wallabies play Scotland from a corporate box. The oil and gas company’s logo may have stood pride of place at the Australian pavilion at the summit, but it was the company’s sponsorship of the Wallabies that would prove a public relations coup. The deal with Rugby Australia will see the team sport the Santos logo on the top-back of their jersey at every game. Former Wallabies captain David Pocock, a strong voice within sport calling for meaningful action on climate says “it’s hard to stomach”. “I was always proud to represent my country. As a rugby player, that’s what you dream of. It’s been difficult to watch a partnership emerge with Santos.” “I really think fossil fuel sponsorship is the new cigarette sponsorship, where they are advertising a product that we now know is destroying our home planet and our futures.” As oil and gas companies have spent billions to control the conversation on climate change and present themselves as “part of the solution”. The $50bn world of professional sport has proven catnip to an industry under pressure over its role in driving climate change. Campaigns director for climate activist group 350 Australia, Kelly Albion, has been tracking fossil fuel companies as they work up sponsorship deals, advertising arrangements and official partnerships with the arts, community groups and sports clubs. “There’s some that are really hyperlocal in places while others are national,” Albion said. “It’s very opaque so it’s hard to know how many of these are out there or what the relationship means.” A count of these arrangements for which there is publicly available information reveals at least 12 fossil fuel companies, industry associations and energy retailers have 24 deals with sports clubs, stadiums or events at all levels. As the list includes only those arrangements for which there is publicly available information, Albion says there may be others that are unknown. ‘You don’t know how much is at stake’ Among the most prolific is South Australian oil and gas company Santos whose patronage extends to several sports organisations. Even before it expanded its “long-term partnership” with Rugby Australia to include the Wallabies, Santos already sponsored the Wallaroos, Queensland Reds, New South Wales Waratahs, Western Force and the Australian Women’s Sevens. Outside Rugby, Santos is the naming rights sponsor of the Tour Down Under while it was announced in February that the company would sponsor the 2021 Australian Open as “official gas partner” – although the company’s logo is not currently listed on Tennis Australia’s website. The move was controversial as the 2014 Australian Open – where play was stopped and 1,000 spectators were treated for heat exhaustion when temperatures rose above 40c – is considered an example of how climate change impacts sport. But Santos sponsorship isn’t limited to the elite level. Earlier this year the company sponsored both the Festival of Rugby in Narrabri – headlined by rock band Thirsty Merc – where teams competed for $25k in prize money, and the Aboriginal Power Cup, a football competition run in partnership with Port Adelaide football club for Indigenous high school students in South Australia. Guardian Australia asked Tennis Australia and Santos for comment. Santos is by no means the only fossil fuel company getting in on the action. Among the more high profile examples are coal mining giant Adani’s sponsorship of the North Queensland Cowboys and the NSW Minerals Council’s partnership with the Newcastle Knights. Meanwhile in Western Australia, gas giant Woodside Petroleum funds a learning-to-swim program with Surf Life Saving Western Australia, the “Woodside Nippers”. A spokesperson for Surf Life Saving WA did not answer questions about how much the relationship with Woodside was worth in dollar terms, but said it funded a range of beach-safety programs and “provides every child with a new uniform”. “In 2019, the partnership extended to include the Nippers program in WA, helping us resource the program and our clubs, increasing opportunities to train children and their parents in beach and surf safety,” they said. Director of climate and environment at the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility, Dan Gocher, says the reluctance of clubs and companies to talk about the issue makes it difficult to assess the scale of the funding. “The problem is you can never put a value on these relationships. You don’t know how much is at stake,” Gocher says. Fossil fuel companies value these partnerships as a way to “buy social licence”. “In Australia, the way you wash your brand is through sport. Tobacco did it for a generation, through Formula One and AFL. Fossil fuel companies are essentially doing the same,” he says. ‘Sport is special’ At the height of its dominance the tobacco industry turned the use of sport sponsorships for influence into a fine art. In one case, a copy of a speaking notes found in the archive of tobacco company RJ Reynolds reveals how by May 1980 it was sponsoring over 2,400 sports events a year. “That translates into 2,400 opportunities to put a politician in front of anywhere from 3000 to 200,000 potential voters,” it reads. “An opportunity provided by Reynolds that’s too good to be true for the politician.” The notes show the ambition of these relationships by crediting the company’s sponsorship of Nascar racing for “killing tax increases in both Florida and Alabama”. Attempts to leverage the “soft power” of sport have not just been limited to tobacco companies. Human rights organisations like Amnesty International have repeatedly warned about how Saudi Arabia has bought up football clubs across the world as a way to water-down criticism over human rights abuses. Elsewhere Russian state-owned oil giant Gazprom has spent billions sponsoring football clubs across Europe as it has expanded its gas infrastructure, even going so far as to sponsor the 2018 FIFA World Cup. Marketing lecturer at the University of Melbourne Robin Canniford says in Australia sport is an obvious target for fossil fuel companies looking to protect their reputation as awareness of their role in the climate crisis grows. “In Australia sport is culture,” says Canniford. “Sport is special because of its emotional energy that you don’t get from many other areas of society any more. Brands as symbols store, like a battery, emotional energy that sports fans love.” Canniford says associating with sport in this way creates a “halo effect” for the company that allows it to “channel all that passion and energy” generated by sport. ‘Get to the future’ While sport can be leveraged to further business interests, the UN attempted in 2018 to use sport to marshal support for meaningful action on the climate change when it launched the Sports for Climate Action framework at Cop24 in Katowice, Poland. Though it has since attracted 273 signatories, only a handful of Australian sports institutions have signed on, including Tennis Australia and Richmond football club. Both have yet to divest themselves of fossil fuel sponsorship, with petrol retailer United Petroleum still counted as a Richmond sponsor. Former Socceroos captain Craig Foster says he welcomes Richmond’s work on climate change in other areas, but says “it has been very disappointing” to see the wider world of sport mute on the issue of climate change. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Most of the advocacy is coming from athletes or former athletes in small groups but the governing bodies that represent literally hundreds of millions of people, playing the most visible sports on the planet, have done next to nothing during the most important week when the planet is facing an existential crisis,” Foster says. “I’ve said to these [sport] executives many times, get out of the past, get to the future,” he says. “Sports should recognise that dying industries like fossil fuels do not represent the future of income.” “Clean energy. Renewables. This is the new generation of sports sponsorships.”I won’t lie: the huge tree toppling over without warning was unsettling. The evening had been otherwise still, without a breath of wind since before dark. The only other sounds in the valley were the songs of the owls and the frogs, and we were - all four of us - quite literally a mile from anything, the nearest sign of civilisation being a fire trail more than an hour’s walk to the north. Our 11-year-olds were zipped into their sleeping bags already, though not yet asleep. My fellow “adventure mum” and I were just about to call it a night and crawl into our respective tents, when suddenly: a loud SNAP, followed by an enormous rolling crunch from somewhere on the hill above. During that long, roaring moment, my body froze while my mama-brain whirred into action. What’s that? Was the whole hillside about to avalanche down upon us? In choosing this spot to camp, have I doomed us all? What are we even doing out here hiking in the middle of nowhere with randomly falling timber when we could be at home, tucked up safely in our perfectly good beds? Thankfully, by the time the roar died away to nothing, and the worried little voice called out from the tent (“Mum? Mum?! What was that?!”) my own voice sounded pretty calm. “Just a tree falling, baby. It won’t hurt us. Go to sleep. I’ll be in next to you soon.” As it turns out, a boy at 11 is big and brave enough to carry a pack, to scramble down a rocky hillside, to jump feet-first into a dark pool on top of a waterfall, and to watch for snakes in the scrub - but not too big or brave for the reassuring nearness of his mum in the dark unknown. By morning, we were freezing but unharmed, and the Tale of the Falling Tree had become just that – a new legend, a story for our young warriors to tell about the danger faced and survived on their wilderness journey. We laughed over our camp-stove coffees about the fright of those few seconds, while the kids scampered around hitting things with sticks. We traded field notes from the overnight experience: who had the worst sleeping bag, who heard the wombat sniffing around the campsite, who smelled the worst. We ate gluey porridge and struggled to stuff everything back in the hiking packs. The water filter failed, so we set to painstakingly boiling many litres of creek water for drinking. We trekked up the steep hill, now hot, smashing our way through stand after stand of thick bracken. None of it seems like the sort of thing you’d call “fun”, and yet when our little troop emerged tired, insect-bitten and victorious from the scrub, the boys moaned that they didn’t want the trip to be over, and started nagging us about the next one. It’s an odd phenomenon, this “type two fun”, in which difficult, scary or uncomfortable experiences become the stuff of happy memories. As I explained to my hiking buddies on a tough section of the walk, this kind of fun is best when you’re no longer having it. It’s the pure joy of living to tell the tale. The concept of enjoying self-inflicted hardship out in nature is not new to me. I’ve done a fair bit of outdoor adventuring in my 40-odd years and you do learn to revel in the roughness of it all. It almost never occurs to me any more to ask “why?” Why carry all the gear on my back when I could pay for a nicer stay? Why punish myself with a long, tough walk when I could drive? Why go out in search of these adventures at all? The falling tree reminded me to ask these questions, because the uncomfortable truth is that the outdoors does come with inherent dangers. Things can and do go wrong on the trail. Despite my often stated ambition to “be the prepared walker that I would want to encounter if I were in trouble in the bush”, there is no accounting for every possibility – as proven by the busted water filter, the tree, the inadequate sleeping bags and countless other tiny hiccups. Taking young kids out into the unknown feels like a particular gamble. When my friend and I decided on this trip with our boys, we thought we knew our “why”. “It’ll be fun!” we told each other. “They need exercise! Kids need to be out in the bush – to be free to run and roam and be loud!” I suspect we were both also instinctively seeking out an antidote to a snowball of parent guilt – in my case, brought on by the Great Screen Binge of 2021. We’ve done a year’s worth of Netflix per week and watched probably half of YouTube. That has led to a withdrawal process akin to detoxing hard substances: moodiness, tantrums, sneaking behaviours (and possibly some criminal activity, for all I know). Screen regret definitely played into my decision to launch our adventure well out of range of 4G. The benefits of hiking in nature are well evidenced. Forest bathing is proven to improve mental wellbeing, and the simple process of walking is medicinal in effect on the brain and body. But in taking the risk on a mother-son bush trip, we got more than we bargained for. As we pushed the physical limits, and forced our bodies (and our sons) to feel that sharp edge of fear and doubt, it felt like we were healing some rift in ourselves, something damaged by many pandemic months spent cowering indoors, wallowing in the necessity of avoidant behaviour. Our kids embraced the wild with abandon. Sitting back and watching the sunset, we tried not to flinch or coddle as the boys hopped precariously across a waterfall, shouting and laughing. I realised that in opening up to this kind of risk, and sharing adversity with our little people, we were gently reminding ourselves of the beautiful fragility of life. From that awareness comes connection, and out of vulnerability comes resilience. After just one weekend, the gratitude we feel for the tree, and for being able to breathe the next breath, is profound. • Meg Hitchick is a midwife, teacher and the campus coordinator of an alternative senior school for vulnerable young people, with a focus on wellbeing and resilience. She lives in regional NSW with her partner, three sons and two dogsSometime before the last Sydney lockdown, I was in a local cafe, staring down a pretentious bowl of chickpea-centric vegetarian fare I’d had countless times before. But that day I took a bite and all I could taste was salt. This had never happened before. I had a few more mouthfuls, hoping the rest would be fine, but the whole meal was uncomfortably salty. I didn’t know what to do. I’m not one to complain about food unless it is genuinely inedible. On the other hand, I’m friendly with the owners of this cafe, and I thought maybe the kitchen should know, so it wouldn’t happen again. The whole thing got me thinking about the public dining social contract. When are paying customers justified in sending a meal back? How should they do it so nobody spits in their replacement meals? I have asked a mixed plate of food professionals to weigh in. Their opinions vary on a number of matters but the overall consensus is that people should feel confident in sending back dishes containing off items or undercooked meat, eggs or seafood, as well as dishes missing key ingredients or with bonus hair, objects or critters. Food temperature also came up a lot but with the caveat that if your meal or beverage is cold because you waited too long to start, that’s really on you. Beyond that, it gets pretty subjective. The chef/owner Ben Shemesh and his partner, Emily van Loon, opened Small’s Deli in Sydney’s Potts Point in early 2020. Determined not to let a little thing like a global pandemic get in their way, they worked tirelessly to make their Italian-inspired takeaway sandwich joint a neighbourhood stalwart. Shemesh has a lot to say about customer gripes: the good, the bad and the farcical. “I once had someone order a steak and, when asked how they wanted it cooked, they said “chef’s choice”. After receiving a textbook medium-rare sirloin, they sent it back and said they couldn’t understand why the chef would choose to cook it that way, and could they have a new steak?” Though chronically non-confrontational himself, Shemesh encourages others to speak up in salty situations. “If someone is paying for something that they think is inedible, they should feel free to voice their opinion.” Citing the potential for human error, like the time he once forgot to put lobster in a lobster spaghetti, he says people should give a venue the chance to rectify the problem. “Or to shoo them out the door with a salt shaker. Either way.” The waiter/cafe manager Lynsey Martin has just hung up her apron after almost two decades in food service in Australia and her native Scotland. The most egregious complaint she has ever encountered was about chocolate brownies that were “just too chocolatey”. Long blacks that aren’t hot enough – a gripe she fielded countless times – are also a bugbear. “We can’t make boiling water any hotter.” I’m incredulous to learn that people often try to get a replacement meal, discount or full free ride because they simply don’t enjoy a perfectly executed dish. “We can’t really take food back just because you don’t like it,” says Martin, deadpan. And don’t get her started on people who finish their entire meal and then kick up a fuss to avoid payment: “I can’t stress enough how ridiculous this is.” When I ask her about my salty meal, Martin says I should absolutely have sent the dish back, especially considering I’d had it many times without issue. She adds that in such a situation, if offered a replacement, she would advise asking for a different dish, as any dressings or sauces in my original order would be from a daily batch and the same problem would be likely to recur. The bar manager Also hailing from Scotland, the hospitality veteran Dave Hinnrichs has done every food service job you can think of, as well as some you probably can’t. He believes valid reasons for complaint include food not being cooked properly, dishes not matching their menu description, and yes, over-seasoning to the point of discomfort. As a punter, he’s comfortable raising issues about food, but always in a “courteous and professional manner”. Like Martin, one of Hinnrichs’ biggest workplace grievances is people who demolish a plate and then gripe about its taste or quality. “I had one couple recently who, after eating their whole meal – four or five tapas dishes – decided to critique everything and then demand a refund.” Diners who slam a venue on social media or Tripadvisor without commenting in person are another pain point. He says staff would always prefer a chance to remedy any problems. Other interviewees confirmed this as a frustrating, and increasing, problem. The food writers The food writer Nicholas Jordan is “hugely averse” to sending food back, generally believing if something isn’t to his taste, it’s a matter of subjectivity rather than a mistake or poor cooking. He believes context is everything and doesn’t want to be prescriptive about rules, beyond off food or the presence of foreign objects. “You know, like a human tooth, a piece of Lego, a snow globe or something.” “We read food reviews that say this is 16/20, we read Instagram posts that say this croissant is good but the one at that other bakery is shit,” Jordan says. “When we visit a new restaurant, our friends ask, ‘Is it good?’ and at those restaurants if we find something isn’t to our taste, we just think it’s shit. Maybe if there was more nuance and understanding of subjectivity, we’d all understand our own tastes better.” He empathises with venues trying to navigate this divisive culture, with chefs often rushing to change dishes because of online critiques, only to encounter a whole new set of complaints: “Some people complain the scrambled eggs are too runny, so the recipe is changed. Fans of runny scrambled eggs end up suffering.” The MasterChef judge and food writer Melissa Leong tells me she would support sending back an aggressively salty dish but stresses the need for courtesy and deference. “Seasoning is subjective and I know people think something is saltier in a restaurant because nobody puts that much salt, butter and oil in food at home. But if it’s … unpleasant, there is a polite way to explain what’s going on and most venues will be happy to do something about it.” In the end, I chose to quietly mention the saltiness of my meal to the manager. I resolved that it must have been a mistake, but a mistake that should be addressed lest new customers leave unhappy. The manager thanked me for the heads up and we all got on with our lives.South Korean horror drama Squid Game has quickly become Netflix’s most-watched series. For those who haven’t seen it, the premise is simple: a group of contestants on the poverty line are pitted against each other in a series of deadly games, all for the entertainment of the super-rich. At its core – and partly why it’s so compelling – is the class struggle. We’re living in a time where the gap between extreme wealth and extreme poverty has never been wider, so the concept of the rich exploiting the poor for sport, or simply to alleviate boredom, feels particularly deranged. But Squid Game is far from the first time class warfare has been explored on screen, and there are a couple of standouts – including an underrated US action film and a cult Australian horror movie – waiting patiently to be rediscovered. The Most Dangerous Game – a 1932 thriller about a hunter stalking humans as prey – was loosely remade in the 1990s, with two separate films that established the hunted characters as homeless men. The first was 1993’s Hard Target, directed by John Woo and starring Jean-Claude Van Damme. It was followed just eight months later by the Ernest R Dickerson-directed Surviving the Game, which has lived in Hard Target’s shadow for far too long. Surviving the Game sees Ice-T in career-best form as Jack Mason, a homeless man hunted through the wilderness of the Pacific north-west by a dream team of 1990s character actors including Rutger Hauer, Gary Busey, Charles S Dutton, John C McGinley and F Murray Abraham. Hauer, a mysterious businessman, leads the charge for the hunters. Like the organisation in Squid Game, he masks his true intentions behind a facade of helpfulness, offering Mason a job on his team and the opportunity to get back on his feet. Mason agrees to participate, without fully understanding what he’s getting into. Like all good entries in the genre, the bad guys see the protagonist as an “other” – as someone beneath them. In Surviving The Game, Mason is deemed to be “nothing”; but Ice-T’s character has other plans and sets about levelling the playing field by dispatching his pursuers in ingenious and bloody fashion. In a similar ballpark is the homegrown 1982 Ozploitation film Turkey Shoot (retitled Blood Camp Thatcher for its UK release and Escape 2000 in the US), in which celebrities and politicians trudge through the Queensland rainforest, hunting inmates from a dystopian prison camp. The elite view the experience as a privilege to which they are entitled, with evil hunter Tito (Michael Petrovitch) stating: “Excess is what makes life worth living – for people like us.” Turkey Shoot achieved cult status across the globe, including a superfan in Quentin Tarantino. Hampered by a shrinking budget, director Brian Trenchard-Smith needed a way to make his movie stand out and the answer was simple – more blood! Because, as he states in his excellent memoir Adventures in the B Movie Trade, “blood is cheap”. Turkey Shoot’s claret-strewn, explosive mayhem won’t be to everyone’s taste, but for those seeking to understand why Australian sleaze horror is a genre unto itself – Ozploitation – this is the perfect place to start. Other notable variations on the elite-hunt-underclass theme include 1987 dystopian action film The Running Man, where Arnold Schwarzenegger is hunted on reality TV. More recently, 2019’s comedy horror Ready Or Not stars Samara Weaving as a bride who is stalked on her wedding night by maniac in-laws desperate to preserve their wealth and status at her expense. Rich people gambling on the lives of the poor is another present theme in Squid Game. For a classic example on screen, you can’t go past John Landis’s 1983 comedy Trading Places, in which two geriatric millionaires make a bet to switch the fortunes of commodities broker Dan Aykroyd and street hustler Eddie Murphy for the princely sum of $1. And in 2016 horror The Belko Experiment (by Wolf Creek director and Australian Greg McLean), ordinary office workers are pitted against each other in a death match at the behest of a shadowy gambling syndicate. If you’re on a dystopian roll, Hard Target 2 starring action dynamo Scott Adkins, and The Hunt starring Glow’s Betty Gilpin, are both arriving on Netflix in November. And The Most Dangerous Game is getting yet another remake later this year under the title Apex, starring Bruce Willis as the prey. In real life, billionaires are firing themselves into space for fun. But on television and in the movies it looks as if there’s no cure for their affluent ennui … where they will continue to hunt and gamble and toy with lives.MORE UPS AND DOWNS AT OLD TRAFFORD Even Alanis Morissette in a rain-drenched wedding dress could detect the irony here. That if Manchester United put anywhere near as much time and effort into the business of winning football matches as they appear to invest in the composition of carefully worded, bespoke apologies for their players to post on social media disgraces in the wake of calamitous on-field humiliations, there would be no need for the aforementioned mass mea culpas in the first place. Already at a low ebb having had their pants pulled down by Liverpool and Manchester City in consecutive home Premier League matches, the club found themselves the subject of further ridicule when a clipped extract of an interview given to SportsPro Media by Phil Lynch, senior club media wonk, started gaining more and more of what Phil would call “traction”. In it, the American explains how through the analysis of “fan sentiment graphs” he and his team compile twice-daily reports for every United player. No, really. What’s more, they have “certain thresholds that alert us when we see fan sentiment going one way or another … and when that happens we then start to work with the player and his team individually to counter that narrative a little bit”. In short, the amount of science and hard work that goes into a Harry Maguire post announcing that he’s gutted but will work hard to put things right and bounce back stronger cannot be overstated, even if it does seem a monumental waste of everyone’s time. Now, The Fiver presumes Harry and his teammates (with perhaps one preening exception) find the whole social media disgrace monitoring and tracking business as ludicrous as the next man and can only imagine the amount of eye-rolling that goes on in the training canteen when some flunky arrives laden down with that morning’s graphs. Certainly, in recent weeks, they won’t have made for pleasant reading and one presumes Aaron Wan-Bissaka will have much work to do to counter his particular narrative once he stops hyperventilating into a paper bag after a quick perusal of his latest fan sentiment numbers. Never backwards in coming forwards with an opinion or two on social media aberrations, Gary Neville wasn’t slow in expressing some strident fan sentiment of his own upon viewing Lynch’s interview. “Devastating for the players this video!” he tweeted. “A senior club employee stating publicly that the club and players’ social media teams are attempting to control their own fans is social engineering not comms advice. All the work Rashford and others have done is diminished by this video.” As understandable as Gary’s irritation might be, it will take more than a bit of ill-advised social engineering to diminish the heroic charity work of St Marcus. In fact the striker was down in Windsor earlier to be presented with his MBE. United’s social media disgraces were quick to post a picture of the ceremony, presumably on the grounds that the increasingly rare sight of one of the club’s players being presented with a medal might send those fan sentiment graphs heading back in the right direction. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Will Unwin from 5.45pm GMT for Women’s Big Cup MBM coverage of Servette 1-3 Chelsea. QUOTE OF THE DAY “It seems like there’s a lot going on but for me to put it in the simplest way – I’m trying to give children the things I didn’t have when I was kid. If I did have, I would have been much better off and had many more options in my life. I’m just giving them the opportunity and I think they deserve the opportunity – what child doesn’t?” – Rashford gets his MBE. RECOMMENDED LOOKING It’s David Squires on … the Premier League’s mechanical pencil of Damocles. FIVER LETTERS “Good luck to Eddie Howe on his appointment as Newcastle manager (yesterday’s News, Bits and Bobs). I wonder, though, if his appointment is the result of some sort of cultural misunderstanding? Did the Saudi representatives at the club mistake the common Geordie expression of warning or exasperation ‘How man!’ as some sort of indication of their preference for the next boss?” – John Lawton. “While we’re on a Fiver nostalgia trip (Fiver letters passim), whatever happened to Orm? There is a depicted goal- (or bad miss-) shaped diagram missing from my life which I would love to see come back, even as a one-off. Please? Pretty please?” – Alistair Moffat [here are some oldies for you – Fiver Ed]. “I am another reader from those early 21st century days. From memory, there were three stories back then. It wasn’t always easy to find the words to fill them, though. Once upon a time The Fiver auctioned off the third Friday story. My Sunday morning team – Lockers FC (Hackney Marshes 2001-2011) – won the bidding war. So not only have I been reading The Fiver forever, I have also actually paid for it” – Dan Ashley. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Dan Ashley. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS A new survey has revealed 20% of female supporters reported having experienced unwanted physical attention when attending men’s games, up from 8% in 2014. Bad news for David Moyes as West Ham could be without key defender Angelo Obonna for the rest of the season after he sustained cruciate knee-gah. Manchester United’s Paul Pogba has sustained thigh-ouch on France duty and faces up to two months on the sidelines. Norwich City may be set to become Frank Lampard’s Norwich City in the wake of Daniel Farke’s exit. Up for the Cup, and up the top of a hill. Morecambe being drawn to play at Buxton’s Silverlands, the highest ground in England, is the highlight of the FA Cup second-round draw. And Shamrock Rovers have banned two fans from home games indefinitely for getting Friday’s Airtricity League game at Waterford suspended by letting off fireworks above the pitch. “It is regrettable that the actions of two individuals caused reputational damage to the club and was not reflective of the atmosphere and support from the large away crowd of over 350 fans who supported the team throughout, enjoying a 3-1 win,” tooted a statement. RECOMMENDED VOTING The FSA Awards are coming soon and various members of Big Website are up for gongs. Vote now and vote regularly. STILL WANT MORE? George Cox overcame heart surgery and not making the grade at Brighton to become a player to watch in the Eredivisie with Fortuna Sittard. He gets his chat on with Will Unwin. Eddie Howe can do a job for Newcastle even if the presence of preferred candidates bodes ill, reckons floating brain in a jar Jonathan Wilson. Premier League clubs are in full “Do One” mode. Ed Aarons on a season so far of the long knives. Conor Gallagher of Crystal Palace is one of the breakout players of the season, but he belongs to Chelsea. Ben McAleer profiles the Epsom-born blonde bombshell. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ‘VEGAN MINCE?’As the winter days close in and the bracing weather causes many to seek refuge indoors we would like to hear about your favourite permanent exhibitions in the UK’s art galleries and museums. Those that you have returned to time and time again. Whether it is the David Hockney collection at Salts Mill in Saltaire, West Yorkshire, or the works of the sculptor Henry Moore at Tate Britain, or the exhibit of 8,000 ancient Egyptian artefacts at the Museum and Art Gallery in Birmingham. Tell us about an exhibition that you love and why for your chance to win. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 16 November at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy hereFans of Kanye West are used to waiting years for the mercurial artist to drop a new album, but the state of California is putting its foot down on shipping delays by his fashion line. Yeezy Apparel, the company founded by Ye (the name West now goes by), will pay $950,000 to settle a lawsuit brought by the Los Angeles county district attorney’s office over shipping delays and false advertisement. The settlement was reached less than two weeks after the DA’s office sued the company for “unlawful business conduct” dating back at least four years. Yeezy’s distinctive foam runners and slippers come in bold colors and shapes that resemble anything from clouds to a small pet, with prices ranging from $200 to nearly $500. The first Yeezy product – a sneaker produced in collaboration with Nike – hit the market in 2009, and the brand gained design credibility and popularity over the years. By 2015, Ye had launched the second season of Yeezy products at New York Fashion Week. But according to the Los Angeles DA, Yeezy repeatedly violated a California state law that requires online shopping items to be delivered within 30 days. In the event of delays, the statute requires the company to either refund customers’ money, replace the goods, or provide a “written notice” to the customer withdetails of how long the delay may be. The complaint also alleged that Yeezy made “untrue or misleading statements” about its capacity to ship orders within a specific timeline, especially in cases where customers paid extra for expedited service. “Online consumers are entitled to protection against unwarranted fees and unreasonably long waits for purchases to arrive on their doorsteps,” the district attorney, George Gascón. “We will enforce state and federal laws governing online shopping in Los Angeles county.” Lauren E Willis, associate dean for research and law professor at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles, said she thought it was unlikely that other companies would face legal troubles over shipping delays. “Although false advertising is false advertising even if the business did not know at the time that it was lying, the government is likely to concentrate its limited resources on pursuing businesses for false statements about delivery only when the government believes the business knew, or any reasonable business should have known, that the statement was false,” Willis told the Guardian. Hoon Chun, the DA’s deputy head of consumer protection, told the Guardian his office was investigating “dozens” of similar cases, but that the targets were confidential unless and until a case is filed. In 2019, the fast fashion retailer Fashion Nova settled a similar case brought by the LA district attorney for $1.75m. Willis says the government needs such interventions to protect consumers as well as competitors. “When a business advertises to consumers using claims it knows are false, the government needs to come in and stop it,” she said. “It is unfair to competitors that are truthfully telling consumer shoppers that their items will not arrive for a few weeks.” David Schindler, Ye’s lawyer, declined to comment on the settlement. Yeezy did not immediately respond to a request for comment.There is something almost sadistic in the way Boris Johnson sends ministers to be tormented on television in defence of the indefensible. There is nothing new in politicians squirming through interviews, and prime ministers have always performed U-turns, humiliating MPs who had reluctantly stood by the abandoned policy. But with Johnson the practice is so common it looks like a system. He tests the limits of shamelessness, using the dignity of his cabinet as a probe. The past week has seen a parade of secretaries of state making excuses for Downing Street, allowances for sleaze and fools of themselves all at the same time. Some actually believe the wretched drivel, others abase themselves in hope of future favour. But Johnson expects loyalty the way a capricious emperor demands tribute. It must be rendered without conditions or camaraderie. If it suits the prime minister to cut his most loyal servants loose, he will do it in a flash. The case of Robert Buckland, shuffled out of the cabinet in September, is instructive. Buckland’s appointment as justice secretary followed his endorsement of Johnson’s leadership bid in 2019, which surprised many colleagues. He had been a staunch remainer and a standard-bearer for pro-European Conservatism before Brexit was even a word. But he was persuaded that Johnson’s cosiness with the Eurosceptic ultras was a tactical feint, and that the liberal, moderate “Boris” of London mayoralty vintage was the real one. Buckland nodded along as Johnson illegally prorogued parliament and again when he threatened to break international law to override the Brexit withdrawal agreement. He did not dissent when the government cast aside its statutory obligations on international aid spending, nor when it was found to have acted unlawfully by failing to publish public procurement contracts during the pandemic. It was Buckland’s job to go on television and explain, with a lawyer’s credentials and a queasy smile, that it really wasn’t such a big deal if the government had broken the law. When Matt Hancock ignored social distancing rules for an extramarital affair and questions were asked about the prime minister’s judgment in refusing to sack the health secretary promptly, trusty lieutenant Buckland was on hand with a defence. “The public are not interested in this issue because it has no bearing on the public interests,” he said. The furore had been whipped up by embittered enemies who resented Johnson’s uncanny ability to keep “his finger on the pulse of the nation”. It was a telling comment because it used popularity as a measure of ethics. It made explicit a recalibration of Conservative values to define as virtue whatever Johnson might get away with. Servility did not spare Buckland the sack. Does anyone in the court of King Boris think they would be treated better? If so, they should scroll further back through Johnson’s record of personal and professional relationships and count how many ended in betrayal. When Theresa May resigned, plenty of Tory MPs thought Johnson’s indiscipline and absent moral compass made him unfit to be prime minister. They weighed that qualm against his mesmeric campaigning prowess and the absence of any better ideas. The gamble paid off. But it offends Conservative self-esteem to admit that the party took a mercenary punt on a charismatic scoundrel. So a respectable plan has been retro-fitted on to the leadership. Johnsonism is elaborated as a new chapter in the Conservative creed: an embrace of an activist state for the purposes of “levelling up” and the end of free-market fundamentalism. Downing Street is credited with mapping a new electoral centre-ground, capturing Labour terrain on public investment while holding a Conservative line in culture wars, effecting a once-per-generation realignment – the tumbling of the “red wall”. Johnson did not discover that strategy. He inherited it from May, who had failed to pull it off in 2017. (She made vital inroads in constituencies that then fell in 2019, but gets no credit because of all the seats she lost elsewhere.) A question that now hangs over Tory MPs is how much of their parliamentary supremacy is a function of the leader’s personality and, by extension, what would be left if his personal brand got broken. The 2019 intake of Tories was notably less biddable last week when Downing Street wanted to nobble the system for policing parliamentary standards. That might indicate closer tuning to the mood in newly acquired seats. There is a scratchiness to the mesh of rich Tories, sleazy favours and bending the rules that could penetrate Johnson’s Teflon coating. The safe bet has thus far been that nothing sticks to him for long, and there is not sufficient evidence yet of his luck running out. But there is also no reason to expect Johnson’s partnership with his party to follow a different course to all of his other relationships. The precedent is estrangement caused by his selfishness, cowardice and duplicity. So far the “Boris” product line and the Conservative party have operated as a successful joint venture. But it would be a mistake to think of them as a single enterprise. Over time, as MPs and ministers are expected to do more for the leader and get less in return, they will notice something parasitical in the arrangement; how thin and brittle Tory identity has become in the leader’s shadow. When the day comes that Johnson’s finger slips from the pulse of the nation, it will be interesting to see what remains of the party that gambles everything on the magic of his touch. Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnistLike a llama chewing its cud, Peru begins placidly: there is a display of pots. You could be forgiven for feeling a bit underwhelmed. But this exhibition’s calm, steady pace and cool layout provide essential grounding as you try to get your head around 2,000 years of ritual warfare, human sacrifice and top-notch hallucinogenics. This is not really an exhibition about Peru, the modern country, but the civilisations of the Andes that long preceded its existence. It traces the cultures of this mountain region from antiquity up to 1534, when Francisco Pizarro and a band of Spanish conquistadors defeated the Inca empire. Ancient Peru’s peoples, from the Chavín culture that goes back to about 800BC through the great art of the Nasca and Moche to the rise of the Incas, are lucidly presented. Once you acclimatise to all the clay and amazingly preserved textiles, you are in a lost world of addictive spectacle and mystery. Plenty of people have lost their heads over ancient Peru. I first read about the Nasca lines, giant earth drawings up to 2km across on the desert plain between the Andes and the Pacific, when I was a child. Unfortunately my source was Erich Von Däniken’s book Chariots of the Gods? which claimed they were UFO landing strips. So did the Nasca get alien help? No. They did use a lot of narcotics, though. A gripping display of Nasca art at the heart of this show proves that far from being a random cosmic mystery, these giant pictures of animals are the summit of a stupendous visual culture. One of the most beautiful geoglyphs portrays a stylised hummingbird with thin elongated shafts representing feathers: in front of a drone video of it is a 2,000-year-old textile embroidered with the same hummingbird designs. You couldn’t have clearer proof that the Nasca lines are rooted in human culture, not extraterrestrial activity. When the Nasca people were making their humongous art, the Roman empire was rising and falling. But there was no connection between people in the Americas and Europe, Asia or Africa. The civilisations we meet here rose and fell to their own drum beat. There are clay pipes here made by the Nasca – but they weren’t for entertainment. A painted vase depicts a shaman in a monstrous mask and a snaky headdress – or does he have real snakes on his head? – holding his pan pipes among a gathering of fellow musicians as he goes into a trance and communes with animal spirits. Next to him is a San Pedro cactus, whose hallucinogenic flesh he has consumed to open the doors of perception. Maybe the Nasca went out into the desert high on cactus to draw their totem animals. Even stoned, they had a superb eye for nature. Killer whales, monkeys, snakes and felines are depicted with crisp, strong lines and colour. A vase takes the form of a tall, wavy stalk of maize, the agricultural crop that sustained civilisation in the Andes. What does that word, “civilisation”, mean? Technically just a society with cities, farming and an organised culture. But we load it with moral values. The civilisations of pre-colonial America combined urban ambition with beliefs in which human blood was essential to keep the universe in balance. The reality of human sacrifice hits you in front of one of the most incredible artefacts here, an embroidered cloth to wrap a dead body, made by the Nasca around the time of Christ. It’s covered with jaunty dancing figures in bestial masks, each of whom is dangling a severed head by its hair. The Nasca shared these sacrificial beliefs with the Moche culture, which flourished in northern Peru from around AD100 to 800. Warriors took part in ritualised battles – but the aftermath was not friendly. Moche sculptures portray the defeated, tied up to await sacrifice. Their faces are studied with tragic precision. One bound prisoner on a model boat maintains dignity as the looming death god rows him to the site of sacrifice. He throws his body back as if in acceptance. This exhibition takes you outside yourself, if you let it, into a world of predatory gods and magic music. The most amazing object is a giant clay drum, from the Nasca civilisation, painted with images of ritual war and sacrifice. Bewhiskered gnashing gods hold the heads of the defeated. Monkey-like zombies hang in the trees. Trophy heads are transformed into the spirits of ancestors. The scene is held together by writhing forms that are half-snake, half-cactus. It is like a manic masterpiece of street art. Even when they weren’t ingesting psychedelic cacti, these ancient peoples regularly chewed coca leaves. Imagery on pots shows how lime was mixed with coca to enhance its effect by specialised coca officials – whose bureaucratic job title goes to show how complex these societies were. The last indigenous rulers of the Andes, the Incas, built a network of roads with runners stationed at intervals to carry messages and gifts: a clay model of a muscular leg celebrates their running power. The Incas took power late, as it would turn out, in the story of the pre-colonial Americas. Originating around Cusco, their capital, from the early 1400s they conquered a vast area that spread into modern Ecuador, Colombia, Bolivia and Chile as well as Peru. The exhibition shows how they used elaborate knotted strings to record crucial information. And a ceramic model of a hoe documents their agricultural revolution, in which they terraced the Andes to grow maize at ever-higher altitudes. They too had coca. An embroidered Inca bag has still got fragments of centuries-old coca leaves inside. They also refined the art of human sacrifice. Selected children were taken to lofty mountain sanctuaries to be slain. They were buried with little doll-like figurines. The doll-sized clothes from these victims’ graves are on view. What would have happened next in the Andes? A film of the legendary Inca city Machu Picchu dwells on astounding details of its architecture and engineering. Even the conquistadors admitted the cities they saw rivalled Europe’s. If the Spanish had never arrived it is completely possible to imagine the Inca empire striding forward technologically, moving towards some other version of a modern world. In fact this show downplays the Incas, because it wants us to discover the peoples who came before them. What astonishes in the art of the Nasca and Moche is a combination of matter-of-fact verisimilitude with fantastic and shocking content, dry clay and wet gore. Peru is a lime-sharp cocktail of the real and visionary. Peru: A Journey in Time is at the British Museum, London, from 11 November to 20 February.The interviewer Maureen Cleave, who has died aged 87, wrote the first notable newspaper article about four “fresh young jokers” from Liverpool, titled “Why the Beatles Create All That Frenzy”, for the Evening Standard in 1963. Three years later, her interview with John Lennon detonated the “Jesus controversy” in the US. Lennon told Maureen in 1966 that the band had become “more popular than Jesus. I don’t know which will go first – rock’n’roll or Christianity.” As the band embarked on a 14-city tour, fans across the Bible belt burned the group’s records and mementoes on public bonfires in outrage and, by the year’s end, the Beatles had decided never to play in public again. Maureen said: “John was certainly not comparing the Beatles with Christ. He was simply observing that so weak was the state of Christianity that the Beatles were, to many people, better known. He was deploring, rather than approving, this.” She said later that Lennon had intended to be ironic. Lennon himself actually thanked Jesus in a book published by Yoko Ono in 1986: “If I hadn’t upset the very Christian Ku Klux Klan, well, Lord, I might still be up there with all the other performing fleas.” Such was the trust Maureen enjoyed with the Beatles that the Fab Four frequently sought sanctuary from the screaming hordes at her London flat in Maida Vale. Since Ringo Starr had once revealed that, wherever they toured, the only place secure from fans was the bathroom of their hotel, the Standard wittily photographed them with her in Maureen’s bathroom for a street poster. “Lennon was the most interesting of them,” Maureen wrote, “imperious, unpredictable, indolent, disorganised, childish, vague, arrogant and very good at answering back.” And yet he also listened. In 1964 Lennon showed her the lyrics for A Hard Day’s Night scrawled down on a birthday card that had been sent from a fan to his little son Julian: “When I get home to you / I find my tiredness is through …” “Rather a feeble line about tiredness,” she said. Lennon borrowed her pen and wrote instead: “When I get home to you / I find the things that you do / Will make me feel all right.” Three hours later, the record was made. Today Julian’s birthday card is in the British Library. From 1970, Maureen and I worked together for many years on Fleet Street papers, where she became one of the most exacting and entertaining interviewers in an era when some journalists became as well known as their subjects. Maureen, however, remained the invisible woman. Clearsighted and persistent, she was a stickler for accuracy while pursuing “an incurable nosiness inherited from my mother”. She much preferred interviewing non-celebrities, eschewing actors and politicians “because they’ve said it all before”. Instead she sought to question remarkable men and women about their inner resources. One of the most fascinating that sticks in the mind was published in 1979. “A Brahms concerto can take a heavy toll of a piano,” she learned from the Steinway piano technician Bob Glazebrook, who visited London’s concert halls to tune the instrument chosen by a great performer for that night’s show. Ashkenazy? The 481. Barenboim? The 770. He could recognise a model playing on the radio, such as the 730 on tour with Elton John in Moscow. “I don’t think it was tuned all the time it was there,” said Glazebrook. In an interview in 1980 the Oxfordshire headteacher DF Goldsmith told Maureen his golden rule: “Do not bore the boys. Never let them know what you’re going to do next.” In 1983 Maureen found that the Guinness heiress Aileen Plunket “carried a rush basket with her diary, address book and fine lawn handkerchief. There are baskets all over the house and she sorts things from one to the other.” In 1985 Little Richard talked of his childhood in Georgia where “the kids played in the dust on the ground. It was the colour of my skin … The dirt was the same colour as we were.” The same year, the chairman of the National Vegetable Society, Donald Maclean, told Maureen that he grew the largest collection of potatoes in private hands in the world. He enthused: “Catriona 1924, the old established queen of potatoes, reigns supreme.” Maureen’s top tip was: “Take notes and be seen to be taking notes because it inspires trust. You’d be appalled by the number of interviewers who rely on their memory for recall. No wonder people complain about being misquoted.” She always read a draft of her articles over the phone for her subject to factcheck and said Lord (Max) Rayne, the former chairman of the National Theatre, was the only person to withdraw permission for publication as a result. Born near Delhi, India, Maureen was the elder daughter of an Irish mother, Isabella (nee Browne), and an English father, John Cleave, a major in the 7th Rajputs. In 1940 Isabella and Maureen were returning to India after a visit to Ireland when their ship, SS City of Simla, was torpedoed. Maureen documented this drama in the Telegraph magazine in 1999. She remembered being rescued, aged six, after six hours in a lifeboat and someone with a mouth organ playing Tipperary. “Not once does my mother mention what she felt,” she wrote. She conceded that Isabella “was the best possible mother for a journalist: honest, observant and imaginative … When she told you a story she gave you the facts, no wasted words.” After schooling at Rosleven in Ireland, Maureen studied history at St Anne’s College, Oxford, from 1954. There she became the first woman invited to speak at the Oxford Union debating society. Maureen said recently that in the 1950s, even with a degree from Oxford, a woman was expected to go into secretarial work. Hence she went to the Evening Standard in 1958 initially as secretary to the editor. When Charles Wintour took the helm in 1959, Maureen insisted that the paper needed a page devoted to younger readers, and he asked her to write it. She was soon delivering a weekly pop column called Disc Date, guesting on the weekly TV panel show Juke Box Jury and becoming a chronicler of 60s London with a regular “Maureen Cleave Interview”. Wintour described her as one of his two “absolutely favourite writers”. Maureen married one of her university admirers, Francis Nichols, in 1966, which prompted the Beatles to send a telegram. The couple spent three years in Peru, and moved from London to his family home, Lawford Hall in Essex, when his mother, Phyllis, died in 1972. There Francis settled as an arable farmer. Maureen continued freelancing into her 70s for the Telegraph magazine, Saga magazine, the Observer and Intelligent Life. Francis died in 2015. Maureen is survived by their three children, Sadie, Dora and Bertie. • Maureen Cleave (Maureen Diana Nichols), journalist, born 20 October 1934; died 6 November 2021NHS staff in England will be have to be vaccinated against Covid by April in order to keep their jobs, the health secretary has announced. While 90% of NHS staff are fully vaccinated, there remain 103,000 workers who have not had a single dose, Sajid Javid said. Staff will be offered one-to-one meetings with clinicians if they want to discuss their concerns. Three NHS workers share their views on mandatory vaccination, backing the policy but others voicing concern that it will exacerbate staffing issues. ‘We should be setting the example to patients’ Tom, a 41-year-old physiotherapist in Leeds, received his booster jab last weekend and believes health workers have a responsibility to set an example for their patients. “When I initially qualified I was expected to be vaccinated against diseases like hepatitis – it seemed like a perfectly reasonable thing to do, given that we’re regularly seeing vulnerable members of society,” he says. He reasoned that while existing health workers will not have known about a Covid vaccine requirement before they took on the job, the profession requires adaptability “when the healthcare environment changes … [which] obviously Covid has done on a massive level”. Amid the proliferation of myths around vaccination, which he credits partially to “social media echo chambers”, the physiotherapist believes it is crucial for NHS workers to be primed to explain the risks and benefits of vaccination. “I had a patient in recently who voiced concerns about the vaccine. I told him I was happy about the fact that I was having my booster. It felt like a relatively powerful thing that I could say to him.” ‘It’s good to encourage people to protect themselves’ Mary*, a 29-year-old junior doctor in a hospital in the East Midlands, is fully vaccinated and, while broadly in favour of compulsory vaccinations, wishes the issue could be approached differently. “I’m of the opinion that it’s good to encourage people to protect themselves,” she says, but as the issue of transmission among vaccinated people still remains, there should be “more clarity for the reasons behind it”. The junior doctor is concerned that some members of staff who feel hesitant will need more support before agreeing to take up the vaccine. “I worry that the people who aren’t going to choose to have it are people who are already in more financially precarious jobs. I hope they are supported to make the right decision,” she says. Mary says reasons for hesitancy among some colleagues included worries around short-term side effects that could cause them to miss work or childcare. While her workplace has held “teams meetings where people can talk about the vaccine”, she thinks a more personalised approach would be more effective. “My feeling is one-on-one sessions with people that you know and trust, like a line manager or someone in your team, are more likely to make a difference.” ‘We respect patients’ choices, why doesn’t that apply to us?’ Anne*, a student nurse in Yorkshire who has not had the vaccine over concerns about potential side effects, is against the mandate. The 20-year-old, who is on placement at a hospital, says she “suffers anxiety every day” in case she’s confronted by vocal staff about her choice. “There will be a large number of people who feel like me but wouldn’t stick their heads over the parapet,” she says. “You want to be honest, but then other people end up finding out and they look down on you.” Anne, who is “up to date” with all her other vaccines but worries about the Covid jab “because it’s new”, is seriously considering not taking up the jab, even if it means being forced to leave her nursing course. “There’s a lot to balance up – it’s quite scary. I love what I do, but part of nursing is to give people an informed choice and respect their decision. We do that all the time with patients – why doesn’t it apply to us in this situation?” Anne has concerns that the policy could result in some staff deciding to leave rather than get vaccinated. “If that happens I’ll be working on wards even more short staffed than before – particularly the lower paid staff that are absolutely vital but not recognised. They’ll probably fill gaps at Amazon and Costa where you don’t come across bodily fluids and death.” * Names have been changedThe EU has condemned the president of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko, for acting like a “gangster”, amid a worsening humanitarian crisis at the country’s border with Poland. The Belarusian government has been been accused of sending refugees to the EU’s external border in an attempt to punish the bloc for criticism of Lukashenko’s domestic crackdown on dissent. Hundreds of people continued to travel on Tuesday as the Polish government announced that between 3,000 and 4,000 people had been settled in an improvised camp on the border just across from its village of Kuźnica. In a first response to the unfolding situation, the 27 EU member states agreed to suspend an EU-Belarus visa facilitation agreement on Tuesday, as the Slovenian presidency of the bloc castigated Minsk for “playing with people’s lives for political purposes”. A spokesperson for the European Commission said it was unacceptable for Lukashenko’s government to use people as political pawns. “This is part of the inhuman and really gangster-style approach of the Lukashenko regime that he is lying to people, he is misusing people, misleading them, and bringing them to Belarus under the false promise of having easy entry into the EU,” the spokesperson said. Poland has sent about 11,000 soldiers to the border area, created a militarised zone two miles deep, built a razor-wire fence and approved the construction of a border wall. It is also enforcing a state of emergency in the region, complete with a media blackout. Lithuania’s parliament voted on Tuesday to introduce a state of emergency on its border with Belarus, where migrants have attempted to cross, and at detention camps in the capital and elsewhere. The decision will give Lithuanian police additional powers to expel asylum-seekers and restricts travel and public gatherings near the border. Lukashenko and the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, spoke by phone on Monday and expressed concern about the buildup of Polish troops at the border, the Belarusian state news agency Belta reported on Tuesday. “To conduct a war with these unfortunate people on the border of Poland with Belarus and move forward columns of tanks – it’s clear this is either a training exercise or it’s blackmail,” Lukashenko said. “We will calmly stand up to this.” In a thinly veiled, but probably empty, threat, he added that Russia could be forced to intervene. “We are not bullying … Because we know that if, God forbid, we make some mistake, if we stumble, it will immediately draw Russia into this whirlpool and this is the largest nuclear power,” he said. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has suggested that the EU provide Belarus with financial assistance to stop the flow of refugees, referencing an earlier deal with Turkey. Brussels said it was in talks with 13 countries that could be sources of people for Belarus to send to the EU’s external border. They are Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Georgia, Guinea, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Pakistan, Tajikistan, and Turkey. Minsk has reportedly issued special visas allowing people to fly into Belarus from Iraq and other Middle Eastern countries. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, said: “The Belarusian regime is attacking the Polish border, the EU, in an unparalleled manner. We currently have a camp of migrants who are blocked from the Belarusian side. “These are aggressive actions that we must repel, fulfilling our obligations as a member of the European Union.” Germany’s interior minister, Horst Seehofer, said EU countries had to stand together in the face of a “hybrid threat” posed by “politically organised migration”. “The Poles have reacted correctly so far,” Seehofer told the German newspaper Bild of Poland’s reinforcement of the border. “We cannot criticise them for securing the EU’s external border with admissible means. The Poles are fulfilling a very important service for the whole of Europe.” Polish police blocked hundreds of people from entering the country on Monday after Belarusian authorities had escorted them to the border. A Polish government spokesperson said it was prepared for further incidents as more people gathered. “We expect that there may be an escalation of this type of action on the Polish border in the near future, which will be of an armed nature,” he said. Hundreds of people spent Monday night in tents in a camp along the border, gathering firewood and lighting campfires as temperatures fell below freezing. Poland’s Kuźnica border crossing was closed early on Tuesday, and police monitoring the area with night-vision and thermal imaging reported a large detachment of Belarusian troops approaching the camp. During clashes on Monday, video footage emerged that appeared to show an armed Polish officer spraying chemicals at men who were trying to cut the razor-wire border fence. Others tried to clear the fence by climbing long wooden poles or branches. Polish police were hit with objects thrown from the Belarusian side as helicopters hovered above. Gunshots were audible in several videos posted online on Monday evening. Many of those seeking entry into Poland are desperately fleeing war and poverty-racked countries in the Middle East. Most want to reach Germany, which said it had received more than 6,100 refugees via Poland from Belarus since the beginning of the year. Poland, a member of the EU and Nato, has drawn sharp criticism for its tough rhetoric on migration in recent years. The latest comments from Seehofer, Von der Leyen and others suggest a softening of the approach towards the country’s rightwing government. Those attempting to cross from Belarus into the EU have become trapped between the two countries since October, when Polish police were authorised to summarily expel migrants and ignore asylum applications. Belarusian border guards have refused to allow them to turn back. Belarus has denied it has any hand in directing the flow of people. “The indifference and inhumane attitude of the Polish authorities has prompted the refugees to take such a step of despair,” the Belarusian border guard said in a statement.One of the world’s most renowned dance institutions is to offer a two-year intensive training course to aspiring hip-hop artists, covering performing arts, graffiti and DJing. Sadler’s Wells plans to open a hip-hop academy at its new east London venue, with the first intake of students enrolling in 2024. The diploma course for 16- to 19-year-olds will provide training in live performance and theatre production at an international standard, including classes on breaking, popping, rap, DJing, beatmaking and graffiti. Jonzi D, who founded Breakin’ Convention, the international festival of hip hop dance theatre, in 2004, has been appointed the academy’s artistic director. Hip hop culture had “produced the fastest growing artistic movement on Earth,” he said. Breaking has been recognised as an Olympic sport and will feature at the Paris games in 2024. Breaking GB, created earlier this year to fund and train competitive dancers, will also be involved in the Sadler’s Wells training course and plans to bring Olympic athletes to the academy to share their expertise. Alistair Spalding, Sadler’s Wells artistic director and chief executive, said: “It is such an exciting opportunity to be able to offer training to young people specifically in hip hop dance theatre, to develop the next generation of hip-hop theatre artists.” Sadler’s Wells East is due to open in 2023 at the Queen Elizabeth Olympic park in Stratford, east London. It will house a 550-seat theatre, the hip-hop academy and a choreography school. The venue will open with Our Mighty Groove, a dance production featuring non-professional dancers from the local area. The choreography, by Vicki Igbokwe, incorporates styles such as house, waacking, vogue, African and contemporary dance. “It’s important to nurture, empower and support the next generation of performers and members of society to find their voice and influence,” said Igbokwe. Justine Simons, deputy London mayor for culture and the creative industries, said: “London needs big forward-looking, ambitious creative projects as we recover from this pandemic – and culture and the creative industries will play a huge role in our economic recovery.” Sadler’s Wells claims to commission and produce more dance than any other institution in the world, including ballet, tap, street dance, salsa and flamenco.Way back in 2008, a little movie named Iron Man introduced us to the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Debuting the same year as Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight, it featured many of the same themes as the Batman sequel: a rich, flawed superhero protagonist who relies on technology rather than superpowers to fight the bad guy; living, breathing, human villains to be taken down, and a neo– real world setting in which the laws of nature seem to be reasonably close to those in our own reality. But while Nolan’s determination to ground his trilogy in verisimilitude barely wavered through his next and final instalment of the Dark Knight Trilogy, 2012’s The Dark Knight Rises, Robert Downey Jr’s Iron Man has since been on a journey in which he fights off an alien invasion, battles genocidal, godlike extraterrestrials and even invents time travel. Before his ultimate self-sacrifice in 2019’s Avengers: Endgame, his superhero pals have included a near-omnipotent being that evolved from a Siri-style virtual assistant, various Norse deities and a number of reality-bending sorcerers and witches. It is fair to say it has been quite a journey. Marvel spent more than a decade and more than 20 films slowly swelling to the cosmic climax of Endgame, and was rewarded with unprecedented acclaim for its intelligent, considered world-building. Even cineastes not naturally disposed towards superhero fare recognised the studio had pulled off an impressive feat, a vast spider-web of storytelling resulting in dozens of interconnected episodes, each one enriched by those that sit before or after it in the creative architecture. It is perhaps little surprise then, that Chloé Zhao’s Eternals has received short shrift from audiences and critics alike (it bears a Rotten Tomatoes rating of just 47%) for completely failing to follow the basic set of rules that Marvel itself set in place all those years ago. Instead of gently introducing the titular alien defenders of Earth in preceding episodes, 10 of them are dumped on us all at once in the space of an hour. And just as we’ve barely got our heads around the idea that these extraterrestrial interlopers are here to protect Earth and its human denizens from the evil, monstrous Deviants, it turns out that their true task is to sit back with a bag of popcorn while a giant being known as a Celestial emerges from the Earth’s core and destroys the entire sentient population of the planet. Perhaps Marvel felt that having already journeyed so far down the cosmic comic book rabbit hole in previous episodes, audiences would be ready for some truly next-level intergalactic nuttiness. Unfortunately it’s hard to really connect with impossibly powerful heroes, even if they have been living relatively human lives for the past 500 years, when it only seems as if you met them five minutes ago. Even the introduction of Marvel’s first gay and deaf superheroes, Brian Tyree Henry’s Phastos and Lauren Ridloff’s Makkari, doesn’t end up being enough to ground the whole dazzling tapestry of superpowered silliness in anything approaching reality. So where does Eternals go next? Marvel has made missteps before on the road to success: the 2013 Thor sequel The Dark World foolishly introduced po-faced nefarious space elves with pointy ears, yet the series was able to get back on track with Taika Waititi’s breezy and ebullient Thor: Ragnarok, which brilliantly reinvented Chris Hemsworth’s son of Odin as a comedy figure. The 2015 Peyton Reed entry Ant-Man was a fairly prosaic introduction to Marvel for Paul Rudd’s size-shifting superhero, yet the character has since grown in stature both literally and figuratively. The problem for Eternals is that the future of the franchise seems to be out there in the cosmos. Three of our merry band, Thena, Druig and Makkari, end up spinning off into space in search of other Eternals by the time the credits roll, while a mid-credits scene suggests the arrival of the Titan Eros (brother of Thanos) might hold the key to that mission. Wouldn’t the Eternals be better off engaging in more down-to-Earth pursuits? If Zhao’s film has any saving graces, it’s that there are some interesting snatches of characterisation amid the common or garden superhero mulch. The idea of a standalone movie starring Kumail Nanjiani’s Bollywood A-lister Kingo or even Henry’s gay dad Phastos (certainly in the hands of a genuine visionary such as Waititi) somehow seems a lot more palatable than Eternals 2: Let’s Meet Some More Blimmin Eternals. Barry Keoghan’s Druig, with his pleasingly off-kilter moral compass, is surely a character with a Loki-like potential for terrestrial mischief-making. There is something tantalisingly comic about Angelina Jolie’s impossibly statuesque Thena and her unfortunate tendency to start slicing and dicing anything in the room without regard to whether they are friend and foe. Perhaps she could team up with the similarly unhinged (at least in his original incarnation) Hulk for a buddy flick. And yet ultimately the problem is that (for perhaps the first time in its history) Marvel needs to find a way forward for a bunch of characters that never truly inspired that much in the first place. It’s a dilemma that rival studio DC has been wrestling with ever since the original Justice League movie failed to wow anyone ever. The difference is that Eternals doesn’t really make an impact on the core Marvel universe in the way that Superman, Batman and Wonder Woman are essential to DC. Perhaps Zhao’s entire movie could be explained away as just the result of Doctor Strange’s eating too much cheese before bedtime, a vision of what Marvel episodes might have been like in an alternative reality if the powers that be stopped paying attention. It certainly feels, even if it goes against the studio’s natural preference for ever-evolving narratives, as if we might all be better off pretending this one never actually happened.Diana Ross has been confirmed to play Glastonbury in 2022, more than two years since she was first announced to play the festival’s Sunday afternoon “legends” slot. Ross said she was “excited and grateful” to perform there amid the UK tour of her first new album in 15 years, Thank You. She was first announced in October 2019, saying then: “To all my fans across the world, this is my tribute to you. Every concert feels like a private party, I can see your eyes and feel your hearts. I’m coming to Glastonbury, with love.” Festival organiser Emily Eavis said she was “thrilled to be able to let you know that the magnificent Diana Ross is coming to play at Glastonbury next summer”. Ross will be 78 years old when she takes the Pyramid stage, whose crowds often top 100,000 people, making her one of the oldest to perform there – though that record still belongs to Burt Bacharach, who was 87 when he played in 2015. With 2020 and 2021’s events cancelled due to the Covid-19 pandemic, it is the longest time without a Glastonbury festival since a fallow spell in the late 1970s. Last year’s edition, the festival’s 50th anniversary, was due to be headlined by Paul McCartney, Taylor Swift and Kendrick Lamar, but it was cancelled in March as the pandemic worsened. Preparations continued for 2021’s event, but it too was cancelled in January. The festival site was instead used for camping during the summer, and for a one-off livestreamed concert Live at Worthy Farm, featuring sets from Coldplay, Damon Albarn and more. Billie Eilish has been announced as the first headline act for 2022, playing the Friday night in a concert Eavis described as “the perfect way to return”. The festival opens its gates on Wednesday 22 June. Ross is scheduled to play arena concerts across the UK that month in Manchester, Leeds, Glasgow, Liverpool, Birmingham, London and Durham.Boris Johnson rejects the idea of a blanket ban on lucrative second jobs for MPs but believes they must be “visible” to their constituents, No 10 has said. This amounts to implicit criticism of Sir Geoffrey Cox, the Conservative MP and former attorney general who it emerged was voting remotely during lockdown while in the Caribbean doing legal work for the the British Virgin Islands, a tax haven. Labour demanded an inquiry, saying his work was inappropriate because he was helping the BVI respond to a corruption investigation initiated by the UK government. (See 1.13pm.) Downing Street has announced MPs will get a second chance to approve the standards committee report saying Owen Paterson broke Commons rules. (See 12.27pm and 4pm.) All 1.4 million NHS staff in England will have to be vaccinated against Covid by next spring if they want to keep their jobs, Sajid Javid has told MPs. Anna Soubry, a former Conservative minister has accused the government of blacklisting dissenters in contests for senior public jobs after claiming she was overlooked for high-profile roles at Ofcom and the Charity Commission. Ireland has begun making contingency plans for a possible trade war between the EU and the UK in the event that Boris Johnson walks away from the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol. The UK has recorded 262 new Covid deaths, the government has revealed in its daily coronavirus dashboard update. This is the third highest daily figure for reported deaths since the second wave peak at the start of the year, only passed by the figures for 26 October (263) and 2 November (293). But the dashboard also shows that cases are on a downward trend, with 33,117 new cases recorded, and the weekly total for new cases down 14.8% on the previous week. Deaths tend to lag behind cases by three or more weeks, and the dashboard figures suggest that, after a recent increase, deaths may be starting to plateau. Week on week, they are now only up by 2.6%. Boris Johnson will travel to the Cop26 climate change summit in Glasgow tomorrow, Downing Street has announced. A No 10 spokesperson said: The prime minister is going up to meet negotiators, to get an update on progress in the talks and encourage ambitious action in the final days of the negotiations. The Economist’s Matthew Holehouse thinks it is a mistake for Labour to be attacking Sir Geoffrey Cox on the basis of the clients he is working for, as Anneliese Dodds has done in her letter to the PM today. (See 1.13pm.) Tom Newton Dunn from Times Radio thinks government whips are starting to brief against the PM. Chris Bryant, the chair of the Commons standards committee, has released the text of a letter he has received from Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, with the wording of the motions that MPs will vote on next week approving the committee’s report into Owen Paterson. No 10 announced the vote was coming at lobby. (See 12.27pm.) Angela Rayner, who as Labour’s deputy leader shadows Dominic Raab in his capacity as deputy PM, has written an open letter to Raab complaining about his claim this morning that Geoffrey Cox’s work in the British Virgin Islands was “quite important” because it was useful for parliament to have some knowledge of what is happening in the overseas territories. (See 9.40am.) She said: The Conservative member of parliament in question was not engaging in a fact-finding mission to gain more knowledge about the British Virgin Islands so we can take action against corruption, money laundering and tax avoidance in tax havens. He was advising the government of the British Virgin Islands, a tax haven accused of corruption, on their response to an investigation by our own government looking into evidence of corruption, abuse of office and serious dishonesty. In other words, he was advising the government of the British Virgin Islands against our own government on how to defend against allegations of corruption. Your comments typify the arrogant and out-of-touch approach of this corrupt Conservative government – showing no contrition at all for voting to support corruption and rip up the independent standards system, and now insulting the British people by suggesting that this Conservative member of parliament was actually acting in the best interests of voters here in Britain. In his point of order Chris Bryant also referred to the No 10 announcement that there would be a second vote next week on the standards committee report saying Owen Paterson broke the rules on lobbying. (See 12.27pm.) He asked the deputy speaker Nigel Evans if he had any more information about when that vote might take place. Mark Harper, the Tory former chief whip, said it was wrong for the announcement about next week’s vote to have been announced to the lobby, not to MPs in the chamber. Evans said he agreed it was “not really appropriate” for the announcement about this vote to have been made outside parliament. He also said it was “a shame” that the new vote was not announced earlier. In the Commons Chris Bryant, the chair of the Commons standards committee, has just announced that his committee has appointed a senior judicial figure to advise it on whether its procedures could be improved. This is a concession to those MPs, particularly Owen Paterson’s allies, who argued that Paterson did not get a fair hearing from the committee because its procedures were flawed. Their main complaints were that Paterson did not get a right of appeal, and that some of his witnesses were not heard by the committee. Bryant has argued that these complaints were unfounded, because Paterson did effectively get a right of appeal and because the views of his witnesses were fully taken into account. But he has accepted that some aspects of how the system works could be reformed. His committee is currently concluding an inquiry covering this very topic. Raising a point of order, Bryant told MPs: We have decided today that we will be commissioning a senior judicial figure to advise us on possible changes to the process. We’ve already taken advice today from Sir Stephen Irwin [the retired judge who chairs the Independent Expert Panel, the body dealing with cases involving bullying and sexual harassment complaints against MPs]. We believe that our present practices guarantee a fair hearing, but we will always consider suggestions for improvements. Here is my colleague Denis Campbell’s story about Javid’s announcement. Tim Loughton (Con) asks Javid what his assessment is of the proportion of the 103,000 unvacinated staff who are exempt. Javid says the impact statement will give more details. With care home staff, the announcement of a mandatory vaccination policy led to the number of staff getting vaccinated increased “dramatically”, he says. Mark Harper (Con) asks if the government will publish a plan explaining what will be done to deal with the vacancies created by this policy before MPs vote on it. Javid says an impact statement will be published today. And the government will publish more details of its workforce planning later. Clive Efford (Lab) asks if Javid will follow a suggestion from the royal colleges and the unions that FFP face masks should be compulsory for health workers. Javid says this is being kept under review. Jeremy Hunt, the Conservative former health secretary, welcomed the policy. And Matt Hancock, Javid’s immediate predecessor, has just told MPs that he was in favour too. He said he backed making flu vaccines compulsory too, and he said he was glad Javid has not ruled that out. In response, Javid paid tribute to Hancock for laying the foundations for the successful vaccination programme. Javid thanks Ashworth for his approach. He says the cross-party support for vaccines has been helpful. He says the vaccine take-up in the NHS in England is 93% for the first dose, and 90% for both doses. He says 103,000 people have not had a single jab. He says it is hard to know how many of them will now choose to get vaccinated. With care homes, once vaccination became mandatory for staff, a “significant number” of workers came forward to get vaccinated, he says. He says he would expect that to happen in the NHS too. Staff will be offered one-to-one meetings with clinicians if they want their concerns addressed, he says. Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, says he would urge Javid to proceed “with caution”. There are more than 90,000 vacancies across the NHS, he says. There will be anxiety at trust level that the policy, however desirable in principle, will exacerbate these problems, he says. He says they cannot afford to lose thousands of staff. He welcomes Javid’s decision to delay introducing this until next spring. But he has some questions. What is the number of NHS staff who are not vaccinated and who are not covered by exemptions? Will the testing regime for NHS staff change? Will visitors to hospitals be asked about their vaccination status? What analysis has been done of vaccine hesitancy in the NHS workforce? What more support will communities get to drive up vaccination rates? Javid says the government has already made vaccination mandatory for staff in care homes from 11 November. Since that was announced, the number of staff in care homes without at least one vaccine does has fallen from 88,000 to 32,000 at the start of last month. He says the government consulted on mandatory vaccination for NHS staff. He says the evidence tips to one side, and he is making vaccination compulsory, in line with advice from NHS leaders and the NHS chief executive. He says he has decided staff will have to get vaccinated. There will be two exceptions: for people who do not have face to face contact with patients, and for those who are medically exempt. He says an impact assessment of the plan will be published. And MPs will get a vote. The measure will be introduced under the 2008 Health and Social Care Act. The new rule will take effect 12 weeks after parliamentary approval, he says. He says the government wants to new condition to apply to staff from 1 April. Javid says despite the “fantastic rates of uptake”, MPs should encourage more people to get vaccinated. Vaccination is an emotive topic, he says. He says people working in health and social care have been “the best of us”, saving lives not only through their work, but by choosing to get vaccinated too. He says 90% of NHS staff have chosen to get fully vaccinated, although in some trusts the figure is closer to 80%. But he says NHS staff have a special responsibility. Their first duty is to avoid preventable harm to the people they care for. And they have responsibilities to their colleagues too. So “it cannot be business as usual when it comes to vaccination”, he says. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is starting his statement to MPs now. He says we are going into the winter “in a much stronger position than last year”. That is mostly because of the vaccine programme, he says. MPs will start a mini-recess tonight, meaning there will be no PMQs tomorrow. But the Lib Dems are saying it should be cancelled. Wendy Chamberlain, the Lib Dem chief whip, said: Boris Johnson must not run and hide from this sleaze scandal. The Conservatives are hoping that they will be saved by the bell, so they don’t have to answer questions on these allegations. It is utterly unacceptable. Any upstanding prime minister would show leadership and cancel parliament’s recess. Boris Johnson’s attempts to avoid accountability tells you all you need to know about this prime minister who is taking voters for granted. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is due to make a Commons statement soon in which he is expected to say that frontline NHS workers in England will have to be fully vaccinated. In Northern Ireland Michelle O’Neill, the Sinn Féin deputy first minister, said that the health minister in the Northern Ireland executive (the UUP’s Robin Swann) had yet to make recommendations on this issue. But she said she would have concerns about mandatory vaccination. She said: I have always been someone who would be more of an advocate of encouraging uptake of the vaccine, educating people as to why it’s so important and I think those people that work in the health service obviously understand that more than most. So let’s have that conversation with the health minister and if he brings forward a proposal then I’ll obviously have to consider that. I think mandatory vaccines are obviously something that is always going to come with its human rights concerns and others, so we have to take a decision based on having all that information. Labour is calling for an inquiry into Sir Geoffrey Cox’s work for a tax haven, the British Virgin Islands. In an open letter to the prime minister, Anneliese Dodds, the Labour chair, say she asssumes that Boris Johnson was “as shocked as everyone else” to discover what Cox had been up to (see 9.40am) and that Cox’s constituents will be wondering whether they are represented by “a Caribbean-based barrister or a Conservative MP”. But her letter mostly focuses on the work Cox was doing for the BVI, and whether this was appropriate for someone who until last year was the attorney general. She explains: As we saw with Owen Paterson just last week, Geoffrey Cox’s behaviour raises serious questions about the conflicts of interest between MPs having second jobs that involve them lobbying or otherwise directly engaging with the government. Sir Geoffrey has been advising the Government of the BVI on behalf of Withersworldwide LLP (‘Withers’) during an inquiry into possible “corruption, abuse of office or other serious dishonesty that has taken place in public office in recent years” – an inquiry that was initiated by the British Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, part of the government Sir Geoffrey himself served in as recently as February 2020. When approving his role at Withers, the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments (ACOBA) attached specific conditions to Sir Geoffrey’s appointment “to mitigate the potential risks to the government associated with this appointment” noting that in his case there were “unknown risks” as to what he might be asked to do on behalf of his new employer. He was required to “consult the AGO [Attorney General’s Office] at the earliest possible opportunity to seek advice in any case in which a risk might reasonably be considered to arise from a perception of overlap between your previous role and your new appointment”. He was also required not to draw on any privileged information available to him from his time in ministerial office, and for two years from his last day in ministerial office not to become personally involved in lobbying the UK government, not to make use – directly or indirectly – of his contacts in the government and/or Crown Service to influence policy, not to undertake any work that involves providing advice on bids or contracts relating directly to the work of the UK government, nor directly engage with the Attorney General’s Office on any other matters relating to Withers or their clients. ACOBA was clear that where Sir Geoffrey was in doubt he “must consult the Attorney General’s Office as to the appropriateness of any particular assignment”. It is hard to see how those terms can have been met if Sir Geoffrey has been advising a known tax haven in relation to a corruption investigation opened by the UK government itself. We need answers as to what’s been happening here. Dodds says it looks as if Cox would “rather get a tax haven off the hook than represent the interests of his constituents” and she asks Johnson if he is happy about that. She ends her letter: One MP found guilty by a cross-party committee of an egregious breach of standards rules. Another jetting halfway round the world to help an administration accused of corruption in an inquiry initiated by the British government. All on your watch. This is a question of leadership, prime minister. It’s time to act. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished. Here are the key points. Downing Street has implicitly critcised Sir Geoffrey Cox for the extent of his work outside parliament. At the briefing the No 10 spokesman said Johnson thought that serving constituents should be the “primary” role for an MP. But the spokesman did not criticise Cox directly, or suggest that he should resign as an MP, arguing that ultimately it was for the voters to judge him. The spokesman said: [MPs] should be visible in constituencies and available to help our constituents with their constituency matters. If they’re not doing that, they’re not doing their job and will rightly be judged on that by their constituents ... [The PM wants being an MP] to be the primary job [for MPs] and for MPs to serve their constituents. It’s incumbent on MPs to be visible and to demonstrate to their constituents that they are acting on behalf of them. But it is up to our constituents to make that judgment. The spokesman would not say whether Johnson had any regrets about not following his advice himself for a year. He was re-elected to parliament, as MP for Uxbridge and South Ruislip, in May 2015, but at the time he was mayor of London. He did not give up his mayoral post until May 2016, and during that year his presence in the Commons was relatively limited because he was mostly focused on his mayoral job. According to the Mirror’s Dan Bloom, Cox was spending an average of 22 hours per week on legal work over the past year. The spokesman said Johnson was opposed to an “outright ban on second jobs” for MPs. The spokesman said Johnson thought an outright ban would be wrong, because it would stop MPs working, for example, as part-time doctors or nurses. But the spokesman would not say whether Johnson favoured a ban on MPs working as political consultants. He said the rules on second jobs for MPs were a matter for the Commons. The spokesman confirmed that MPs would get a second chance to approve the standards committee report saying Owen Paterson broke Commons rules. The motion would be tabled today, the spokesman said. It would rescind the vote last week that proposed setting up a new committee chaired by John Whittingdale, and allow MPs to approve the report criticising Paterson, even though Paterson is no longer an MP. MPs will vote on the motion next week, after the mini-recess starting tonight. This sounds like a possible U-turn because in the Commons yesterday Stephen Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, implied there would not be a second vote. No 10 would not say that Johnson was sorry for what happened last week. Asked if the PM was sorry, the spokesman just referred journalists to what Johnson said in an interview about this yesterday (when he refused to apologise). The spokesman also referred to what Stephen Barclay said yesterday, about the government regretting what happened. When it was put to him that, because he would not say the PM was sorry, people would conclude Johnson was not sorry, the spokesman said the government thought it was regrettable that the vote last week conflated the Owen Paterson issue with the general issue of standards reform. Labour is calling for the government to “come clean” about exactly how levelling up money for individual constituencies is distributed. It said if the criteria for funding was clear, it would not be possible for Tory whips to threaten to withhold cash from places where the local MP was defying the government whip. Steve Reed, the shadow communities secretary, told the Today programme: There’s growing concern that ministers are misusing their power and potentially breaching the ministerial code of conduct to coerce MPs by making threats to funding for their constituents and that is a severely damaging approach for the government to be taking. [See 11.24am.] What we’ve had is a whole series of questions raised about how these different pots of money, different regeneration funds, are being governed and how they’re being applied to different constituencies. And what we’re calling on Michael Gove today to do - the secretary of state for levelling up - is to come clean about all conversations between ministers and MPs about the proposed bids, whether that’s the towns fund, the levelling up fund or other regeneration funds, but also to be clear about what the selection criteria are for funding so that it’s no longer possible, if that was published, for ministers to corruptly seek to influence decisions in order to coerce MPs. And here are some more lines from Dominic Raab’s interviews this morning on sleaze/standards/corruption issues. Raab insisted government constituency spending decisions were not related to whether or not the local MP defied the whip - although he did not deny that threats of this kind may have been made to some Tories. He told the Today programme: I’m not in the whips’ office, but I can tell you that government decisions on where investment is made [is] not to take in those political considerations. They’re taken with very clear processes that are followed. Asked if threats to punish MPs by withholding funding from their constituencies may have been made, Raab said: Well, I can’t tell you what happened between the whips and individual MPs, what I can tell you is that there are no Government decisions on investment across the country, that would have political influence beyond the correct official criteria, processes, procedures to make sure that money goes where it’s needed most and where it’s required. There have been various reports that threats of this kind were made to rebel Tories last week, although no MP has gone on the record to confirm this. Similar claims have been made in the past, as my colleague Aubrey Allegretti reported in September. The most detailed article on this topic may be this one by Paul Goodman for ConservativeHome. Goodman’s verdict is that the evidence is inclusive. Here is an extract. MPs who I’ve spoken to agree that, in a few cases, the government attempted to withdraw funding to which it was already committed from towns represented by independent-minded backbenchers, pleading new pressures on public spending. But there is no agreement about why it did so. One backbencher says he was told that the whips had compiled a list of MPs who would be affected; that the Treasury was responsible for the list – and that, after he made representations, the funding was restored. At no time was he told that the way in which he had voted or spoken was responsible for the planned cut. Another tells much the same tale, but with a twist: that, though he wasn’t told by either the whips or the Treasury that the way in which he had spoken or voted was responsible … he was told by other ministers that the way in which he had voted and spoken was responsible. Raab was unable to explain why Boris Johnson has refused to apologise for the Owen Paterson vote debacle. On the Today programme Raab was asked this seven times. Raab said he could not speak for the PM directly, but he said that Stephen Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, expressed regret for what happened yesterday, and he said he was happy to also express regret for this himself. Raab rejected claims that the Tories were effectively selling peerages to donors. He said: In relation to becoming appointed to the House of Lords there’s also very clear rules. I would just say that, of course, people who are entrepreneurs but also engaged in public service, whether that’s charities, whether that’s supporting political parties, do a public service. And certainly we benefit when the Conservative party has a treasurer ... people who’ve got that kind of experience. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, will make a statement in the Commons later on Covid, it has just been announced. Presumably he will announce the plan to make vaccination compulsory for frontline NHS staff in England. There are two urgent questions first, on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and racism in cricket, and so the Javid statement will probably not start until around 2pm. Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents hospitals and other NHS trusts, has also expressed concern about the plan to make vaccines mandatory for frontline NHS staff in England. (See 10.41am.) He told the the BBC Radio 5 Live this morning: You just have to look at what is happening in the care sector - the deadline for [care homes] is November 11 and they are saying they are very worried about the number of staff that they may lose as a result of this. So that’s why we have said to the government, we understand why you are doing this but please could you work closely with us to manage that risk? So yes we are worried, but the whole point is doing everything we can to ensure that risk of losing staff doesn’t materialise. As my colleague Aubrey Allgretti reported yesterday, there were 114 cases of Covid among people working in parliament last month. Today there is another, with the Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, saying he has tested positive. Less than three weeks ago Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, was defending the then refusal of most Tory MPs to wear masks in the Commons chamber, saying there was no need because they all knew each other, and shared “convivial fraternal spirit”. But since then habits have changed, and Conservative MPs have started wearing masks more often. The Unison union, which represents many health workers, has said that forcing frontline NHS staff in England to be fully vaccinated would be a mistake. Sara Gorton, the union’s head of health, told the Today programme this morning that making vaccination mandatory would be “really risky” because it could have “really, really difficult consequences for the NHS in what we know is going to be a really difficult winter”. She said: This isn’t about saying that it’s wrong, the vaccination programme is wrong, it’s saying that it is wrong to leap to the law, rather than stick with persuasion, conversation, peer group support to try and increase those rates beyond what is, let’s face it, a really, really high existing level of vaccination amongst NHS staff. According to the BBC’s health editor, Hugh Pym, an announcement on this is coming today. Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister, all but confirmed the announcement on ITV’s Good Morning Britain this morning when he said the government had looked at “every alternative” to compulsion. He said: I think ultimately that we’ve got to make sure that the lives of those people in those vulnerable settings are safeguarded, and that’s a difficult choice, that’s one of the many difficult choices that we’ve got in government. But I think we’d be getting a lot of criticism if we weren’t taking those difficult decisions, and we were leaving people more and unnecessarily exposed than before. The NHS Confederation, which represents NHS leaders, has joined those criticising Boris Johnson for not wearing a mask at certain points during his visit to a hospital yesterday. Matthew Taylor, the confederation’s chief executive, told Sky News: The prime minister is an incredibly influential figure and what he does is important. I think it was unfortunate that he was seen in a hospital setting not wearing a mask because I think this hospital, like every hospital, would encourage people to be wearing masks, not just in wards but in the hospital as a whole. I’m not interested in criticising him individually - it’s a tough job being prime minister - but it goes to the fact that we do need a strong message from the centre. Asked about this in his morning interview round, Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister, said Johnson was following the rules that applied. He told Sky News: I know the prime minister took the advice on the clinical setting that he was in and followed all the protocols and procedures that were applied there, and that’s what everyone should do. The trust that runs the hospital, Northumbria NHS healthcare, has defended Johnson. It posted this on Twitter yesterday. A total of 859 deaths registered in England and Wales in the week ending 29 October mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, PA Media reports. PA says: This is up 8% on the previous week and is the highest number since the week to 24 September. Around one in 13 (7.8%) of all deaths registered in England and Wales in the week to 29 October mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). The ONS also said a total of 167,367 deaths have occurred in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. The highest number on a single day was 1,484 on 19 January. During the first wave of the virus, the daily toll peaked at 1,461 on 8 April 2020. As the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg reports, Labour is challenging Boris Johnson to condemn Geoffrey Cox. And this, from the Spectator’s James Forsyth, explains why this is potentially such a lucrative line of attack for the opposition. Note the reference to “senior MPs” in Forsyth’s tweet. One bonus about using second jobs as a wedge issue against Johnson is that it doesn’t just open up a division between the Tories and public opinion; it aggravates the split between the Tory old guard in parliament (who were defending Owen Paterson most vigorously), and the 2019 “red wall intake”, who don’t have outside earnings like Cox’s and who may feel about this much the same way as Anneliese Dodds does. This is from Wendy Chamberlain, the Lib Dem chief whip, on the Geoffrey Cox story. The public will rightly be gobsmacked by these reports. Why was a Tory MP apparently spending time on the other side of the world advising a known tax haven instead of supporting his constituents? For the justice secretary to defend this behaviour as legitimate is frankly astonishing. The bigger irony here is that the government has ordered an inquiry into corruption and political cronyism in the British Virgin Islands, while refusing to carry one out at home. Good morning. Boris Johnson may have been hoping that, after yesterday, outrage about Tory sleaze would have passed the high water mark and that the news agenda would start to move on. But it hasn’t worked out like that, and this morning the whole sleaze/misconduct/corruption issue has got second wind and is back with a vengeneance. Alex Wickham in his London Playbook briefing has a good round-up of all the new developments, but the highlight is the Daily Mail splash, by Harriet Line and Jason Groves, which starts like this. A Tory MP has earned hundreds of thousands of pounds from a second job that saw him vote in Parliament remotely from the Caribbean. Geoffrey Cox, a QC and former attorney general, is advising the government of the British Virgin Islands, a tax haven accused of corruption. He took advantage of lockdown rules to cast votes in the Commons by proxy as he worked 4,000 miles away on the lucrative contract earlier this year, a source disclosed. Sir Geoffrey yesterday revealed he has earned more than £1million from outside legal work over the past year on top of his £82,000 salary as a backbencher. The Mail is not alleging that Cox has broken any laws. But, as MPs discovered during the expenses scandal, what matters in the court of public opinion (a judicial environment where Cox’s skills are well below QC level) is what people think is approporiate, not what’s legal. Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister, was on morning interview round duty for the government. As justice secretary, he would normally be expected to applaud a British lawyer making good money abroad, but obviously that wasn’t the line to take today. Asked about Cox, and whether it is right for an MP to be spending so much time on a second job instead of representing his consitituents, Raab’s first response was to say that the fact that we know about this was a victory for transparency, and the rules that force MPs to declare their earnings and their hours in cases like this. Raab said it was legitimate for Cox to be advising a foreign government on legal matters in this way. He told Times Radio: In relation to the British Virgin Islands, I was the foreign secretary that commissioned a commission of inquiry, given the allegations of misgovernance and very serious ones, including criminal wrongdoing. Now, I’m not going to get dragged into what individual MPs do, but actually having the former attorney general - and it wasn’t my decision, he was hired by the government of the BVI to advise them on how to correct and deal and address those allegations - actually, is a legitimate thing to do as long as it’s properly declared. And of course, it’s quite important in that parliament, which is responsible residually for some areas of our relationship with the overseas territories, we’ve got some knowledge of what’s going on in those territories. But on the wider question of whether an MP should be spending so much time on a second job, and earning so much from it, Raab was equivocal. He would not defend Cox. But he did not criticise him either, and instead he said it was up to Cox’s constituents to decide what was right. Asked if he was “comfortable” with this, Raab told the Today programme: As I made very clear, it’s not for me to get comfortable or otherwise with it. It’s for the voters in any individual constituency to look at the record of their MP and decide whether they got the right priorities. That sounded like a vague hint that the Conservative association in Torridge and West Devon, or the electorate there as a whole, might be justified in finding a new MP at the next election. I will post more on Raab’s interviews shortly. Here is the agenda for the day. 10am: Michelle Stanistreet, general secretary of the National Union of Journalists, and Lexie Kirkconnell-Kawana, head of regulation at Impress, give evidence to the Commons culture committee on the online harms bill. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 2pm: A minister gives a statement in the Scottish parliament on Covid. 2.30pm: The British Retail Consortium, the Cold Chain Federation and UK Hospitality give evidence to the Commons environment committee on labour shortages; at 3.30pm Ben Broadbent, deputy governor of the Bank of England, gives evidence. Also, according to the BBC, the government will today confirm that Covid vaccines will be compulsory for NHS frontline staff in England from next spring. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comWomen’s Super League matches have attracted an average combined peak audience of almost one million across Sky Sports and the BBC in the opening five weeks of the season. The peak averages were 318,400 on Sky and 668,000 on the BBC, the Football Association said as it launched a three-year strategy for the women’s professional game that includes targeting average match attendances of 6,000. “We have a fantastic opportunity with Sky and BBC to build that awareness and signpost fans back,” said Kelly Simmons, the FA’s director of the women’s professional game. “We are averaging around 2,200 in the WSL at the moment and pre-Covid it was about 3,000 but that was skewed by some really big attendances off the back of the Women’s World Cup, so when you pull those out we’re back to where we were. We obviously want to keep building on that. Fans have not been able to come to games for some time so we have to recreate that habit.” Also targeted are financially sustainable WSL and Championship structures within the next five years. Whereas the sustainability of clubs is a longer-term aim amid rising player wages and club ambitions, it is believed that five years is a realistic goal for the leagues. “We’ve been doing a lot of work on the predicted future revenues and where we would want to invest and where that might break even,” Simmons said. The FA is reviewing league ownership and although the chair of the WSL and Women’s Championship board, Dawn Airey, said they were “some way off” a decision on the leagues’ future she added that she “would anticipate that within the next couple of years that it will change”. “We realise that as the leagues become more successful and as the amount of money coming in to women’s sport is increasing, it would benefit from a real focus and potentially be a standalone new company,” she said. “We are some way off from reaching a decision on the future of the leagues, in terms of the structure and how it’s run but it is a very active conversation and is being done hand in glove with clubs. “It’s all about focus, investment and getting a league that is already very strong to become that world leader. To be a world leader you have to be financially sustainable and profitable too so we’re very very focused on that.”In 1991 the defence contractor Ferranti International went bust following a fraud on it by International Signal and Control, a US arms company it had merged with. Ferranti’s chairman, Sir Derek Alun-Jones, briefed me as a journalist on the matter, sometimes with documents. Later in the 1990s some of those documents vanished while I was having breakfast in the cafe at Taunton station. I learned where they had got to only when David Pallister, with whom I worked on the case, phoned to tell me they were at Royal Navy headquarters in north-west London. A mistake, the navy said, but only after David pressed them to hand them back. I never found out how David had traced the documents and neither of us ever got to the bottom of what really happened at Ferranti.Britain’s post-Brexit system of financial regulation is to have a greater focus on growth and international competitiveness under new plans outlined by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak. In what the Treasury described as a “once-in-a-generation” opportunity to reform the way one of the UK’s biggest industries is supervised and policed, Sunak said the sector would benefit from a customised regime. The proposals would involve the scrapping of EU financial services law retained after Brexit but no longer deemed appropriate. It will be replaced by new rules drawn up by the UK’s two watchdog bodies – the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority. Ensuring financial stability would still be the prime goal for the FCA and the PRA, but the two bodies are now to be given the additional task of boosting growth, according to the Treasury. Sunak believes the insistence on rules made in Brussels being followed has constrained the government’s ability to set requirements best suited to the needs of UK markets. Making regulation consistent with growth does not feature in the EU’s system of financial regulation. Financial services were not included in the Brexit deal agreed by with the EU, and the government has been under pressure to prevent business being lost to cities such as Frankfurt, Paris and Amsterdam. The government said it recognised the need to ensure regulation supported the “future strength and viability of the UK as a global financial centre”. The chancellor said: “Earlier in the year, I set out my vision for an open, green, and technologically advanced financial services sector that is globally competitive and acts in the interests of communities and citizens across the UK, creating jobs, supporting businesses and powering growth across the UK. “One important part of that vision is ensuring, as an independent nation, that we have a coherent, agile and internationally-respected approach to financial services regulation that is right for the UK. “Today’s proposals will support the future strength of the UK as a global financial centre, ensuring an agile and dynamic approach to regulation that supports the growth of the UK economy, without diverging from our continued commitment to high international standards.”The daughter of former Royal Navy officer who was shot dead by a soldier on the streets of Belfast 49 years ago has said the government’s planned amnesty for legacy killings was a “kick in the teeth” for thousands of victims seeking justice in Northern Ireland. Patricia Burns is seeking a judicial review in Belfast’s high court in an attempt to pre-empt legislation the Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, is expected to table shortly. It would end all prosecutions for Troubles-related killings up to April 1998, a move that is opposed by all political parties in Northern Ireland but supported by high-profile MPs in the Conservative party. “He says this way is the best way, but what does he know?” said Burns, who was six years old when her father was shot. She told the Guardian the family’s attempts to get truth and justice had been frustrated at every turn. Almost 50 years later she is still fighting to get the facts around the case. A request for a new inquest was rejected and the original inquest papers were heavily redacted in what she describes as a “cover-up”. On the planned new laws she said she had to fight to “be the voice of my father” as he was not here to fight for justice. “It’s just another kick in the teeth. My whole life everything we have pushed for the door has been shut. There’s never been anything easy. I mean we haven’t done anything wrong and we are the ones that have to keep pushing, pushing, pushing to clear daddy’s name,” she said. Burns already has two other legal proceedings ongoing including civil action against the Ministry of Defence and the former police force in Northern Ireland, the Royal Ulster Constabulary. She and Daniel McCready, another relative of a Troubles victim, have just lodged papers seeking a judicial review of the command paper published by Lewis in July outlining his proposals for the new legislation. It is an unusual legal move, said her solicitor, Patricia Coyle, as there is no legislation yet to review. They are asking the judge to hand down an “advisory judgment” on the “constitutionality and lawfulness of the proposals in domestic and international law”, she said. They will also seek an advisory declaration that any legislation that seeks to terminate civil claims, inquest applications or any other court proceedings would be a “fundamental unconstitutional interference in the role and function of the judiciary” as well as a breach of European convention of human rights. Thomas Burns, who served in the forces in Singapore and Scotland over 10 years, was shot in 1972 by a soldier as he left the Glenpark Social Club in north Belfast and died the following day. Burn’s solicitors said the attorney general accepted in 2019 that her father was an innocent victim and that the verdict of misadventure was wrong in both fact and law, but denied the family a fresh inquest on the basis that there was no usefulness to an inquest 47 years after their father was killed.Britain’s economy risks emerging from the pandemic into a long period of stagnation that damages household incomes and undermines plans to level up the regions, according to a hard-hitting report by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research. As it downgraded growth forecasts for next year and predicted a rise in prices that could push inflation above 5%, the thinktank accused the government and the Bank of England of mismanaging the economy since the 2008 financial crash. Jagjit Chadha, the NIESR director, said the government had come to rely on low interest rates to prop up the economy, allowing ministers to abdicate responsibility for directing investments to corners of the economy that needed it most. He said it was likely the regions outside London would miss out on much of the recovery, widening the gap between rich and poor regions. Cuts to welfare benefits and rising levels of inflation would also hit the disposable incomes of poorer families, doubling the level of destitution in the UK. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation says adults with an income below £70 a week or couples with two children below £140 a week are unable to afford the basic needs of life and are destitute. Britain’s economy is expected to grow by 6.9% in 2021 and by 4.7% in 2022, as it recovers from the Covid-19 pandemic, before slowing sharply to 1.7% growth in 2023 and 1.3% in 2024, NIESR predicted. It said the Bank of England was unduly optimistic about the economic outlook and had only a 30% chance of its forecasts for inflation and growth being met in three years’ time. It also said inflation was likely to reach about 5% next year and stay high for longer than Threadneedle Street expected. “We’re getting the economic management of the UK economy wrong,” Chadha said. “There is a persistent problem over many years of economic growth disappointing on the downside,” he said, which he blamed on low levels of public investment to raise the level of workers’ skills and improve productivity. In a swipe at the government, Chadha said a hard Brexit had made the situation worse. “Short-run supply problems will persist and are likely to be exacerbated by Brexit. This is because our exit from the EU has acted to reduce the pool of labour, contributed to lower levels of firm investment than might otherwise have been the case, and led to some contraction in the size of our traded sector. “Of course the squeeze on less well-off households is now well over a decade old, predating Brexit, and has primarily resulted from an inability to address our productivity shortfall. “Our problems are not insurmountable, but prompt and consistent interventions by the state to support training, labour mobility, house building may act to alleviate some of the costs of adjustment to that high wage-high skill economy for which we yearn,” he said. The NIESR deputy director Adrian Pabst described the extra £1bn over three years to boost training budgets as “a drop in the ocean”. The Bank of England kept interest rates on hold at 0.1% last week despite widespread speculation in financial markets that it was preparing for an increase to 0.25%. Members of the monetary policy committee (MPC) voted seven to two in favour of maintaining rates at the historic low – a level put in place in March 2020. The NIESR deputy director Paul Mortimer-Lee said the pressure from rising inflation would become impossible to ignore next spring, forcing the MPC to increase rates to 0.5%. “The Bank of England (is) hoping – unreasonably, we believe – that inflation will go away of its own accord quite quickly,” he said. “It doesn’t need to move quickly to raise interest rates, but it does need to show willing.” Shortages of vital components and goods, especially those made in emerging economies, will also hit growth in the global economy and by more than currently expected by the International Monetary Fund and the OECD, the thinktank said. Growth of the world economy is likely to slow to 4.3% in 2022 and 3.7% in 2023, the thinktank forecast.England Hockey has been accused of a “shocking abuse of power” and “institutional and structural bias” by a club that has won its appeal against a 12-month suspended ban for breaching a code of conduct. The sport’s governing body was also found to have broken its own rules when investigating Barford Tigers, whose men’s team play in the third tier of the national league. The case came about after complaints from Yardley Hockey Club and City of Birmingham Hockey Club in 2019 relating to abusive language and sexism offences. It led to Barford receiving a suspended sentence in 2020 despite “robustly denying” the charges. However last month an appeals panel quashed the charges against the club and found that England Hockey had relied upon an “invalid application of the disrepute offence regulations”, while the procedure was “fundamentally flawed”. Barford Tigers chairman, Gurmej Pawar, has now written to the England Hockey chief executive, Nick Pink, to demand an apology and changes to the appeal system. In a letter sent on Tuesday, he wrote: “The findings that England Hockey broke and disregarded their own rules is a disturbing conclusion and, whilst a shocking abuse of power, is something that we suspected throughout the course of dealing with England Hockey. “In effect, we felt that we were not only fighting the case but also a system riddled with institutional and structural bias. “This was a case of the national governing body bending the rules to serve their own narrative, that an ethnically diverse club must be in the wrong.” Last year the Guardian revealed that eight clubs, including Barford Tigers, had written to England Hockey to warn that the sport had an endemic race issue. Pawar added: “No institution should be allowed to be a law unto itself, and there is no room for the outdated discriminatory attitudes that Barford Tigers Hockey Club and others have endured from England Hockey in hockey, sport or in society. Enough is enough.” Sanctions that specifically related to the conduct of Barford’s vice-president, Sukhdev Gill, in his capacity as an umpire were not appealed against. In a statement, England Hockey accepted that mistakes had been made. “It has become clear that there were shortcomings in the initial process, and we at England Hockey are saddened and disappointed by this and recognise that the process needs to be reviewed and changed,” Pink said. “In terms of volume of evidence, complexity and duration, this case is unprecedented and has exerted our process in a manner it simply has not experienced previously. We have taken on the learnings from this, and as such, we will share our new processes at the next England Hockey AGM in March.” Pink dded that “relevant documents” in relation to the case will be published to improve transparency and the outcome of future disciplinary proceedings will be shared.The Duchess of Sussex’s letter to her estranged father was “written with public consumption in mind as a possibility,” the court of appeal has heard. Lawyers for Associated Newspapers Ltd (ANL), publishers of the Mail on Sunday, argued Meghan’s privacy case should have gone to trial rather than be dealt with by summary judgment without need for a trial. Meghan won her privacy and copyright claim when Lord Justice Warby ruled earlier this year that publication by the Mail on Sunday and Mail Online of extracts from the letter was “manifestly excessive and hence unlawful”. Opening ANL’s three-day appeal against the high court judgment, Andrew Caldecott QC said new evidence in a statement from Jason Knauf, former communications secretary to the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, would suggest Meghan suspected her father might disclose the letter to the media. He said the judge had implicitly accepted the letter was an intimate communication for her father’s eyes only. “The fundamental point turns out to be false on the new evidence. The letter was crafted specifically with the potential of public consumption in mind because the claimant appreciated Mr Markle might disclose it to the media,” Caldecott said. Meghan’s legal team are opposing the appeal and argue that the judge reached the right conclusions on the evidence before him. They also object to the introduction of Knauf’s new evidence and say that, if the court accepts his statement, Meghan will also wish to put forward new evidence. Meghan’s father shared the letter because he considered an article in US People magazine, which featured interviews with Meghan’s friends portraying her as a caring daughter offering an “olive branch” and his reply as “wholly inappropriate”, to be a “serious attack” on him, Caldecott said. Meghan’s privacy claim was “diminished and outweighed” by her father’s right to reply to the “false and misleading” allegations in the People article that suggested he had “cruelly cold-shouldered” his daughter in the run-up to her wedding to Prince Harry. Texts from Thomas Markle to his daughter showed he messaged her regularly, including from his hospital bed as he underwent emergency heart surgery, to let her know he would not be able to attend as doctors would not allow him to fly, Caldecott said. In the texts, he told her he loved her, and wished her the best. He asked who would be giving her away, and said that if she really needed him he could come and he was sorry, the appeal judges heard. Caldecott said the judge did not give enough weight to the texts. They were “affectionate texts”, ignored in the judge’s summary, and showing “abundant contact” in the run-up to the wedding, and painted a completely different picture to the People article that he never called, never texted and ignored her, said Caldecott. Judgment in the appeal will be given at a later date.On the morning of 9/11, my husband and I were the only visitors at the home of Robert Frost, high in the White Mountains in New Hampshire, where he returned from England as the first world war began (Editorial, 8 November). To be asked to sit in his chair and hold his writings was a privilege I will never forget. To look across at the mountains, feel the calm he must have felt, the “ordinary” belying the power of his poetry, is not lost today. Jean Jackson Seer Green, Buckinghamshire • For the cost of the Covid contracts secured by Randox, the company Owen Paterson lobbied for, we could have settled our dues to Iran, and Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe might well be home now (Report, 5 November). Marion Worth Newport • You say the sleep study (Sleep at 10pm linked to lower risk of heart disease, study finds, 9 November) took into account “age, sex, sleep irregularity” and other factors. Shouldn’t that be gender, rather than sex? Or am I missing something? I do sleep well! Rev Trevor Smith Plymouth • Eider ducks (Country diary, 8 November) are also known in some circles as “Frankie Howerd ducks”. Listen to their conversations and it’s obvious why. Dave Headey Faringdon, Oxfordshire • Re climate change songs (Letters, 4 November), Leonard Cohen’s The Future contains the classic line: “Take the only tree that’s left and stuff it up the hole in your culture.” Reg Smith Keswick, Cumbria • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I am a 62-year-old man who has been disabled for the last eight years after working all my life. I lived in Herefordshire, so was on the “legacy benefits” system of income support, and my wife is my full-time carer. With the legacy benefits we were on, I also received the enhanced disability premium and the capped protection benefit. I also have an ongoing award for the highest rate of personal independence payment (PIP) in both categories. This is due to several issues striking at once, leaving me in a power chair and relying on my wife for normal day-to-day activity. We moved to Abergavenny in August, to a bungalow that would make my life much easier. And that’s when it all came tumbling down around us. We had to change over to universal credit, which means I have to have another assessment for my work capabilities, despite my consultant writing in a letter to my GP that, in his opinion, the possibility of me ever working again was extremely limited. This also means my disability premiums stopped, along with the income guarantee. In monetary terms this amounted to £350 per month. The private company carrying out these assessments on behalf of the government is way behind – so we are already at week 14 with no date set for the assessment. So far, as a couple, we are £1,220 poorer. We are now having to sell our possessions – such as my wife’s jewellery, my phone, my watch and even furniture – just to be able to keep warm and eat. We are not alone. There are many disabled people unable to work in the same situation. All I hear is that universal credit is doing everything to help people into work, but what about those who can’t? The system is failing us miserably and has been for years, but now it’s become barbaric in its execution. Is this really a society that would rather be rid of disabled people by killing them off? Name and address supplied • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Most of the media seem to think that the idea of net zero emissions is unproblematic, despite the fact that many climate scientists consider that it is very problematic. Given the prominence of the idea at Cop26, this lack of balance in the reporting of breakthroughs is worrying. For example, Robert Watson, a former chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, has denounced net zero as a trap set by industrialists and governments to hoodwink the world. Watson and other climate scientists have argued that while net zero might be a great idea in principle, in practice it “helps perpetuate a belief in technological salvation and diminishes the sense of urgency surrounding the need to curb emissions now”. They say the push for net zero has encouraged a “burn now, pay later” approach, which has seen carbon emissions continue to rise. As a sociologist, I am not in a position to evaluate such criticisms of net zero scientifically, but as a sociologist of science, I think it is important that there is a balanced debate about it. Leslie Sklair Emeritus professor of sociology, London School of Economics • Peter Kalmus is right that “climate breakdown is the result of centuries of colonial and social oppression” (Climate depression is real. And it is spreading fast among our youth, 4 November). But it’s more than that. The activities that are causing climate breakdown are a form of colonialism in themselves. By living unsustainably now, we are living on the backs of people who will live after we have gone. We are stealing the wealth and future of others to keep ourselves comfortable. Fossil fuel companies are colonial enterprises, and the organisations that support them are propping up a form of colonialism which will impoverish us all. Mark Walford London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The results of this survey are sad but unsurprising (Few willing to change lifestyle to save the planet, climate survey finds, 7 November). At the weekend, I took my 12-year-old son by bus across west London to his football match. While the world discusses how to address climate change, everyone in west London is out driving a 4x4. The vast majority of children going to play football and rugby on the pitches where we spent the morning were driven there. The roads were gridlocked, the car parks were full, and tempers were fraying. Yet the parents will make the same choices next weekend – and no doubt what I saw is reflected up and down the country. In London in particular there really is no excuse: the city has a comprehensive public transport system, with free buses for children. When will people wake up to the fact that they themselves are the traffic, the congestion and the pollution? Adam Manolson London • I don’t think human nature changes very much. Nearly 50 years ago when I was living in West Germany, as it was then, during the oil crisis, their government introduced a Sonntagsfahrverbot which banned most car travel on Sundays to save fuel. It was not unusual to see people strolling down the middle of empty autobahns. A bumper sticker appeared which translated as “Everyone wants to return to Eden but few want to go on foot”. Plus ça change, eh? Linda Marriott North Hykeham, Lincolnshire • It’s more than anecdotally evident that too many people in Britain, aided and abetted by our libertarian and inept government, can’t be bothered, despite regular advice, to wear a mask in public places to protect themselves and others. How then will British society ever take the climate crisis seriously and do what’s required of the populace to help reduce the planet warming to a rate of 1.5C or lower by 2050? In this context, it’s illuminating and worrying to note from the international survey that the “gulf between citizens’ view of their own efforts (44%) and that of their government (16%) was highest in the UK”. Robin Bevis Okehampton, Devon • I’m not surprised at the survey results. They reflect the success that fossil fuel interests have had deflecting our attention from real solutions that would reduce emissions and transition us to a clean-energy future, such as policies that would end subsidies for fossil fuels, tax carbon pollution or establish a border carbon tariff. Through well-funded advertising, op-eds, and social media, they have led the public to believe that the problem is us. They have turned our attention away from the disease, death, and planetary disruption their products are causing, to lay the blame on our own individual carbon footprints, our selfish, wasteful lifestyles. This survey indicates that fossil fuel interests have succeeded; respondents appear to be feeling confused, a bit guilty, and unsure of climate solutions. Bob Taylor Montecito, California, USA • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.AstraZeneca is to create a new vaccines unit as the Anglo-Swedish drugmaker plans for the future of its coronavirus shot beyond the pandemic. The company said the reorganisation would bring together people who had previously been based in different parts of the business, and will be dedicated to the Covid-19 vaccine and tweaked versions to deal with new variants of Sars-CoV-2. The move will not involve any extra investment in vaccines, but will make it easier for the company to continue making the Covid-19 shot over the long term. AstraZeneca was chosen to develop the Covid-19 vaccine in conjunction with the University of Oxford, despite the drugmaker’s limited experience of large-scale vaccine production beyond a nasal spray for flu. Unlike rival drugmakers such as major US pharma companies Pfizer, Moderna or Johnson &amp; Johnson, AstraZeneca supplied its coronavirus vaccine at cost. However, it committed to sell the vaccine on a not-for-profit basis only during the pandemic period. As hospitalisation numbers are falling in countries where vaccines are prevalent, its thoughts are turning to the future. The Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine has played a key role in supplying poorer countries because it is generally cheaper than other shots – costing about $5 (£3.70) a dose – and because it does not need to be stored at very low temperatures like some alternatives. About 1.8bn doses of the vaccine have been delivered across 170 countries, and AstraZeneca has supplied 38% of the vaccines for Covax, a scheme backed by the United Nations for low and middle-income countries. The next biggest contributions to Covax have been Pfizer, at 27% of doses and Moderna at 13%. However, AstraZeneca has also faced a significant amount of negative publicity related to very rare blood clot side-effects as well as manufacturing delays soon after its rapid launch. The US Food and Drug Administration has not yet approved the AstraZeneca shot months after three rival products gained authorisation, even though some of the AstraZeneca shots have been manufactured within the US for export to other countries. A spokesperson for AstraZeneca said: “In order to optimise the management of our existing portfolio of vaccines and antibodies for viral respiratory infections, we are creating a dedicated vaccines and immune therapies unit that brings together R&amp;D, manufacturing, commercial and medical teams. “The team will be dedicated to our Covid-19 vaccine, our long-acting antibody combination and our developmental vaccine addressing multiple variants of concern, as well as to our existing portfolio for respiratory viral disease.” The team will be led by Iskra Reic, a member of AstraZeneca’s senior executive team who previously led the company’s operations in Europe and Canada. • This article was amended on 10 November 2021 to clarify that Covax, while backed by the United Nations, is not a “United Nations scheme”.One in four autistic children wait more than three years to receive the support they need at school, leaving families “exhausted and on the edge of crisis”, according to the National Autistic Society. Seventy-four percent of parents who were polled by the charity said their child’s school did not fully meet their needs – double the dissatisfaction levels four years ago in the charity’s last education report. Parents also complained they faced lengthy battles trying to secure the right support for their child, with 57% reporting they had waited more than a year and 26% waiting more than three years. The NAS school report, based on surveys of 4,000 parents, carers, autistic children and young people, also highlighted the impact of the pandemic on autistic children, with 44% of parents of the view their child has fallen behind with work and 59% concerned their child has become more socially isolated. The charity says the education system is not working for autistic children in England and is calling on the government to take action in its special educational needs and disabilities (Send) review, which has been beset by delays. According to official government data there are more than 160,000 autistic pupils in schools across England, of whom 70% are in mainstream schools, while the rest are either receiving specialist education, are home educated or are out of education altogether. One in five parents responding to the NAS survey said their child had been “informally” excluded at least once in the past two years. Caroline Stevens, the NAS chief executive, said the system was broken and called on the government to act. “The education system simply isn’t working for autistic children and their families, and things have been made even harder by coronavirus. “Families told us they had to spend months, even years, without the right support, often because there’s no school to meet their needs. And two in five of those who were refused an assessment of their child’s needs said they took legal action. “We won’t accept a world where so many autistic children are falling behind and so many families are being left exhausted and on the edge of crisis. The government’s upcoming Send review is an opportunity to change things, to live up to the promise of the 2014 reforms which were never implemented properly.” A Department for Education spokesperson said £74m was being invested in the first year of a cross-governmental national autism strategy, which was set up to improve the lives of autistic young people and their families and carers in England. The DfE said the Send review would be published “in due course”, adding that training was under way to improve teachers’ knowledge of autism. “We want every autistic young person to reach their potential and feel heard at every stage of their life,” the spokesperson said.PS: Tesla’s stock is now down 11% today, extending losses for a second straight day, as investors dumped the high-flying stock in anticipation of a possible stake sale by company chief Elon Musk. The rout comes after Musk asked his Twitter followers over the weekend if he should sell 10% of his stake in the company as Washington proposes to hike taxes for the super-wealthy. Nearly 58% said they would support such a sale. Here’s Reuters’ latest: “People are anticipating that he is going to come into the market and start selling shares, they’re trying to get ahead of that,” said Dennis Dick, a trader at Bright Trading LLC. Musk could time the proposed sale to coincide with a federal tax bill of nearly $11 billion that would be triggered by exercising a chunk of his Tesla stock options worth $26.6 billion as of Monday close. While the stock sale could solve a major tax headache, Musk’s tweets raised questions about violation of his settlement with the U.S. securities regulator. He was fined $20 million by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for tweets in 2018 and was required to step down as chairman. Kimbal Musk, Elon Musk’s brother, on Friday filed to sell 88,500 Tesla shares worth $109 million. Investors will be closely watching SEC filings from Tesla for any details on Musk’s plans. SEC rules give companies four working days to report major events. And here’s more reaction: Time to recap The UK will suffer stuttering growth, rising inflation and widening income inequalities in the coming months, the NIESR economic thinktank has warned. Rising prices, increased taxes, and a likely increase in interest rates will all hurt families, and push more into destitution. NIESR also warned that UK regional inequality is rising, and that Britain’s economy risks stagnation and sticky inflation over the coming years due to persistent supply-chain bottlenecks and headwinds from Brexit. Households also face rising prices in the shops, with grocery inflation at its highest in 14 months. Consumers have started their Christmas shopping earlier than usual amid concern over supply chain shortages and rising prices. The UK is to consult on launching ‘Britcoin’. Officials will assess whether a central bank digital currency is feasible and desirable - it could be launched in the second half of the decade. While UK policymakers mull things over, Bitcoin has hit a new record high today, trading over $68,000. But the Federal Reserve has warned that the stablecoins which underpin crypto are vulnerable, after a surge in interest this year. The Fed’s latest financial stability report also warned that risky asset prices remain vulnerable to a tumble if growth falters or the pandemic intensifies. A crisis in China’s real estate sector could strain the Chinese financial system, and spill over to the United States, it fears. US producer price inflation remained high last month, as the surge in gasoline pushed up the price of goods. In Germany, investors are more optimistic about the economic outlook, but the supply chain crisis is hurting the economy now. Shares in Tesla have tumbled 10% today, as investors brace for Elon Musk to sell some of his stake. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says: Tesla shares are also lower again for the second day in a row, sliding to their lowest levels this month, as investors weigh how CEO Musk will go about selling his holdings. Primark has announced plans to open more than 100 new stores, but also warned that supply chain issues are hitting the availability of a small number of lines. General Electric is splitting itself up after 129 years - into three public companies focused on healthcare, energy and aviation. British Airways is planning to hire 4,000 staff in the coming months, in a reversal of its cutbacks under the pandemic, Bloomberg says. And Watches of Switzerland has lifted its sales forecasts, as the boom in demand for expensive timepieces continues. Seán FitzPatrick, the former chief executive and chairman of Anglo Irish Bank whose collapse in the financial crisis led to a €30bn rescue package and Ireland’s bailout, has died. Rishi Sunak has outlined plans for a post-Brexit system of financial regulation, which will focus more on growth and international competitiveness. About 5,000 public phone boxes around the UK will be protected from closure in areas of high accident rates or poor mobile signals, under plans drawn up by Ofcom, the regulator. Stock markets have dipped in Europe and on Wall Street. Goodnight. GW AstraZeneca is to create a new vaccines unit as the Anglo-Swedish drugmaker plans for the future of its coronavirus shot beyond the pandemic. The company said the reorganisation would bring together people who had previously been based in different parts of the business, and will be dedicated to the Covid-19 vaccine and tweaked versions to deal with new variants of Sars-CoV-2. The move will not involve any extra investment in vaccines, but will make it easier for the company to continue making the Covid-19 shot over the long term. Britain’s post-Brexit system of financial regulation is to have a greater focus on growth and international competitiveness under new plans outlined by the chancellor Rishi Sunak. In what the Treasury described as a “once in a generation” opportunity to reform the way one of the UK’s biggest industries is supervised and policed, Sunak said the sector would benefit from a customised regime. The proposals would involve the scrapping of EU financial services law retained after Brexit but no longer deemed appropriate. It will be replaced by new rules drawn up by the UK’s two watchdog bodies – the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority. Ensuring financial stability would still be the prime goal for the FCA and the PRA, but the two bodies are now to be given the additional task of boosting growth, according to the Treasury. More here: In the City, the FTSE 100 index has closed lower as financial markets lose some of their recent zip. The Footsie lost 26 points, or 0.36%, to finish at 7274, away from the 20-month highs set last week. Primark owner Associated British Foods bucked the trend, jumping 8% after it announced international expansion plans and a special dividend this morning, and said it hoped to recover strongly from the pandemic. Rolls-Royce also had a good day, up 3.6% after securing more than £450m from the government and investors roll out a new breed of mini nuclear reactors. But cyber-defence firm Darktrace continued its volatile trading, falling 6% today as traders continue to weigh up its prospects. Utilities, financial stocks, basic materials firms and energy companies also lost ground, with Irish conglomerate DCC down 3.9%, and engineering group Smiths off 2.7%. Europe’s Stoxx 600 closed a little lower too, down 0.2%, after an eight day run of gains. Sushil Kuner, principal associate at law firm Gowling WLG, says a UK central bank digital currency could bring benefits. “This is an exciting moment for the UK in its positioning as a leader in the FinTech space and it is great to see the UK government and BoE taking steps towards adopting a digital currency which could, theoretically, speed up transactions, cut costs and promote further financial inclusion.” The UK should move faster towards launching a digital currency, argues Simon Youel, head of policy and advocacy at Positive Money. He says the second half of this decade could be too late. “With cash under attack and the rise of new private currencies, such as so-called stablecoins, we are seeing the future of money being surrendered to a cartel of private banks, card companies and tech giants. “By the second half of the decade multinational corporations such as Facebook may have already launched their own currencies, which could quickly scale up and dominate the global monetary system, with dire consequences for accountability, privacy and economic policymaking. We need a central bank digital currency to provide a public alternative, for people who don’t want to rely on big banks and tech companies to make payments. “Central bankers have been caught sleeping at the wheel, and should be acting much faster to introduce new public digital currencies if we are to maintain any hope of having democratic control over our money and banking system.” The UK is moving a step closer to its own digital currency -- although ‘Britcoin’ wouldn’t be launched until at least the second half of this decade. The Bank of England and the Treasury have announce they will hold a formal consultation in 2022 on whether to move forward on a possible central bank digital currency (CBDC). CBDC would be a new form of digital money issued by the Bank of England and for use by households and businesses for their everyday payments needs, they say. It would exist alongside cash and bank deposits, rather than replacing them. Next year’s consultation will set out the BoE and the Treasury’s assessment of the case for a UK CBDC, including the merits of further work to develop an operational and technology model for a digital pound. It will consider issues such as the high level design features, possible benefits and implications for users and businesses, and considerations for further work. Economic Secretary to the Treasury, John Glen, says the consultation will begin an open discussion on the role a UK central bank digital currency could play. “I’d encourage everyone to contribute to the discussion so we can explore the opportunities this could bring, as well as understanding any risks it may pose.” No decision has been made on whether to introduce a CBDC in the UK, which would be a major national infrastructure project - and which chancellor Rishi Sunak dubbed ‘Britcoin’ earlier back in April. Next year’s consultation would help authorities decide whether to move into a ‘development’ phase which will last several years while a technical specification was drawn up and tested If this ‘development’ phase concludes that the UK should have a CBDC, and that it is operationally and technologically robust, then the earliest launch date would be in the second half of the decade, they say. Deputy governor for financial stability, Jon Cunliffe, explains: “The plan to publish a consultation next year on CBDC is a crucial step in our policy development, especially as we further our thinking on the pressing issues at hand. What it will do is provide a platform for interested parties and relevant groups to engage with the key questions on the merits of CBDC, and whether the public sector should advance to a development phase.” After a storied 129 years, America’s best known industrial conglomerate is splitting itself in three. Shares in General Electric have surged 6% after it announced it will divide into three public companies focused on healthcare, energy and aviation. It marks the final step in the undoing of the sprawling group created by Jack Welch, a symbol of US economic power, which can trace its history back to Thomas Edison’s first incandescent light bulb, and was ranked the world’s biggest company as recently as 2009. Sky News’s Ian King has a good take: For decades, it has been a bellwether of US manufacturing, a company co-founded by Thomas Edison, the inventor of the light bulb, that exported high-quality American goods to every corner of the globe. It was among America’s biggest companies by stock market valuation for most of the post-war period, becoming the biggest for most of the 1990s, before being eclipsed in 1998 by Microsoft. Now, though, General Electric (GE) is a shadow of its former self and, by market capitalisation, it sits just 76th in the S&amp;P 500 index. Its stock market value has fallen from around $590bn 20 years ago to just $119bn at the close on Monday evening. Today, the 129-year-old company’s board took the action many investors have demanded for years, announcing it would break itself up into three different publicly quoted companies. The Wall Street Journal’s Alex Martin also show how influential GE was: Shares in Tesla have taken an early tumble. Tesla shares fell by as much as 10% to $1,032, the lowest in almost two weeks. They then recovered a little, but are still down around 6.7% now. This adds to Monday’s losses, when Tesla fell almost 5% after Elon Musk held a twitter poll in which a majority said he should sell 10% of his holding. If Musk proceeded with the plan, then a large block of Tesla shares would hit the market. He owns around 17% of the company’s stock, and said back in September that he needed to exercise a large number of stock options this quarter, which would create a big tax bill. Selling some of his stock could free up funds to pay the taxes Tesla’s share price surged by around in October alone, which lifted its value to fresh record highs over $1.2trn. Musk’s brother Kimbal sold 88,500 Tesla shares last Friday, becoming the latest board member to offload a large number of Tesla stocks which hit record highs, Reuters reports. The US stock market has opened cautiously, as investors digest last night’s warning from the Federal Reserve about risky rising asset prices. After hitting record highs yesterday, the main indices are slightly lower. Dow Jones industrial average: down 100 points or 0.26% at 36,337 S&amp;P 500: down 9 points or 0.2% at 4,692 Nasdaq Composite: down 54 points or 0.34% at 15,927 points Paypal have fallen 11% after the online payments company issued a fourth-quarter forecast that fell well short of analysts’ expectations last night, along with disappointing guidance for next year. But Roblox, among the world’s most popular gaming sites for children, has seen its shares surge 25% after it reported impressive sales growth. Roblox’s revenue increased by 102% year-on-year in the last quarter. Daily active users grew 31% to 47.3 million during the third quarter and gamers spent 11.2 billion hours on the platform. British Airways plans to replenish its depleted workforce with as many as 4,000 new employees by next summer as it prepares for a wider rebound in air travel, Chief Executive Officer Sean Doyle has told Bloomberg. They say: The IAG SA unit will add pilot, cabin-crew, ground-staff and back-office posts, Doyle said in an interview Monday. BA currently employs about 30,000 people, so that the move would boost headcount almost 15%. “We’re actively recruiting,” Doyle said on a flight to New York from London. “It’s exciting to be rebuilding the airline and to be creating opportunities again after two years where we haven’t been able to fly much.” After slashing about 10,000 jobs during the coronavirus pandemic, BA now faces a tighter labor market as it seeks to rebuild staffing and capture its share of the travel rebound. The airline has been negotiating with unions to revive short-haul operations from London Gatwick airport on a lower-cast basis, while ramping up flights from its Heathrow hub after the U.S. lifted border curbs. More here: British Airways to Hire 4,000 in Reversal of Covid Era Cuts That flight was the first out of London since the US lifted its travel ban, allowing fully vaccinated passengers from the UK, EU, India, Mexico and Canada. Inflation watch: US goods and services providers continued to raise their prices at a solid rate, as cost pressures continue to mount. US producer prices rose by 0.6% in October, up from 0.5% in September. Much of the increase was due to a 1.2% rise in prices for goods -- led by gasoline, which jumped by 6.7%, following the rise in crude oil prices. The surge in gasoline prices is a growing political headache for president Biden, whose call for Opec+ to boost production has been rebuffed. The Bureau of Labor Statistics explains: One-third of the October advance in the index for final demand goods can be traced to prices for gasoline, which rose 6.7%. The indexes for diesel fuel, fresh and dry vegetables, gas fuels, jet fuel, and plastic resins and materials also moved higher. In contrast, prices for beef and veal decreased 10.3%. The indexes for light motor trucks and for residential electric power also fell. Services prices rose 0.2%, while construction costs jumped 6.6% in the month. On an annual basis, PPI jumped by 8.6% in October, matching September’s reading, as transportation bottlenecks, materials shortages and increasing labor costs all drive up costs. One of the bankers at the centre of Ireland’s financial crisis over a decade ago has passed away. Former chief executive and chairman of Anglo Irish Bank Seán FitzPatrick, 73, died on Monday after a short illness, a spokesman for his family has confirmed. FitzPatrick played key role in the rapid expansion and subsequent collapse of Anglo Irish Bank. He build the bank from a small lender to one of the country’s largest banks, which was the lender of choice to some of the State’s biggest property developers during the Celtic Tiger years. But the bank hit trouble once the financial crisis began, and the property market began to crash. Gaps were exposed on the balance sheets of many Irish banks, including Anglo Irish, leading to a liquidity squeeze. The Dublin government nationalised it in 2009, fearing that the bank’s collapse would cause major damage to the Republic’s wider economy. This led Irish taxpayers to pay €30bn to save Anglo Irish Bank from collapse, forcing the state to seek a bailout from the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank and the EU in 2010 to save the country from national bankruptcy, at the cost of painful austerity. An inquiry later heard that Ireland had been pushed into this bailout, with the European Central Bank unwilling to see losses forced on senior bank bondholders. FitzPatrick was subsequently acquitted of charges that he had misleading auditors about multimillion-euro loans, in the longest criminal trial in the history of the Irish state. The UK’s cost of living squeeze will hurt growth, says NIESR Interim Deputy Director for Macroeconomics, Paul Mortimer-Lee: “A squeeze on real incomes for workers and those on Universal Credit will slow economic growth next year, with the adverse effects on consumption offset by lower savings. Meanwhile, inflation is set to peak around 5%, forcing a reluctant Bank of England to raise interest rates, albeit grudgingly. Unemployment should settle in a narrow range around 4 1/4%. The risks are skewed to the upside on inflation and the downside on growth.” Last week the Bank of England forecast that labour incomes after inflation and tax would fall in 2022 and 2023 - a two-year squeeze. This squeeze is undermining Boris Johnson’s claim to be building a “high-wage, high-skill, high-productivity” economy. NIESR’s deputy director for Public Policy, professor Adrian Pabst, says: “Britain’s broken economic model shows no signs of turning into a high-wage, high-productivity, high-growth economy anytime soon. England’s regions and the three devolved nations are not catching up with London and the metropolitan South-East. Instead, regional disparities are widening while the poorest households risk sliding into destitution. The task for policymakers is to raise regional productivity outside of metropolitan areas, connect London’s capital markets with regional and local capital markets, and devolve both power and resources to local government combined with greater accountability.” The UK will suffer stuttering growth, rising inflation and widening income inequalities in the coming months, the NIESR economic thinktank has warned. In its latest forecasts for the UK, NIESR says households will be hit by rising prices, increased taxes, and a likely increase in interest rates. This will create a painful cost of living squeeze - with poorer households hit hardest, it warns: Household incomes will be painfully squeezed by a combination of earnings growth lagging inflation, rising interest rates and tighter fiscal policy. The effects will be felt unevenly, with Universal Credit recipients the hardest hit and those in receipt of significant non-labour income - not subject to the Health and Social Care Levy - relatively unaffected. Ending the temporary £20/week uplift to universal credit this autumn will accentuate this squeeze, NIESRR says, meaning more families will fall in destitution: The squeeze on household incomes from rising prices and withdrawal of the Universal Credit uplift will lead to a doubling of destitution: despite the reduced taper rate, neither the recovery nor the increase in the minimum wage will be enough to make up for this squeeze. Affected households are concentrated in certain regions and localities of the UK, especially in the North of England (notably the North West) and in Northern Ireland. NIESR forecasts that the UK economy will grow by 6.9% this year, but slow to 4.7% growth next year. Rising inflation and increased taxes will hit consumers, while supply disruptions will continue to weigh on the economy, it warns. NIESR is also concerned that regional differences within the UK economy are growing - with productivity in London continuing to outpace other parts of the country. NIESR forecast that consumer price index inflation will peak at around 5 % in the second quarter of 2022 (as does the Bank of England), falling thereafter but remaining above target until 2024. Above-target inflation is being driven by supply shortages, base effects and a global rise in energy prices, it says. NIESR expects the Bank of England to increase interest rates to 0.25% by the end of the year (it meets again in mid-December), and then raise rates to 0.5% in the second quarter of 2022, before further rises in 2023. NIESR director, Jagjit Chadha, also warns that the short run supply problems faced by the UK will persist and are likely to be exacerbated by Brexit. This is because our exit from the European Union has acted to reduce the pool of labour, contributed to lower levels of firm investment than might otherwise have been the case, and led to some contraction in the size of our traded sector. The Financial Times are reporting that the UK is set to scale back some of its proposed corporate governance and audit reforms. This follows a “fierce backlash” over the costs of proposed boardroom rules, amid a push to strengthen Britain’s corporate governance rules following several company collapses. Here’s the details: Officials are close to finalising a reform package that will mark the largest overhaul of British audit and corporate governance for generations following high profile scandals, including at outsourcer Carillion and retailer BHS. However, officials are expected to rein in some of the most controversial plans in favour of a more “business friendly” regime. Executives have warned that additional costs would make it less attractive to establish and keep businesses in the UK at a time when ministers are keen to foster a post-Brexit economic recovery. Officials plan to tighten company internal controls by insisting that directors make an annual statement about their effectiveness. But a proposal to use legislation to require directors to sign off on companies’ internal controls over financial reporting, modelled on the US’s Sarbanes-Oxley Act, is expected to be dropped. A similar provision is instead expected to be included in the UK corporate governance code, according to people familiar with the revised proposals, which would carry less weight and be more difficult to enforce. Here’s the full story. The plans remain subject to change until signed off by business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng, the FT adds. Back in March, our financial editor Nils Pratley argued firmly that Kwarteng should resist pressure to water down these reforms, explaining: The deeper corporate grumble has been about the potential for directors to be held to account for mistakes in company accounts. On that score, the consultation paper talks about giving ARGA [the Audit, Reporting and Governance Authority] “effective investigation and civil enforcement powers”, which may provoke more bleating from boardrooms about how risk-taking will be stifled. Kwarteng needs to hold the line. When companies are tapping public markets for funding, directors should be on the hook if financial controls are inadequate or unaffordable dividends are distributed. Companies such as Carillion and Thomas Cook should not collapse like a pack of cards. The boardroom brigade should count their blessings: the proposed system looks several degrees softer than the Sarbanes-Oxley regime in the US. Supply chain bottlenecks are continuing to hit Germany’s economy too. The current economic situation in Europe’s largest economy has worsened again this month, according to the ZEW Institute’s latest survey of investors, dropping by 9.1 points to 12.5 points this month. But investors are more optimistic that the situation will improve; the ZEW Indicator of Economic Sentiment for Germany climbed 9.4 points to 31.7 points, the first rise since May. ZEW President Professor Achim Wambach explains: “Financial market experts are more optimistic about the coming six months. However, the renewed decline in the assessment of the economic situation shows that the experts assume that the supply bottlenecks for raw materials and intermediate products as well as the high inflation rate will have a negative impact on the economic development in the current quarter. For the first quarter of 2022, they expect growth to pick up again and inflation to fall both in Germany and the eurozone. Despite the cost of living squeeze, some consumers are still splashing out on expensive watches. Watches of Switzerland, which sells Rolex, TAG Heuer, OMEGA, Breitling, has lifted its forecast for this financial year, after strong revenue growth. The company says it has seen: Continued strong demand environment for luxury watches and jewellery, with growth in the period led by a significant increase in volumes of non-supply constrained brands. Watches of Switzerland’s group revenues jumped 44.6% in the first half of the financial year (to 31st October), and were almost 41% above pre-pandemic levels. Sales in the US jumped 50% year-on-year. It now expects to pull in revenues of £1.15bn to £1.20bn this financial year (its previous guidance was £1.05bn to £1.10bn), and to increase its profit margins, saying: Our guidance reflects visibility of supply of key brands. The Group does not expect the return of tourism and airport business to pre-pandemic levels during the year. Watches of Switzerland has benefitted from the surge of spending since pandemic restrictions lifted, with some people using their savings on new watches and other jewellery. Ruth Griffin, retail partner at law firm, Gowling WLG, says: “This helps demonstrate the resilience and flexibility of the luxury market, coupled with the impact of lockdown easing on consumer behaviour and in-store footfall. It will be interesting to see how this plays out in the retail market and whether others will pick up on the dynamic. WOS’s retail strategy has proved successful too, where the spread of risk and opportunity is concerned, and this now seems to be paying off.” Watches of Switzerland says it has “actively re-built” its stocks of Rolex in the US and the UK, after stocks fell earlier this year. Back in September, following reports of a ‘great Rolex shortage’, the watchmaker insisted that the scarcity of its products was “not a strategy” on its part - but was because it couldn’t meet demand while maintaining quality. Grocery inflation in the UK has hit a 14-month high, intensifying the cost of living squeeze facing households. Market research group Kantar reports that grocery price inflation rose to 2.1% in the four weeks to October 31st, its highest level since August 2020. Prices are rising fastest in markets such as savoury snacks, canned colas and crisps, Kantar reports - while prices of fresh bacon, vegetables and cat and dog treats are falling. That will hurt household budgets, at a time when energy prices have also risen, petrol and diesel are at record levels, and overall inflation is seen hitting 5% by next April. Fraser McKevitt, head of retail and consumer insight at Kantar, says rising prices are leading shoppers to hunt around for the best deals. “Grocery prices are rising and this month inflation hit its highest rate since August 2020, when retailers were still cutting promotions to maintain stock on the shelves. As prices increase in certain categories, we can expect shoppers to continue to visit several supermarkets and shop around to find the best deals. Already, households visit an average of 3.3 supermarkets per month in order to find the best value for money.” Kantar also reports that people are preparing for Christmas early this year, stocking up on mince pies, Christmas puddings and turkeys: “After a tough 18 months, consumers are gearing up for bigger and better celebrations. An unrestricted Halloween drove sales of pumpkins up 26% in the four weeks to 31 October, and with trick or treating back on the cards seasonal confectionery grew by 27%. “With Christmas ads out earlier than ever and Christmas stock on the shelves, we’re keen to prepare early this year so we can dive head first into festivities. 4.7 million households bought mince pies this month. Customers are also getting ahead on shopping for the big day itself. Frozen poultry sales are 27% higher year on year, with people spending an additional £6.1 million in the latest four weeks. 1.6 million households bought their Christmas pudding this month as well, 400,000 more than last year.” In recent months, consumers had been warned that some traditional Christmas foods, such as turkey and pigs in blankets, could be hit by shortages of workers. Kantar also reports that: Grocery sales fell by 1.9% year on year in the 12 weeks to 31 October 2021, but are still higher than before the pandemic, up 7.3% compared with 2019. Consumers’ shopping behaviour is beginning to stabilise and some habits from the pandemic look set to stay. Shoppers are still making 40 million fewer trips to supermarkets per month than in 2019, while a fifth of households order their groceries online each month. Last week, Marks &amp; Spencer reported that its online Christmas food ordering service has already sold out of some items - including the biggest turkeys and Christmas puddings. ITV’s Joel Hills has more details about Primark’s Christmas plans, following its financial results and expansion this morning. In today’s annual results, Primark warns that it has seen “further supply chain disruption” in recent weeks, including temporary closures at dispatch ports, limited sea container availability and congestion at destination ports. That means a small number of product lines could be in short supply. These disruptions have delayed both the handover of inventory from suppliers and the shipping and delivery of inventory to store. We are closely managing this with the support of our logistics providers, taking advantage of our scale and efficient warehouses, and we are prioritising the product most in demand. Although, at this point, the disruption is causing limited availability on a small number of lines, our warehouse inventories give us stock cover on the majority of lines for the important Christmas trading period. Primark will not increase its prices despite soaring costs, the boss of its parent firm Associated British Foods has said -- although some food prices will rise (as flagged earlier) due to the surge in costs. PA Media have the details: George Weston, chief executive of ABF, told the PA news agency that the retailer has seen rising energy and distribution costs but will not pass this on to customers. “We haven’t increased prices at Primark over the past 10 years and we won’t do so this year,” he said. “We have currency difference in our favour and there are other areas we have recognised to find cost savings so won’t pass that on.” However, Mr Weston said the company has already increased some prices across its grocery business, which runs brands including Kingsmill, Twinings and Ryvita. He told PA: “In food we are having to pass some of the impact on to customers because it’s just too big to absorb. “Energy prices have shot up, with natural gas trebling. Distribution costs have risen, labour costs have risen - it seems like everything is jumping up right now.” Associated British Foods also points out that Brexit has “exacerbated” the shortage of lorry drivers in the UK, which is one cause of supply chain problems. In today’s annual results, it says: Our businesses are reliant on the availability of skilled HGV drivers. Whilst there is currently a shortage of drivers in other parts of Europe, the USA and Australia, the situation has been exacerbated in the UK as a result of the EU exit. We continue to work closely with our major carriers and logistics partners to minimise supply chain disruption. The situation remains fluid and is being closely managed and monitored. Last month the UK government announced that foreign lorry drivers can make an unlimited number of pick-ups and drop-offs in a fixed period in the UK, to help prevent shortages this Christmas. ABF also says its businesses were well prepared for the end of the Brexit transition period and it hasn’t seen any material disruption to its supply chains. But it has seen a small increase in the administrative costs of trading and in limited cases duties related to its trading with the EU. In the City, shares in Primark’s parent company have surged over 6% after it announced expansion plans, and a special dividend. But, Associated British Foods is also experiencing supply chain problems, which could push up prices at its food divisions. Discount clothing chain Primark plans to expand its store estate over the next five years to 530 stores, from 398, and accelerate its expansion into the US, France, Italy and Iberia. That includes growing its US store estate to around 60 stores, from just 13 at present. Paul Marchant, CEO Primark, says there is ‘sizeable growth potential’ in the US: “Six years after we opened our first store in Boston, it’s clear that US customers – from Florida right up to Chicago – are loving the unique Primark offer. With our current portfolio of 13 stores trading really well, it feels like we’ve established a strong foundation from which to accelerate our expansion in the US market. Primark has announced three new store locations in the New York region today -- City Point in Brooklyn; Roosevelt Field in Garden City, Long Island; and Crossgates Mall in Albany. In its annual results, ABF also reported that Primark’s like-for-likes sales fell 12% compared to pre-pandemic levels in the last 12 months (to mid-September). Store closures due to pandemic lockdowns wiped out around £2bn of sales last year. And it hopes to bounce back strongly this year and at least recover all those lost sales (unless significant restrictions are reimposed), having seen customers returning to its stores in large numbers since Covid-19 vaccines were rolled out. George Weston, Chief Executive of Associated British Foods, said: Although the possibility of further trading restrictions cannot be ruled out, we expect Primark to deliver a much improved margin and profit next year. We are now intent on expanding our new store pipeline and investing in technology and digital capabilities to continue improving the performance of the business. But ABF, which also has sugar, grocery, ingredients and agriculture operations, warned that it is “not immune” to supply chain problems, rising raw material costs and higher wages. And that could force the company to hike its prices: We are seeing significant cost increases in energy, logistics and commodities in addition to the impact of widely reported port congestion and road freight limitations. Our businesses are working to offset the impact of these through cost savings. Where necessary, our food businesses will also implement price increases. ABF also warns that there’s a risk of increased pressure on its supply chains resulting from labour shortages as economies reopen, exacerbated by employee health and safety concerns. ABF shares have hit a two-month high this morning, up 6.7% to £19.93, the top FTSE 100 riser. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, says ABF’s upbeat outlook has boosted shares: Wilfred Daye, the head of the trading platform Securitize Capital, says crypto assets are also benefitting from inflation worries: “Inflation is a major consideration for investors today, and the younger generation of investors often favours cryptocurrency as a hedge over gold. In fact, while gold has slid throughout the year, bitcoin and ethereum have more than doubled. Retail investors have played a major role in fuelling this shift and institutional investors are increasingly following suit.” Another reason behind the surge in ethereum is its recent system upgrade, he said. Here’s the full story: Naeem Aslam of Avatrade argues that increased institutional take-up of cryptocurrencies is driving bitcoin and ether higher. The twitter poll that Elon Musk should sell 10% of his Tesla shares may also be pushing the markets higher, Aslam suggests, [Musk may put some of the proceeds into crypto rather than fiat currencies, as he already owns bitcoin, ether and dogecoin] Within just a few days of Bitcoin’s last burst to historical highs, on Monday the notorious digital coin was again able to shatter through its ceiling and is currently trading around $67,700. Similarly, Ethereum breaking through the $4.800 barrier is a first for the alt coin. The recent cryptocurrency rally has been aided by the launch of a Bitcoin-linked ETF in the United States as well as Elon Musk’s weekend Twitter poll. Solana and Binance Coin have gained nearly 20% in the last week, bringing the total market capitalization of cryptocurrencies to $3 trillion. As evidenced by Bitcoin’s price action, which is now four times what it was at the end of 2020, as investors are becoming more comfortable with the practical use of Bitcoin and companies are working hard to find innovative ways to use blockchain technology, as evidenced by the launch of new coins such as Solana. But Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at OANDA, isn’t as impressed: The crypto-space looks to be the only “asset class” moving today. Both digital Dutch tulips, Bitcoin and Ether, have hit record highs this morning as the street continues to buy on a positive technical picture, a lower dollar, and Elon Musk’s Twitter account. I am girding myself for more “institutional experts” appearing on the news wires droning on about becoming “mainstream assets.” Whoever bought the Squid Games tokens probably isn’t feeling the same way. Consumers starting their Christmas shopping earlier than usual amid concern over supply chain shortages and rising prices helped to drive a recovery in UK retail sales last month, industry figures show. The British Retail Consortium said total sales were up 1.3% in October from the same month a year ago, and up 6.3% from the same month in 2019, before Covid-19 tipped the UK into the worst recession for 300 years. According to the BRC, clothing and footwear sales performed well, as Halloween helped to boost sales of children’s costumes and chocolates. However, global supply chain disruption continued to hold back sales of furniture and electrical items. Food shops also reported weak growth, with spending dented by the gradual return of consumers to pubs and restaurants after the reopening of the hospitality sector. Separate figures from Barclaycard showed that overall spending on credit cards grew by 14.2% in October from a year earlier, with particularly strong growth in spending on travel, digital entertainment and subscription services. More here: Callie Cox, investment strategist at Ally, points out that Wall Street is on quite a tear: The Fed also flags concerns that Europe’s recovery could be hit by new variants of Covid-19, saying: Despite high vaccination rates, the emergence of new variants and a resurgence of COVID-19 infections could weigh on the ongoing recovery in Europe. Ending stimulus support too early could also “materially hit” economic growth and affect financial stability, it says. Such a slowdown would stress the European financial system, and lead to knock-on damage to the US economy - through a deterioration in global risk appetite, a pullback in lending from European banks to U.S. businesses and households, strains in dollar funding markets, and losses due to large direct and indirect credit exposures. The Fed also fears that stresses in China’s real estate sector could strain the Chinese financial system, with possible spillovers to the United States. In its financial stability report, it cites the heavily indebted Evergrande as an example of the risks. In China, business and local government debt remain large; the financial sector’s leverage is high, especially at small and medium-sized banks; and real estate valuations are stretched. In this environment, the ongoing regulatory focus on leveraged institutions has the potential to stress some highly indebted corporations, especially in the real estate sector, as exemplified by the recent concerns around China Evergrande Group. Stresses could, in turn, propagate to the Chinese financial system through spillovers to financial firms, a sudden correction of real estate prices, or a reduction in investor risk appetite. Given the size of China’s economy and financial system as well as its extensive trade linkages with the rest of the world, financial stresses in China could strain global financial markets through a deterioration of risk sentiment, pose risks to global economic growth, and affect the United States. Evergrande, which owes over $300bn, avoided default last month with a last-minute payment to lenders. It has been hit by a government measures to cool the housing market, with tighter regulations on developers designed to curb debt, preserve cash, and limit overbuilding. But the problems go wider. A report last month found that one third of China’s property developers will struggle to repay their debts in the next 12 months Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The surge in risky asset prices this year has made them increasingly susceptible to a tumble if economic growth takes a turn for the worse, the pandemic escalates, or investors lose confidence. That’s the message from the US Federal Reserve, which is also concerned about the rise of stablecoins which underpin the cryptocurrency market. In its latest financial stability report, the Fed flagged that prices of risky assets have generally risen further since its previous report six months ago. Despite concerns about the spread of the Delta variant of the virus that causes COVID-19, asset prices have been supported by increased earnings expectations and low Treasury yields, it says. In a warning to the markets, they say: Prices of risky assets generally increased since the previous report, and, in some markets, prices are high compared with expected cash flows. House prices have increased rapidly since May, continuing to outstrip increases in rent. Nevertheless, despite rising housing valuations, little evidence exists of deteriorating credit standards or highly leveraged investment activity in the housing market. Asset prices remain vulnerable to significant declines should investor risk sentiment deteriorate, progress on containing the virus disappoint, or the economic recovery stall. But are investors heeding the message? Last night, the US stock market closed at a fresh record high, extending its pandemic rally, as investors continue to shrug off concerns about rising inflation, supply chain problems, and the ongoing pandemic. And bitcoin has struck a new record high this morning -- hitting $68,550 for the first time, as crypto assets continue to surge. Critics would point out that the Fed’s own policies have helped drive the rally in risky assets. Since early in the pandemic it has kept interest rates at record lows and pumped $120bn per month into the system through its bond-buying stimulus programme, which it is just starting to wind down. The Fed’s financial stability report shows concerns over the rise of stablecoins - cryptocurrencies [such as tether] that try to peg their market value to some external reference, such as the US dollar. The Fed points out that the sector has grown fast, and warns that ‘some stablecoins are vulnerable’ Policymakers are concerned about the consequences if a stablecoin can’t hold its value. The value of stablecoins outstanding has grown about fivefold over the past 12 months and stood at around $130 billion as of October 2021 Certain stablecoins, including the largest ones, promise to be redeemable at any time at a stable value in U.S. dollars but are, in part, backed by assets that may lose value or become illiquid. If the assets backing a stablecoin fall in value, the issuer may not be able to meet redemptions at the promised stable value. Also coming up today: Rolls-Royce is moving ahead with a multibillion pound plan to roll out a new breed of mini nuclear reactors after securing more than £450m from the government and investors. The engineering firm will set up a venture focused on developing small modular nuclear reactors, or SMRs, in partnership with investors BNF Resources and the US generator Exelon Generation with a joint investment of £195m to fund the plans over the next three years. On the data front, the latest survey of US producer prices will show whether inflationary pressures are still building in America’s economy. The ZEW survey of economic confidence will show if German investor confidence has improved, after falling for the last four months. Central bankers will be busy; the Bank of Canada, Bank of England, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and European Central Bank are holding a conference on Diversity and Inclusion in Economics, Finance, and Central Banking. The agenda 7am GMT: German trade data for September 10am GMT: ZEW index of German economic sentiment 1pm GMT: ECB president Christine Lagarde speaks at the 4th ECB Forum on Banking Supervision Forum: “Tomorrow’s banking: navigating change” 1.30pm GMT: US PPI index of producer prices released 2pm GMT: Fed chair Jerome H. Powell gives opening remarks at the Conference on Diversity and Inclusion in Economics, Finance and Central Banking 3.30pm: Bank of England deputy governor Ben Broadbent gives evidence to the EFRA Committee: Labour shortages in the food and farming sector 4pm GMT: Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey on a panel on “Central Banks and Inequality”, at the conference on Diversity and Inclusion in Economics, Finance and Central BankingAndrew Gale, the Yorkshire head coach, has been suspended pending a disciplinary hearing into an offensive tweet he posted 11 years ago as the club continues to grapple with its racism scandal. Gale, 37, replied to a message from Paul Dews, Leeds United’s head of media at the time, in 2010 that included the words “button it yid!”. It resurfaced this week in the public outcry that followed Yorkshire’s handling of Azeem Rafiq’s allegations. The former club captain, who took over as head coach in 2016, told Jewish News he was “completely unaware” of the offensive nature of the term and deleted the post shortly after sending it but could now face a sanction from his employers. A statement from Yorkshire on Tuesday evening also disclosed that Martyn Moxon, the director of cricket, is signed off work with a “stress-related illness”. It is understood the 61-year-old is unlikely to give evidence at parliament’s digital, culture, media and sport select committee hearing next week. After settling his employment claim with the club on Monday, Rafiq called for Moxon and Mark Arthur, the chief executive, to be removed from their positions after they failed to properly escalate his initial claims of racism in 2018. Both men remain employed by Yorkshire – the club said Moxon will be given “the necessary support” – but are likely to have their positions reviewed in the coming weeks by Kamlesh Patel, who took over as the new chair last Friday after Roger Hutton’s resignation and has since praised Rafiq for his bravery as a whistleblower. As well as battling to stabilise Yorkshire’s finances after an exodus of sponsors and the possibility of losing the lucrative Headingley Test match next summer, Lord Patel is launching a review of the club’s reporting processes and setting up a whistleblower hotline. The latter follows a number of recent allegations of racism from other former Yorkshire players, with Patel confirming the hotline will be in operation by the end of the week. “We want anyone who may have suffered issues to come forward,” he said. “These will be considered carefully and with due diligence.” Yorkshire also confirmed the report into Rafiq’s complaints, completed in September after a 12-month investigation that Patel described as “flawed”, has been shared with Julian Knight MP, chair of the DCMS committee that will meet next Tuesday, and the Equality and Human Rights Commission. The report includes a number of allegations of racism from Rafiq’s two spells at the club between 2008 and 2018, one of which led to the BBC pulling Radio 5 live’s The Tuffers and Vaughan Cricket Show off air on Monday evening. Michael Vaughan, the former England captain and now a prominent pundit, is accused of telling a group of four players of Asian heritage “there’s too many of you lot, we need to do something about it” before a game for the club in 2009. Writing in the Telegraph last week, Vaughan said he “completely and categorically” denies making the comment and did not meet the team investigating Rafiq’s allegations due to concerns over confidentiality. The BBC last week announced that Vaughan would not be appearing on his usual Monday night slot, with a spokesperson saying this was to “maintain the impartiality of the programme” when discussing the fallout from the Yorkshire crisis. However, the Tuffers and Vaughan show was shelved completely and replaced by the Good Pace for Radio podcast hosted by England’s Tymal Mills and Mark Wood that looked ahead to Wednesday’s T20 World Cup semi-final against New Zealand in Abu Dhabi. One source at the corporation told the Guardian that proceeding with the show would have put co-host Phil Tufnell in a difficult position given his working relationship with Vaughan and the title of the show carrying both their names. The show was not due to be aired next Monday due to a clash with the England football team’s World Cup qualifier against San Marino.Mexico’s use of spyware made by NSO Group is facing new scrutiny following the arrest of a businessman on allegations that he used the surveillance tool to spy on a journalist. The arrest of the businessman – who has not formally been named by Mexican prosecutors – comes months after a consortium of media outlets, including the Guardian, published a series of reports detailing how the phone numbers of thousands of Mexicans, including 50 people linked to the country’s current president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, appeared on a leaked list of numbers selected by government clients of the Israeli spyware company for possible surveillance. Journalists, as well as lawyers, activists and prosecutors also appeared on the list. In the wake of the stories by the Pegasus project, Obrador called his predecessors’ alleged use of spyware “shameful” and said his own government would bar use of the surveillance tool. Mexican press freedom group Article 19 hailed the arrest, and expressed hopes it would lead to the identification of those responsible for the abuse of spyware in Mexico and around the world. “We hope this will be the first step towards unraveling the framework of the illegal and abusive use of a [spying] tool which infringes the most elemental principles of privacy, intimacy and fundamental rights,” the group said in a statement. The arrest marks the first legal action in the country against an individual accused of being linked to the alleged cyber-spying campaign. Media reports said the man was linked to a company that served as an intermediary between NSO and Mexican authorities. Mexico is known to have been one of NSO’s first clients. About 30 contracts were reportedly signed by the governments of President Felipe Calderón and President Enrique Peña Nieto between 2006 and 2018, though officials say some of the contracts appear to have been disguised as equipment purchases. Mexican authorities have said that the country has spent about $300m in government contracts to buy spyware in the past. Santiago Nieto, who head’s Mexico’s Financial Intelligence Unit, has said purchases of spyware appear in at least some cases to have included excess payments that may have been used to pay kickbacks to government officials payments. A spokesperson for NSO said: “As stated in the past, NSO’s technologies are only sold to vetted and approved government entities, and cannot be operated by private companies or individuals. We regret to see that, over and over again, the company’s name is mentioned in the media in events that has nothing to do with NSO, directly or indirectly.” The Israeli company has faced a barrage of bad news is recent days, from a decision by the Biden administration to place the company on a US blacklist, and a US appeals court ruling which rejected NSO’s “sovereign immunity” defence in a case brought by WhatsApp. The company has said its spyware – which can hack into phones and remotely control them – is used by its government clients to target terrorists and other serious criminals. It has said it investigates serious allegations of abuse and that the leaked list at the heart of the Pegasus project is not a list of the company’s clients’ targets.Marcus Rashford has vowed to keep campaigning to lift children out of poverty after receiving his MBE, saying he will give the medal to his mum. The England footballer, who last year forced two major government U-turns to extend free school meals into the school holidays, received his MBE for services to vulnerable children at Windsor Castle on Tuesday. Rashford, 24, has helped raise enough money since March 2020 to help the food waste charity FareShare distribute more than 21m meals for families experiencing food insecurity. Rashford was outspoken in his opposition to the government’s axing of the £1,040-a-year – £20-a-week – universal credit uplift on 6 October. The Manchester United striker said he would continue to campaign to “give children the things I didn’t have when I was a kid”, adding: “If I did have, I would have been much better off and had many more options in my life. “For me, it is a punishment for them not to be getting things like meals or supplies of books.” Rashford said he would be giving the MBE medal to his mum, Melanie Maynard, who raised five siblings while working full-time on minimum wage in Manchester. Rashford’s MBE was conferred by Prince William in the first face-to-face ceremony since the pandemic began. “Keep continuing the vital work you are doing for vulnerable children across the UK,” the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge said on Twitter. Rashford’s campaigning was honoured in October by the University of Manchester, which made him the youngest recipient of its honorary doctorate. “Marcus, your work to #EndChildFoodPoverty has changed so many lives for the better. We are proud to be doing this work alongside you,” FareShare said on Twitter. Rashford this year published a bestselling children’s book – penned with the journalist Carl Anka – from Macmillan titled You Are a Champion.This may not be the finest article ever published by the Guardian, or the best that I have written. After 17 days on hunger strike outside the Foreign Office, I have to admit I am slowing down both in my speech and in my thinking. Until the weekend, I was on a long plateau, but each day now feels like a descent. I am very tired. It’s probably the body saying, “be careful: do not take this too far”. It is not that I am hungry, although I have a strange desire for scrambled egg on toast, a food I do not especially like. The black coffee that I drank last week is now impossible. It makes me too sick. A couple of veterans have told me to take water with salt. People ask whether this self-inflicted punishment is worthwhile. But I felt I had no choice: it seemed the moral thing to do. I felt that if I did not act, it was likely that within weeks my wife, Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, who has been furloughed from jail in Tehran, would be sent back for a second sentence. By acting, I hoped to forestall this. There is a blockage at the heart of this, which has been recognised by former Conservative foreign secretaries. The UK has an acknowledged £400m debt to Iran, and if it is not paid neither Nazanin nor the other British hostages will come home. For more than a year it has been said that the prime minister, foreign secretary and defence secretary want to pay this debt. Yet it does not happen, and no explanation is ever given. I’m concerned that they plan to link the British hostages to those in the US in order to secure a block deal, bringing British and American prisoners home together and making the debt a constituent part of this jigsaw. But this would be an act of folly, for both British and American political prisoners. I don’t think the US is forcing the UK to do this; rather, it seems the UK wishes to stand alongside America. This is a reckless, irresponsible policy choice. It would be even worse, of course, if the release of the prisoners was linked to material progress on the Iran nuclear deal. There would be so many dynamics and concerns at play, including domestic politics in Iran and US. This debt is a bilateral issue between the UK and Iran. There is a moral hazard here: it is a debt that has to be paid, a legal obligation. It is not a ransom demand: the longer this debt is left unpaid, the greater the anger and the more interest Iran will demand. The UK has allowed hostages to be taken because of it, and if it is not paid soon I suspect other hostages will be taken. Our family has become part of an acceptable level of collateral damage. Nazanin is of course worried about where this will go. She has herself been on hunger strike in prison and knows what effect it can have on the body. My first hunger strike in summer 2019 outside the Iranian embassy was undertaken alongside hers; I ended mine after she ended hers in 15 days. She was in control, but feels less so now. She sees the pictures of me on social media and elsewhere. She watches the weather on the internet to see how cold it is in London, and asks me to be careful. A danger with hunger strikes is that you become more stubborn and less flexible, and it’s important this is not taken too far. I would never let my daughter, Gabriella, go from two parents to none. I have no death wish. At the same time it is important that she sees her dad battling for her mum. She understands more of what is happening now than she did two years ago. She knows that Daddy is on hunger strike to get Boris Johnson to bring Mummy home. When this is over, she will know she went to Downing Street to deliver the petition. Amid all this angry politics, I have been struck by the care and kindness of strangers – packages sent via Amazon, the visits from old friends, former teachers from school or university, my old boss. It is not food, but it is sustenance. Our story is dark in many ways, but that reminder of kindness is absolutely central to survival. • Richard Ratcliffe is the husband of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe. He works as an accountant and lives in London. His campaign to free his wife can be contacted via @freenazaninMost of the people due to board a controversial deportation flight to Jamaica on Wednesday have been removed from the flight list, as anti-deportation activists have blocked the road in front of a detention centre to try to prevent them from being put on the plane. The activists, calling themselves Stop The Plane, have locked themselves to metal pipes outside Brook House immigration removal centre near Gatwick airport. Originally more than 50 Jamaican nationals were due to fly, but the Guardian understands most are no longer on the passenger list. The flight was due to depart at 1am on Wednesday morning with only two or three passengers onboard. Messages online from anti-deportation groups said the flight departed Birmingham airport with just three deportees on board a plane able to seat 350 people. Home Office deportation flights to Jamaica are controversial because of the Windrush scandal. Although the Home Office says nobody from the Windrush generation is on the list, some have Windrush connections. The Home Office has encountered various problems with the flight. The Covid outbreak at Colnbrook, an immigration removal centre near Heathrow, has led to some detainees being told their removal flight has been deferred; in addition, some of those due to fly on Wednesday have been identified as potential victims of trafficking as a result of county lines drug dealing, which requires further investigation. Concern has been raised at the highest level by the Jamaican high commissioner, Seth Ramocan, about people who have been in the UK since childhood. A survey of 17 people originally expected to fly on Wednesday, by the organisation Movement For Justice, identified at least 10 who have been in the UK since they were children. They include one man who came to Britain at the age of nine and was raised by his aunt, who was from the Windrush generation. At least 24 British children have been at risk of losing their fathers. Another man, who came to the UK at the age of 10, and served an eight-year-sentence for a kidnapping offence, is suffering from dangerously high blood pressure. In the past few weeks he has been taken to hospital several times, admitted and then discharged back to the detention centre. His blood pressure has been as high as 260/150, particularly high for someone of 34. A healthy reading is in the range of 90/60 to 120/80. His lawyer, Jacqueline McKenzie of Leigh Day solicitors, said she had been informed his wrist was believed to have been fractured earlier on Tuesday during a restraint episode in the detention centre. The Home Office said: “The Home Office reviews all reports resulting from a use of force to ensure that techniques are used proportionately, that they are justified, and are used for the minimum period required.” One medical assessment carried out during the man’s detention states: “He needs to be released from custody as soon as practically possible as we cannot predict when he would have another massive MI, or even a stroke or fatal event. Please release him as soon as possible to avoid a major cardiovascular event.” McKenzie said: “I am extremely concerned about our client, who has been deemed unfit to fly. It is unclear why the Home Office has chosen to be so belligerent in this case.” A spokesperson for Stop The Plane said: “We reject the legitimacy of the entire deportation regime. It is premised on racist notions of black, brown and racialised people.” The Home Office said: “Those individuals with no right to be in the UK and foreign national offenders should be in no doubt that we will do whatever is necessary to remove them. This is what the public rightly expects and why we regularly operate flights to different countries. All immigration removal centres have dedicated 24-hour on-site medical facilities, including access to independent doctors and nurses, with healthcare support provided throughout the removal process. An individual’s medical needs are determined by an independent doctor and will always be considered when removing them.”The projection by Climate Action Tracker (CAT) that global heating would soar to 2.4C, based on analysis of countries’ 2030 greenhouse gas emissions targets, caused widespread dismay at the Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow. Optimistic estimates published last week that temperatures could be held to 1.8C were known to be based on untested assumptions about long-term promises, and many countries and activists treated them warily as a result, but the “reality check” from the CAT analysis of nationally determined contributions (NDCs) for the next decade came as a shock nonetheless. Tina Stege, climate envoy for the Marshall Islands, a tiny archipelago in the Pacific that will face inundation at temperatures above 1.5C, said the findings underlined how vital it was for countries to revise their NDCs to take much stronger action this decade. “The world is heading for at least 2.4C based on 2030 NDCs,” said Stege. “2030 is a cliff edge, certainly for my county, and really for the world.” Scientists have made clear that unless emissions can be reduced by about 45% by 2030, the target of holding global heating to 1.5C will be out of reach. As current NDCs are so inadequate, developing countries at the talks are pushing hard for countries to be forced to revise them as soon as possible – next year, according to many. Under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, the 1992 parent treaty to the Paris accord, a Cop (conference of the parties) takes place every year. But under the Paris agreement, countries only have to revise their NDCs every five years. For the High Ambition Coalition, made up of developed and developing countries including the US, the EU, the Marshall Islands and many of the other countries most at risk from climate breakdown, waiting five years for a revision is too long. The coalition put out a statement – not yet signed by all members, but approved by the US and more than 30 others – calling for countries to have to update their NDCs every year if they were not aligned with the 1.5C goal. Frans Timmermans, the EU’s vice-president, said: “Before we leave this conference, we need to make sure that we take decisions that put us on track to meeting our [1.5C] goal, and this needs to be done within a year, because time is running out.” Other countries and groups, including the Climate Vulnerable Forum, made up of countries most at risk from climate breakdown, are making a similar call. Green campaigners have also joined the push. However, there is disagreement over exactly how any such “ratchet” mechanism would work, how often countries should be forced back to revise their NDCs, and whether some countries that had produced revisions already should be exempt, even if those revisions were weak. One Cop expert told the Guardian: “There is a real danger that whatever form of words is agreed is not strong enough to force countries to make real updates on the urgent timetable needed.” The UK, as president of the Cop, is set to produce a draft text in the early hours of Wednesday morning that will address this issue, but any form of words will be subject to intense scrutiny and potential change by all parties. Alok Sharma, the UK cabinet minister who is Cop president, warned: “[The draft] is likely to require negotiating teams to consult with their capitals. We hope they do so expeditiously.” What is certain is that this issue will dominate the final days of Cop26. Michael Jacobs, professor of political economy at the University of Sheffield, who attended Cops as climate adviser to Gordon Brown, said: “With countries’ commitments for 2030 adding up to a likely 2.4C, not 1.5C, it seems inevitable that there will be increasing demands for the Cop to agree some mechanism, to strengthen NDCS before the next scheduled moment of 2025. 2025 would surely be too late for 1.5C to be kept alive. It’s action this decade that’s needed, not 2050.” Ed Miliband, Labour’s shadow business secretary, said: “With Glasgow commitments for 2030 so far off from where we need to be, the British presidency must not allow the world to shrug its shoulders and wait till 2025 to return to this yawning gap in ambition. It would be a terrible betrayal of vulnerable countries and future generations in every country of the world.”When the alarm was raised with members of the South Wales Caving Club on Saturday afternoon that a fellow caver was stuck underground with serious injuries, they sent out an alert to comrades across the country that help was needed. By Monday afternoon, the number of experienced cavers arriving to assist the rescue mission at the Ogof Ffynnon Ddu in the Brecon Beacons had swollen to nearly 250. The cavers – each of them volunteers, many of them taking time off work to offer their help – were taking part in what would become the longest rescue mission in Welsh history. And the mission was complex. The Ogof Ffynnon Ddu network was described as “intestinal” by one caver; one of the longest in the UK, it goes on and on, 300 metres deep, 30 miles long. Gary Mitchell, an incident controller at South and Mid Wales Cave Rescue Team (SMWCT), one of 16 volunteer underground rescue organisations across the UK, said: “In caving terms, it’s a relatively popular cave. It’s beautiful, in a national nature reserve with stunning features. It’s big, challenging, it has three entrances. “Because it’s a relatively popular cave in terms of caving, we as a rescue team have our headquarters right by it, we regularly practise in it. “People come to that region because of its stunning cave system – there’s a bigger volume underground than you would have in other caves. So you are going to get accidents, people get lost, get stuck, run out of lights.” Mitchell had just turned up at the South Wales Caving Club headquarters, a converted terrace of grey cottages, when a young caver came racing out of the rocks to alert the club that there had been a serious incident. “As soon as the information [about the incident was] passed on, we knew this was a big incident, we knew he had got multiple injuries,” Mitchell said. “We had really good early information. That is a gamechanger.” Mitchell and his colleagues set up a control room in the caving club HQ, bringing in laptops and radios – surrounded by four large kegs of beer that had been in place for a planned party that night. The rescue operation rapidly stepped up. The team was concerned about the casualty’s location – he had entered through the Cwm Dwr entrance. “It’s not an entrance you choose to go in for fun, particularly,” Mitchell said. Realising that they would have to remove him by stretcher from an alternative portal – known simply as the “top entrance” – it became clear they had at least a 40-hour rescue on their hands. “If you do 10 minutes caving that equals one hour stretcher carry. As soon as it’s a stretcher case, times the caving time by 10.” One stretcher party consists of an average 15 people, so the team understood they would need as much support as they could secure and sent out an alert on Sarcall, an emergency communication service used by cave rescue. “We are hitting the panic button [at that point],” Mitchell said. “We can put an alert to all team members to ask if they’re available.” And the volunteer cavers answered the call in droves. From Gloucestershire, the Midlands, Somerset, Yorkshire, Derbyshire, Northumberland, the cavers came to the injured party’s aid. Among them was Martin Grass, the chair of Mendip Cave Rescue in Somerset, two hours away. He manned a communications device for about eight hours in thick fog at the top of the mountain. The system, Cave-Link, allows text messages to be sent through rock without cable, communicating with cavers underground, relaying information to the control room. Grass described the rescue as the most serious he had ever experienced in decades. “It’s the longest we’ve had. I think with the injuries it was the most severe. It ranks up there at number one.” Mitchell said: “Cavers are a relatively small, slightly strange bunch. Many of us know each other. Actually it was a bit like a social reunion because people are coming across the country who you don’t see very often. So you have to maintain that by not wearing them out. “You have to task them to the right places, those with the right skills, you’re not tasking too much or too little; if you’re sitting underground waiting, then the one thing you can do wrong is have too many people underground who are sat there freezing cold. You have to plan for it well.” Mitchell explained that in the first crucial hours after the alarm was raised they were able to get two advanced first aiders to the casualty, who were able to provide oxygen and painkillers and assess the injuries. But it was clear a fully qualified doctor would be needed and within four hours a cave rescuing doctor was on the scene. As well as the casualty, the rescuers’ health is paramount too. The cavers typically do six-hour shifts underground. After that “you’d come in, get showered, get warm, get fed, ideally get a few hours’ kip and then say: ‘I’ll go back in now or back in tomorrow’, whatever you’re up for. “This casualty required oxygen. But it’s not easy getting oxygen for 50 hours underground. Oxygen canister lasts about 40 minutes. That’s a huge amount of oxygen … teams brought oxygen from their regions.” Even after the 50-hour-plus epic battle to get the injured party out, the mission is still not technically over. Much of the kit used remains underground and cavers continued on Tuesday – and will probably continue for the rest of the week – to recover the equipment.It’s not unusual for Ted Cruz to levy a dyspeptic jeremiad against “government propaganda” or denigrate his political enemies as “petty authoritarians who would deny you the right to make your own medical choices” or “puppet[s] … with a hand inserted up their backside”. But the Republican senator’s target this time was an actual puppet – the 8ft 2in (249 cm) beloved yellow Big Bird, whose innocuous tweet about inoculations inspired a round of puppet-sneering from America’s conservative culture warriors. Anti-Sesame Street fervor is not exactly new, as I learned during my nearly two year stint there as a lowly production assistant. People had a problem with everything from Bert and Ernie’s sexuality, that time Cookie Monster tried to eat healthier, and the introduction of an HIV positive muppet named Kami. Apparently not everyone was on board with the company’s mission to help kids grow “stronger, smarter, and kinder”. Cruz affirmed his party’s anti-muppet stance last week after Big Bird tweeted, “I got the Covid-19 vaccine today! My wing is feeling a little sore, but it’ll give my body an extra protective boost that keeps me and others healthy.” Sesame Workshop, the nonprofit organization behind Sesame Street, declined to comment on the social media interaction. Cruz isn’t the only one who thinks the educational program is sinister. When Elmo and his father discussed racism in the wake of protests for George Floyd in a CNN town hall for kids, Fox News host Tucker Carlson criticized the children’s television show, saying it was telling children that America is a “very bad place” and it was their fault. The funding of Sesame Street has always been politicized. When Mitt Romney ran against Barack Obama in the 2012 presidential election, he promised to cut federal support for public broadcasting, which led Obama to mock Romney for going after Sesame Street instead of Wall Street (in 2015, the TV show controversially received a windfall in the form of privatized financial support from HBO). Airing for the first time 52 years ago, Sesame Street’s roots are in the civil rights movement. With a groundbreaking diverse human cast and an array of colorful muppets, it was a trailblazer. In early episodes Grover even learned about civil disobedience from a hippie. More recently, Sesame Street aired a special episode to address discrimination against the Asian American community in light of the surge of hate crimes during the pandemic. In one segment, Analyn, a child who was bullied about her eyes, is comforted with a song. Sesame Street is unique in its genre in that, unlike other children’s television shows, it does not suspend reality for its millions of tiny viewers. In addition to racism, the show has tackled real issues like living with a disability, coping with the death of a loved one, and poverty, with the introduction of a homeless character named Lily. In 2018, conservative America took a collective gasp after former Sesame Street writer Mark Saltzman said he wrote the characters Bert and Ernie as “a loving couple”. Sesame Workshop eventually surrendered in the debate and issued a statement declaring the rainbow sweater-wearing Bert and Ernie were not in fact lovers, but rather nonsexual best friends who happen to live together. Big Bird’s recent vaccination tweet wasn’t the first time Sesame Street joined a nationwide immunization campaign. A video has resurfaced online from a 1972 episode that shows the 8 ft yellow muppet lining up for his measles vaccine – hardly controversial at the time. It’s not just Republican politicians who are cold on Big Bird – their voters are too. After Romney tried to cut funding a Vanderbilt/Yougov poll found that while 85% of Democrats had favorable views of Big Bird, only 55% of Republicans did. Perhaps they never forgave him for his 1985 hit, I’m So Blue.Good evening, It’s night time now in Glasgow, and we’re going to close the blog shortly. The conference is well on its way to the final stretch. Here are today’s main events: The world’s most respected climate analysis coalition, the Climate Action Tracker (CAT), announced that temperature rises will top a disastrous 2.4C by the end of this century, based on the short-term goals countries have set out at Cop26. The UK Met Office warned that 1 billion people will be affected by extreme heat stress if the climate crisis raises the global temperature by just 2C. That includes heating to the point that the human body cannot cool itself by sweating and even healthy people sitting in the shade will die within six hours. All four UK health secretaries pledged to build climate-resilient health services, alongside 46 other countries making similar commitments. Health services are currently a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions, accounting for about 4.6% of the worldwide total. Canadian and British scientist advisers said substantial changes in behaviour are needed to tackle the climate emergency. Canada’s chief scientific adviser, Mona Nemer, said there would need to be a “profound behavioural and cultural change in terms of our relation to the Earth”. Cop26 delegates expressed unease about the lack of progress made in discussions with only four days to go before the official end of the conference. “Everything is still to play for but there’s a long way to go,” said Tracy Carty, climate change policy and advocacy lead at Oxfam. Democratic Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez hailed Joe Biden’s efforts to tackle the climate crisis, but said the US has “to deliver to get credit on climate change”. Extinction Rebellion Scotland activists have set up a 24-hour vigil outside JP Morgan Chase – the bank which invests more money in fossil fuels than any other in the world. Some neat art installations and designs at Cop (and around the UK) this year. The Dezeen architecture, interiors and design magazine has reported on the “Sinking House” in Bath, which takes inspiration from Monopoly. Dezeen explains: “Sinking House is a 5.5-metre by 3.5-metre bright red timber sculpture designed in a universally recognisable shape that takes cues from classic Monopoly houses.” “The world as designed by men has destroyed many things,” Cop26 delegates have been told, as leaders and campaigners warned that the climate crisis could not be ended without the empowerment of women. Women and girls around the world suffer disproportionately from the impacts of climate breakdown, as they are on average poorer, less educated and more dependent on subsistence farming. A UN report found 80% of those displaced by the climate emergency are women. The focus on gender equality on Tuesday saw indigenous women and politicians including Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, and Nancy Pelosi, speaker of the US House of Representatives, demand increased investment. Angelica Ponce, executive director of the Plurinational Authority for Mother Earth in Bolivia, said: “The world as designed by men has destroyed many things. The world should begin thinking like women. If it was designed by a woman, it would end violence against women and children. “We want to be in the corridors of power and take part in decisions at international level to end this struggle of climate justice,” she said. “As indigenous women, we live day-by-day the cruel reality of climate change in our land.” Meanwhile, somebody has graffitied “blood money” on another bank in Glasgow, according to a Glasgow Times reporter. Activists from Extinction Rebellion Scotland have just started a 24-hour vigil outside JP Morgan Chase – the bank which invests more money in fossil fuels than any other in the world. “Just last month, [JP Morgan Chase] said they’re going to continue in fossil fuels,” said protester Gary Jack, 60, a part-time crofter who travelled down to the city from north of Inverness. “And the reasoning behind that was, they can use the profit to invest in renewables. So their logic is, make the problem worse to gain more money to try and make it better – which is bonkers.” The activists said they have been visiting the Glasgow branch every day since the start of Cop26 and metal fences had already been put up outside the entrance before they got there. “I think it’s an admission of guilt, that they have to barricade themselves in,” Jack said. He added that police had also been positioned outside the bank every night: “That’s taxpayers’ money funding the police to protect the baddest bank in the world.” He said the with UN climate change conference being in the city, Scottish environmental activists were keen to make the most of the global spotlight being on them. “This is it. We’re not going to travel halfway around the world for the next Cop, and this is the one that needs to make the big decisions. There’s a fork in the road here. So we’re going to do everything we can and that’s why I’m here every day.” JPMorgan Chase launched a “Paris-aligned financing strategy” last year, pledging to set intermediate emission targets for 2030 for its financing portfolio A reminder: It’s Gender Day today at Cop26. And with that, the UK government pledged to fund £165m to help “progress gender equality while tackling climate change”. WaterAid, a charity working on supplying clean water and decent toilets, has lauded the announcement but said it is not enough. Kathryn Pharr, Senior Policy Advisor on International Climate Action, WaterAid, said: While we welcome the UK government’s pledge, sadly it is just a drop in the ocean of funding needed to support the millions of women and girls across the globe who are bearing the brunt of the climate crisis. More severe floods and droughts will only increase this injustice as women and girls are forced to walk further to collect water for their households, miss out on going to school, getting jobs and fulfilling their potential. This announcement needs to be an urgent rallying cry to other governments to follow suit and truly equip women and girls to be leaders in the fight against climate change, rather than victims, and to put gender equality at the heart of climate action. Maybe that was too easy a test for liveblog readers. Cop-watchers will know that, over the years, there have been several Cop presidents who are women. In fact, the president of the last summit, Cop25, was a woman: Chile’s Carolina Schmidt. BUT there are big gaps in diversity and inclusiveness at Cop, not just this year but all years. Last year, a campaign was launched to address that. Called SHEChangesClimate, its goal is to ensure “all delegations, for all climate negotiations, have at least a 50% representation of diverse women at their top levels”. You can read more about the campaign here. A little test for people who have closely watched Cop over the years. We’ve been getting a lot of press releases here at the Guardian during Cop26. One just landed in a colleague’s inbox that caught her eye. To save the marketing agency embarrassment, I won’t mention who sent it, but have a read of the below and try to guess what might be wrong: “Leading voices from the business world have joined with environmental and social activists, scientists and politicians to urge that the president of Cop27 is a woman. If successful, this would be the first woman president in Cop history.” Only a tiny fraction of Cop26 delegates have tested positive for Covid-19, largely due to the “exceptional” measures taken to limit infections, the Scottish government has said. John Swinney, the deputy first minister, told MSPs on Tuesday only 0.1% of delegates with passes for the summit’s ‘blue zone’ tested positive by Friday last week, a period covering the first week of the event. He said a full update would follow when the summit ends. Delegates have to complete and register daily lateral flow tests; produce evidence of their tests results; show vaccination certificates and observe distancing at events. Those measures led to many of the lengthy queues and delays getting into the conference zone last week. Swinney said the event, which could lead to Covid infection rates spiking again, was being monitored very closely. “Covid-19 has presented significant challenges to staging this unique event. The scale and worldwide draw of Cop26 poses risk of spread of Covid-19 both within delegates and to or from the local population of Scotland and the UK. “A comprehensive and exceptional package of mitigation measures has been in place to ensure the event is delivered safely, helping to protect the welfare of everyone involved and the wider community.” The speaker of the United States House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, has just been (you guessed it) speaking at an event attended by the press and US congresspeople. “This is all about the children,” she says. “Leaving a world where they can be healthy, more secure, and more in reach of their fulfilment.” We have a live feed above. It’s a glorious sunny afternoon outside the summit venue as the band strikes up for an impromptu ceilidh (Scottish or Irish social gathering) organised by Extinction Rebellion Scotland. The ever-patient caller takes the international crowd through the steps to the Gay Gordons dance just as the Welsh Kitchen, which appears at XR events across the city, sets up. Today it’s cottage pie on the menu. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the Democratic Congresswoman, has warned that the US “has not recovered our moral authority” following the Donald Trump years. Speaking at a sideline event at Cop, Ocasio-Cortez was among a group of Democrats who hailed Joe Biden’s efforts to tackle the climate crisis. But while she said America “is back” in the climate conversation, the Congresswoman said this needs to be matched by actions. “We have to deliver to get credit on climate change, it’s as simple as that,” she said. (Stepping away from the press conference, which just ended, a bit of political drama from our Scotland editor, Severin Carrell) The Greens leader of Brighton and Hove city council has apologised for “a major failure of judgment” after flying from London to Glasgow, where he lambasted the UK government for ineffective action on climate change at the Cop26 summit. Phelim MacCafferty, who also co-chairs the council’s carbon neutrality working group, admitted he took the flight instead of going by train on Friday, arguing he was worried about warnings that rail travellers faced delays that day. The next day, MacCafferty represented Brighton and Hove at an event to present the Glasgow declaration on climate, attended by Greta Thunberg, and was at the mass march through the city on Saturday. Caroline Lucas, the Green MP for Brighton Pavilion, travelled to Glasgow by train. He had been challenged about his travel by the Brighton Argus, a local paper. “This decision to fly was a major failure of my judgment which goes against my political group’s pledges and principles and I unreservedly apologise,” he told the paper. “I reluctantly took this very difficult decision because I was concerned about the unreliability of the rail network following the well-publicised difficulties experienced by many people wanting to travel by train to Glasgow the week before, when trains were cancelled. “I was concerned that this would happen again and I felt it was important not to miss the opportunity to attend the important presentation on behalf of the city, lobby world leaders and share with others the innovative work taking place in Brighton and Hove.” Here is the key quote from the CAT press conference (live in the video above) from Bill Hare, the chief executive of Climate Analytics: Glasgow was meant to keep the Paris agreement’s 1.5 degree limit in sight, but the 2030 emissions gap is still so huge that we can’t really see that being possible at present. Scientists have warned that beyond 1.5C, some of the damage to the earth’s climate will become irreversible. The CAT analysts also found a chasm between what countries have said they will do on greenhouse gas emissions and their plans in reality. If current policies and measures are taken into account, rather than just goals, heating would rise to 2.7C, based on the CAT analysis. Read the full report here: This might come as a shock to avid readers. That is because just last week, other organisations published more optimistic forecasts of 1.9C or 1.8C. However, those estimates were based on long-term goals set out by countries including India, the world’s third-biggest emitter, which is aiming for net-zero emissions by 2070. By contrast, the CAT based its analysis on countries’ short-term goals for the next decade. Bill Hare, the chief executive of Climate Analytics, one of the organisations behind CAT, explains why long-term goals are misleading: We are concerned that some countries are trying to portray [Cop26] as if the 1.5C limit is nearly in the bag. But it’s not, it’s very far from it, and they are downplaying the need to get short-term targets for 2030 in line with 1.5C. Niklas Höhne, an author of the report, said: Countries’ long-term intentions are good, but their short-term implementation is inadequate. In other words, we can make promises for the future, but we need to make drastic and immediate changes in the next few years to avoid disaster. And … the results are in. It’s very bad news. The Climate Action Tracker (CAT), the world’s most respected climate analysis coalition, has announced that temperature rises will top 2.4C by the end of this century, based on the short-term goals countries have set out at Cop26. That is a disastrous level of global heating far in excess of the limits in the Paris climate agreement, despite a flurry of carbon-cutting pledges from governments at this year’s UN summit. At that level, widespread extreme weather – sea level rises, drought, floods, heatwaves and fiercer storms – would cause devastation across the globe. A reminder: the Paris accord aspirations were of “well below” 2C upper limit, and the much safer 1.5C limit. In twenty minutes, what could be the biggest news of the day is going to drop: the results of the Climate Action Tracker. What’s that? The CAT is the world’s most respected climate analysis coalition, providing independent reports to policymakers since 2009. What does it do? It tracks and monitors government climate action and, since 2015, measures it against the globally agreed Paris Agreement aims. What are those? For the first time, rich and poor countries joined together in a legally binding treaty pledging to hold global heating to well below 2C, the scientifically-advised limit of safety, with an aspiration not to breach 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. What will CAT say this year? You will find out shortly. I’m Oliver Holmes, taking over the blog. I’ll be with you for the rest of the day. If you see anything you think deserves a spot on here, email me at: oliver.holmes@theguardian.com I’m going to hand over to my colleague Oliver Holmes for the rest of the afternoon and he’ll keep you updated. Thanks and bye! AP also reporting that US Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who is also at Cop, was asked if she had a message to young activists who have pressed governments to cut climate-damaging fossil fuel pollution. She told reporters: “Well, I would say, Stay in the streets. Keep pushing.” Ocasio-Cortez was one of a number of democrats who voted against Biden’s infrastructure bill. Am just looking at Associated Press which is reporting that Nancy Pelosi, the US speaker of the House of Representatives, has said we need to put women and girls at the centre of efforts to fight climate change, pointing out that they are disproportionately affected by the impacts of a warming planet. Pelosi is leading a delegation of congressional Democrats to the UN climate talks in Glasgow this week to send a message that the US has rejoined international initiatives to curb climate change after the Trump years. Global warming “is a threat multiplier, amplifying and accelerating existing inequities in our economies and societies,” she said during a Tuesday meeting focused on gender and climate change. A report by the UN Development Program has estimated that 80% of those displaced by climate change are women. Pelosi said a a $1.85 trillion package of measures focused on health, family and climate change reflected the Biden administration’s goal to “build back better with women”. Democratic holdouts have the bill currently stalled in Congress. Echoing President Joe Biden, Pelosi said: “America is back together for the planet, for the women, for our children.” With four days to go before the official end of Cop26 on Friday, there is unease among delegates about the lack of progress made in discussions. “Everything is still to play for but there’s a long way to go to ensure Glasgow is remembered for the right reasons,” said Tracy Carty, climate change policy and advocacy lead at Oxfam. At a press conference hosted by the Climate Action Network, she said there were high hopes for another text due out on Wednesday, “but in terms of the normal rhythm of things, we’d expect to be where we are now much earlier, things are running very late”. “I think ending Cop on Friday is very ambitious, so be prepared to change your trains,” she added. “Obama came here recognising the huge diplomatic lift that is needed now. Maybe Boris Johnson can come back to help move things along. That’s the level of political engagement we need.” Also speaking at the event was Iemaima Vaai from the Pacific Conference of Churches who spoke of the alarm among indigenous communities at the slow pace of progress. “We talk about 2030. For us low-lying countries by then a whole country could be relocated and displaced,” she said. “Our climate reality in the Pacific is now having to accept relocation as an adaptation measure. Coastal communities have had to transition, taking up new skills and knowledge on farming and relocating inland. And worst, they’ve had to pay these relocation costs even though they contribute the least to the climate crisis.” At the entrance to the blue zone, a group of Indigenous Activists are staging a memorial to highlight the link between “the ongoing violence towards Indigenous women, queer, trans, and two-spirit peoples and the extractive industries that created the climate crisis”. “We reject colonising messages that tell us what lifestyles are right or wrong, says Panganga Pungowiyi, from Alaska. “We see the parallels between the abuse of our land and the abuse of our people.” Nuskmata from the Nuxalk community on the Canadian border said: “We have a highway in the north called the highway of tears, where so many of our women and girls have been stolen. We have mining extraction without consent, deforestation, industrial salmon farms, all these things are linked.” Hallo, I’ll be following events at Cop26 for the next couple of hours. My colleague Libby Brooks has just filmed these rather excellent drummers outside the conference centre. That’s it from me today. Thanks for reading and contributing. I’ll hand over now to my colleague Bibi, and leave you with this story – about two delegates from the Cop26 negotiations visiting a charity shop in Glasgow that specialises in benefitting the formerly homeless people who live and work there. Chile’s Gonzalo Muñoz and the UK’s Nigel Topping toured the the Emmaus shop and community building on Ellesmere Street in Hamiltonhill. Emmaus helps people with experience of homelessness learn how to repair and upcycle donations that might otherwise go to landfill, sorting items, testing products and stripping goods for valuable metal. Muñoz reportedly bought a teapot. The last lap is the hardest in any race and that’s where the Cop26 climate summit is as it enters its last few days. The glitzy opening ceremony with world leaders is a fading memory and now it’s the hard yards of negotiation and compromise for their ministers. They must finalise the rules of the 2015 Paris deal so countries cannot cheat their way to the carbon-cutting finish line of net zero. The complex, technical texts belie their importance – disputes over a single word could provoke walk outs by some negotiators. So what’s on the table? “Transparency” – code for regular UN-led checks on how countries’ are delivering. This is seen as the backbone of the Paris agreement by many. The US is very keen, China is not. “Article 6” – the rules for an international market in carbon credits through which nations can offset their own pollution by paying for cuts elsewhere. That’s a vital way to cut carbon efficiently, or a scam to delay cuts, depending on who you ask. African nations say a cut from credit sales should be used to fund adaptation to extreme weather in vulnerable countries, but the US sees that as an unacceptable tax. “Loss and damage” – perhaps the most sensitive of all the issues, this is money from the rich nations that mostly caused global heating to the poor nations that mostly suffer. Reparations say some, with Scotland the first to offer cash, but many nations are reluctant. There’s more. Will the “cover decision” agreed by all nations firmly target a temperature limit of 1.5C, which scientists now say is vital, or stick with the more vague “under 2C” of Paris? Oil-rich Saudi Arabia is lobbying for the latter. Will countries agree to upgrade their emissions pledges every year, rather than every five? Will a decade-old promise of $100bn to fund clean development in low-income countries finally be delivered, and will this increase in future? These are the hard yards that matter if the climate crisis is to end. You can’t cheat atmospheric physics. So the world has to win this race clean and win it fast, with the clock at a minute to midnight. The Guardian will be reporting from the Glasgow finish line with this in mind: winning the climate race slowly is simply another way of losing. A viral video posted by the celebrity chef and noted idiot Salt Bae in which he serves steak covered in gold leaf to the head of Vietnam’s delegation to the Cop26 climate change summit has drawn criticism of hypocrisy, greenwashing and general forehead-smacking weirdness. To Lam, the minister of public security of the nominally communist country, left the summit in Glasgow to travel to London, where he visited the grave of Karl Marx, founded of communism. He then visited the restaurant of Nusret Gökçe, Salt Bae’s real name, who posted the video to TikTok showing him feeding Lam gold-covered meat directly into his mouth. Meals at the restaurant, slated hilariously in an indirect review by my colleague Jay Rayner, can cost thousands of pounds. As Vice magazine put it: “There’s nothing more 2021 than Salt Bae feeding a communist party official gold-plated steak after a climate change summit.” Patrick Vallance has echoed Barack Obama’s call to stick to the target of 1.5C. Changes in behaviour are needed to tackle the climate emergency, the UK’s chief scientific adviser told the summit. He said behaviour change was starting to happen but needed to go further and said he now cycled to work, ate less meat and had taken the train to the climate summit in Glasgow. He also said that the climate crisis was a far bigger problem than coronavirus and would kill more people if changes were not made now. Canada’s chief scientific adviser, Mona Nemer, said there would need to be a “profound behavioural and cultural change in terms of our relation to the Earth”. Speaking to my former Guardian colleague Adam Vaughan, now at New Scientist, Vallance added: There’s actually quite a lot of hope. The technologies we need are either here or in development. The second reason for hope is we’ve got a whole generation that’s absolutely determined to do this. There’s behaviour change happening right the way across the globe. Third is: some of the commitments at this conference are going to make a difference in getting people together.” India’s indigenous Adivasi people have denounced Narendra Modi for hypocrisy, saying he proclaimed his green credentials at Cop26 while planning to massively expand coal mining on their lands. The India prime minister’s plan to open 55 new coal mines, expand 193 existing ones and produce 1 billion tonnes of coal a year would destroy the land and livelihood of many Adivasi people, they said, noting that 80% of the new mines will be on Adivasi land. They point to the Hasdeo Forest in Chhattisgarh, home to a roughly 20,000-strong Adivasi community, where two coal mines are already operational, and a third, Parsa, to be operated by the mining giant Adani, has been approved. The ripple effects of Cop26 are being felt right across Glasgow as businesses seek to boost their green credentials in light of the event. In its own unique take on renewable energy, Glaswegian nightclub SWG3 is hoping to become the first in the world to create a heating system powered by the body heat of dancers. The human body emits 100 watts of heat when resting, and more when exercising. SWG3’s Bodyheat project will see this heat captured through air conditioning and piped through to twelve 150m-deep boreholes beneath the venue. The energy can then be used immediately to cool the audience, or stored underground for months until it’s needed to heat the building. “The great thing about this project is that it talks directly to our audience and it’s accessible where people can come to a gig or a club and contribute to this system,” managing director Andrew Fleming-Brown told the Scotsman. The venue had planned to trial the new technology during Cop26 but its completion date has been pushed back to early 2022. “This is our innovative contribution to a global issue, and will help us to dramatically decrease our energy consumption – bringing us one step closer to becoming a carbon-neutral venue in the not so distant future,” said Fleming-Brown. The climate activist group Glasgow Calls Out Polluters blockaded a business dinner last night, some chaining bicycles across the road and others glueing themselves to the main door of the venue. The dinner was organised by the World Business Council on Sustainable Development and was themed around Adaptation, Loss and Damage – a key agenda item at Cop26. Jonny Marsh from the group told BBC Radio Scotland this morning that the event theme “definitely falls under the umbrella of greenwashing”. “Some of the companies and people in that room such as Claire Perry, one of the directors and an ex-president of Cop, have known since the 80s about detailed research into climate change, so to have them posit themselves as the solution is ridiculous when they’ve known about it for decades.” Marsh added: “We were there to amplify the voices of those who haven’t been invited to such an exclusionary event, the indigenous folks of the world and the global south who are most affected by climate change don’t have a seat at the table.” There were 16 arrests at the protest. A weekly poll conducted by YouGov and released this morning suggests that concern over the environment in the UK is higher than ever. Of the respondents, 40% named environment as one of their top three issues for the country, along with health and the economy. “This is the highest level of concern we have ever seen, almost certainly due to the impact of Cop26 on public awareness,” said Anthony Wells, director of YouGov’s political and social opinion polling. “What remains to be seen is whether climate change remains such a high priority once the conference moves on.” Praised for his clarion call yesterday not to give up on the stated Cop26 goal of keeping global temperature rise to 1.5C, Barack Obama is also taking a wee bit of heat for mixing his monikers. The former US president referred to Scotland as the “Emerald Isle”. Cue outrage. Next we’ll be hearing he doesn’t like Irn-Bru. All four UK health secretaries are pledging to build climate-resilient health services this morning as they commit to become net zero, alongside 46 other countries making similar commitments as part of Science and Innovation Day at Cop26. Health services are currently a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions, accounting for around 4.6% of the worldwide total, meaning if they were one country, health systems would be the fifth-largest emitter. The pledge will fit with the UK government’s commitment to the entire country being net zero by 2050. The NHS in Scotland has committed to being a net zero carbon emissions health service by 2045, while in Wales the ambition is for the public sector to be collectively net zero by 2030. The health and social care secretary, Sajid Javid, said: “As a health community, we cannot simply sit on the sidelines - we must respond to climate change through urgent action, with global collaboration at its core.” Speaking at NHS Scotland’s Sustainability Conference today, Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, underlined the fact that the climate emergency is not just an environmental crisis but also a public health crisis. The world’s biggest car companies are reportedly refusing to sign a deal to end new car emissions by 2040, which is set to be unveiled in the final days of the Cop26 summit. According to the FT, Volkswagen and Toyota, the two largest motor giants, are holdouts, with the former reportedly refusing the deal outright. Two UK officials also said Germany, China and the US had not signed, although there is some optimism that the Americans might yet overcome fears of the domestic backlash and ink the deal. Various reasons have been given for not signing the deal, including the carmakers’ belief that the transition to green vehicles will not happen fast enough in some of their key markets. Volvo, GM, Ford and Daimler have all agreed to sign. The collective pledge would work toward ending sales of polluting car models by 2040. Moby, the McCartneys, Joaquin Phoenix and Gandhi’s grand-daughter Ela are among the celebrities who have urged Cop26 to adopt the Plant Based Treaty campaign today. Modelled on the better known Fossil Fuel Treaty, the treaty aims to “put food systems at the forefront of combating the climate crisis”. It calls for a shift to healthier, sustainable, plant-based diets to mitigate the effects of the environmental damage caused by rearing animals for meat. In a joint statement, the McCartney family, who launched the Meat Free Monday campaign in 2009, said: “We believe in justice for animals, the environment and people. That’s why we support the Plant Based Treaty and urge individuals and governments to sign it.” Ela Gandhi added: I believe that the indiscriminate breeding of animals for consumption is harmful both for health as well as for the environment. The animal industry has also contributed, to a large extent, to the deterioration of the fertility of our soil and thus the environment. Large forests have had to make way for cattle farmers all over the world. Gandhiji in his bid to transform his modestly affluent lifestyle in 1904 was driven by three important considerations of which one was that a life worth living is that of the tiller of the soil and the handicrafts person. Living close to nature was part of his teachings. [The] Plant Based Treaty is calling for just that.” The foreign minister of Tuvalu, the low-lying Pacific island nation, has recorded a video speech for Cop26 while standing knee-deep in seawater. Simon Kofe stood in a suit and tie to deliver his speech about Tuvalu’s struggle against rising sea levels. “We are sinking,” he said. “But so is everybody else.” Good morning, and thanks for following our coverage so far. It’s gender day at Cop26, as well as science and innovation day, and all eyes will be on the Climate Action Tracker report released this afternoon. Remember: the key goal of Cop26 is to keep the chance of limiting global heating to 1.5C alive. But there is much work to do to achieve this in the summit’s final week. Meanwhile, the news overnight is that a billion people will be affected by extreme heat stress if the climate crisis raises the global temperature by just 2C, according to research released by the UK Met Office. The Met Office assessed wet-bulb temperature, which combines both heat and humidity. Once this measure reaches 35C, the human body cannot cool itself by sweating and even healthy people sitting in the shade will die within six hours. Read Damian Carrington’s report:British soldiers and Ministry of Defence officials were aware of – and failed to properly investigate – a series of alleged massacres of 33 Afghan men by SAS soldiers at the peak of the conflict about a decade ago, a court has heard. The claim is being made on behalf of Saifullah Yar, four of whose male relatives were killed in a special forces night raid, and whose lawyers raised a string of questions as to whether the British military had concealed what happened. Richard Hermer QC, representing Yar, told the high court on Tuesday that there had been allegations of “patterns of unlawful killings and a cover-up” as he sought to obtain further records relating to alleged SAS executions of “fighting-age males”. Yar’s father, two brothers and a cousin were killed in an SAS raid on a compound in Helmand, southern Afghanistan in February 2011. The soldiers said they acted in self defence against men who carried assault rifles and grenades, but the family deny they possessed the weapons. Lawyers representing Yar want Mr Justice Swift to order the MoD to release further official documents – but the department said that Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, had adopted “a duty of candour” and had released 1,800 pages of material so far. “This is not a public inquiry and there is not a duty to provide any document that might look embarrassing,” said Lisa Giovannetti QC, acting for the minister. The court hearing was part of a wider judicial review claim, in which a judge will have to decide if the MoD broke human rights law by failing to commence a “prompt investigation” into the Yar family killings – and whether it failed to investigate “systemic issues”, to see if there was a pattern of battlefield executions. Other disputed killings took place in the week before the deadly raid on the Yar family compound, Hermer told the court. In one incident nine people were killed in similar circumstances, while in a second a single person died. Emails revealed that “senior officers were raising concern about the way the SAS was operating”, Hermer said, and that there were “implausible explanations that Afghans were shot and killed after going to their homes and returning with weapons”. Other emails released by the MoD in relation to the Yar family case showed two British officers discussing the incident later that day on email, under the heading “EJK” – extrajudicial killings. “They express astonishment that those involved seemed to be beyond reproach,” he told the court. “Why are we the only one who see this bollocks for what it is?” one of the officers wrote at the time. Further deadly incidents took place in the weeks following, prompting another officer to set down their concerns in a statement written in March 2011, writing: “During these operations it was said that all fighting age males are killed on target regardless of the threat they posed. this included those not holding weapons… “It was implied that photos would be taken of the deceased alongside weapons that the fighting age male may not have had in their position when they were killed.” A short internal military review of 11 separate incidents took place April 2011. Officers did recommend that service police investigate, but it spent only a week on the ground, and was accused of “uncritically accepting” accounts provided by soldiers involved. The 11 incidents were referred to Operation Northmoor in 2014, which was responsible for investigating alleged war crimes by British forces in Afghanistan, but it was closed in 2020 without any prosecutions being made. Investigators did not review video footage, which could have been been of relevant incidents, the court heard. The MoD said it did not intend to respond to Hermer’s version of events. Giovannetti said “that shouldn’t be taken as agreement or that it is accepted”. The hearing is due to last four days, some parts of which may be held in private, with a judgment expected at a later date. The full case will also be heard at a later date.For two days the same looped recording has been blaring out from speakers on the Polish border: “Attention! Attention! Crossing the Polish border is legal only at border crossings.” The ominous warning is directed at the thousands of asylum seekers massed in Belarus on the opposite side of the barbed wire running between the two countries. According to Poland, Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, is deliberately provoking a new refugee crisis in Europe by organising the movement of migrants from the Middle East to Minsk and promising them a safe passage to the EU in revenge for the sanctions Brussels has imposed on his authoritarian regime. Nearly 20,000 Polish border police, flanked by military support, are now deployed in a show of force unknown in the country since the end of the cold war. Until a few days ago, most migrants were violently pushed back, though some managed to make it to Warsaw after hiding out in the dense forests. Since Belarusian authorities on Monday began escorting thousands of migrants to the Polish border in a dramatic escalation of an already deadly crisis, crossing the frontier has become even more difficult. In the forests between the two countries, where night-time temperatures fall below zero, it is the thousands of Iraqi, Syrian and Afghan families who are now paying the price, scapegoats trapped between the violence of the Polish authorities and the false promises of the Belarus. They live in small tents hidden between the trees, trying to keep warm in damp sleeping bags. At least eight people have died. The Guardian met a group of three Iraqi Kurdish families from Duhok, including at least eight children, who had just crossed the border from Belarus. Volunteers from Grupa Granica, a Polish Network of NGOs monitoring the situation on the border, reached them in the woods near Narewka before the Polish border police and – with the help of asylum lawyers – have so far prevented them from being pushed back to Belarus. “We travelled for three days by car to Istanbul,” said a 40-year-old man, who said he had to leave the Iraqi governorate of Duhok for fear of retaliation by former Islamic State members in nearby villages. He told an interpreter that from the Turkish city, they took a flight to Minsk, and once they reached the Polish border “the Belarusian police cut the barbed wire and let us through”. The families had attempted to cross the border nine times before, being pushed back each time. “Upon their arrival, the Polish border guards took them into a car and transferred them to the border patrol station,” said Anna Alboth from Minority Rights Group, an NGO. “We try to monitor the situation, because from our past experiences the Polish police pushed back migrants even after taking them to a police station.” Warsaw’s rightwing government has quadrupled the presence of border guards and military personnel in the area, creating a two-mile deep militarised zone and building a razor-wire fence. There are dozens of checkpoints along the entire perimeter of the area. The soldiers stop every single car, to ask for documents and for the driver to open the boot. In the streets around Sokòlka, about 12 miles from the border with Belarus, police trucks regularly whizz towards the secure zone, sirens blaring, while multiple helicopters monitor the scene from above. “The situation is desperate and it’s getting worse,” said Kyle McNally, humanitarian affairs adviser for Doctors Without Borders (MSF). “I have seen first-hand the injuries people experienced when assaulted by border guards from both Poland and Lithuania. “People have described being beaten with the butt of a gun, kicked in the ribs, electrocuted in the neck, and have had all their belongings taken or destroyed by European border guards. This is unacceptable and must end now.” According to MSF, one Syrian family slept in the forest on the Polish side of the border for 21 days before they were forced back. The only assistance they received was by kind locals, at risk of their own safety. But the Polish authorities forced them back into Belarus where they now await an uncertain fate. A text message sent by the Polish government to the phones of recently arrived travellers, warns that “The Polish border is sealed”, “Belarus told you lies” and “Go back to Minsk”. The message – directed at asylum seekers, but being sent to most travellers in Poland who have recently completed a locator form – contains a link to a mysterious warning for the asylum seekers: “Do not take any pills or medications given to you in Belarus. You may be poisoned!” Anna Chmielewska, from Ocalenie Foundation and coordinator of Help Center for Foreigners, based in Warsaw, said: “In early October, the Polish government told the press that the migrants were behaving strangely and that they believed they had been drugged or poisoned by the Belarus officers. “We have no more information about this story, but to me, it sounds like fake news to make migrants look dangerous and Belarus look bad.”The jury at Kyle Rittenhouse’s murder trial on Tuesday watched drone footage that showed Rittenhouse shooting Joseph Rosenbaum at close range during a night of protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last August. The video, zoomed in and slowed down by a forensic imaging specialist, was played as the prosecution finished presenting its case, after a week of testimony in which some witnesses seemed to bolster Rittenhouse’s claim of self-defense. Rittenhouse is a former police youth cadet from Antioch, Illinois. On the night in question he went to Kenosha with an AR-style semi-automatic rifle and a medical kit, in response to a militia that called for protection for businesses against protesters supporting the Black Lives Matter movement. The 18-year-old is charged with two counts of homicide, one of attempted homicide and two of recklessly endangering safety, for firing his weapon near others. He is also charged with possession of a dangerous weapon by a minor, as he was 17 at the time. He has pleaded not guilty. The drone footage shown in court on Tuesday showed Rosenbaum, 36, following Rittenhouse before Rittenhouse suddenly turned and fired his rifle. Rosenbaum was shown to fall as Rittenhouse ran around a car. Dr Doug Kelley, a forensic pathologist with the Milwaukee county medical examiner’s office, said Rosenbaum was shot by someone within 4ft. Rosenbaum’s hand, he said, was “in close proximity or in contact with the end of that rifle”. Kelley said Rosenbaum was shot four times: in the groin, hand and thigh as he faced Rittenhouse and then in the back. Prosecutor James Kraus called that the “kill shot”. Moments later, Rittenhouse, then 17, killed Anthony Huber, 26, who was seen on bystander video hitting Rittenhouse with a skateboard. Rittenhouse also wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, a protester and volunteer medic who carried a gun of his own. On Monday, Grosskreutz told jurors he was armed because he “believe[s] in the second amendment” but that he did not shoot Rittenhouse because “that’s not the kind of person that I am … and definitely not somebody I would want to become”. A Kenosha detective, Ben Antaramian, testified that authorities learned someone had recorded drone video, which played on Fox News, but were not given a high-definition version until Friday. Prosecutors also displayed autopsy photographs of Huber’s body on a gurney and closeup pictures of a gunshot wound to his chest. Rittenhouse turned his head and lowered his eyes, and sighed deeply. In the highly contentious trial, prosecutors have portrayed Rittenhouse as the instigator of bloodshed. “The evidence will show that hundreds of people were out on the street experiencing chaos and violence and the only person who killed anyone was the defendant, Kyle Rittenhouse,” Thomas Binger, Kenosha county assistant district attorney, said last week. Rittenhouse’s lawyers have said he acted in self-defense, suggesting he feared his rifle would be used against him. Rittenhouse’s lead lawyer, Mark Richards, said: “Other individuals who didn’t see [the Rosenbaum shooting] attacked [Rittenhouse] in the street like an animal.” The trial continues.Thirty-two thousand care home staff and tens of thousands of NHS personnel could quit over the government’s insistence that both workforces get vaccinated against Covid, it is feared. The warning came as Sajid Javid confirmed that health service workers in England will have to be fully jabbed by next April or risk being sacked. The move will bring the NHS into line with the care home sector, in which staff have until Thursday to prove that they have had two doses. The health secretary appeared to disclose to MPs when making the announcement about the NHS that, with Thursday’s deadline for care home staff imminent, as many as 32,000 of them have still not yet been jabbed. The Conservative MP Mark Harper, a former government chief whip, told Javid that 32,000 was “a very significant number”. He also asked the government to publish “a plan to deal with what sounds like will be something like tens of thousands of NHS staff who, if the care home workforce is any precedent, are going to end up leaving the national health service”. The minister replied that the number of care home staff was accurate: “The 32,000 number he’s referred to, I would just point out that was the latest number that we had – it’s a published number – at the end of last month.” But it might include potentially thousands of people who are medically exempt, he added. Javid said staff such as doctors and nurses “carry a unique responsibility” to keep patients safe. Workers who deliver personal care services in people’s homes will also have to be vaccinated. “I have concluded that all those working in the NHS and social care will have to be vaccinated. We must avoid preventable harm, and protect patients in the NHS, protect colleagues in the NHS and of course protect the NHS itself,” he told MPs. The only exceptions among the NHS workforce will be for those who are medically exempt from being vaccinated and those who have no face-to-face contact with patients. Javid decided to press ahead with making jabs mandatory despite health unions and some organisations representing doctors voicing strong opposition. He had been warned that compulsion would lead to an exodus of NHS staff who have chosen not to get immunised. “Concerns [were raised] that some people may choose to leave their posts if we went ahead with this. [But] I have carefully considered the responses and the evidence and I’ve concluded that the scales clearly tip on one side,” he told the Commons on Tuesday. Javid said that while 90% of NHS staff had already had both jabs, about 103,000 have not, and in some trusts only 80% have been double-vaccinated. Many are younger women who are or hope to become pregnant, or those from a minority ethnic background. He considered imposing the new legal duty of vaccination on NHS personnel before this winter. But he opted to delay it until April 2022 after warnings from hospital groups NHS Providers and the NHS Confederation that doing that sooner would exacerbate understaffing by triggering an exodus of staff at the time when the health service is under its greatest pressure. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, said: “Had the policy been introduced any sooner, we would have risked worsening the NHS’s current workforce shortages at a time when the health service is already under huge operational pressure. This could have posed a risk to the quality of care we were able to provide.” Javid said that a statement about the impact of the move to mandatory jabs would be published later on Tuesday but that a full impact assessment would be made public “later”. Other countries including France, Italy and the US have already made vaccination compulsory, he added. Some hospitals in the US have recently fired small numbers of employees after they refused to get immunised. The union Unison, which represents both NHS and care home staff, said there would be “dire consequences” for care homes from Javid’s “draconian approach”. “The staffing crisis will become a catastrophe for a sector already on its knees. Some homes may have to close if care staff are barred from their jobs. Forcing the vaccine on care staff is an own goal by the government,” said Christina McAnea, Unison’s general secretary. Take-up rates would only increase with “persuasion, not punishment”, she added. But Javid believes that, while some NHS staff may leave, making jabs mandatory will drive up vaccination rates by prompting workers in the NHS to finally get immunised in the same way that has already occurred with care home staff. While some care home workers have quit, vaccination rates in that sector have risen sharply since Javid announced in June that he was making it compulsory there. He decided not to force NHS staff to have a flu jab, though is keeping that option “under review”.It is no surprise that a man who treats his own citizens so brutally should use others ruthlessly. Alexander Lukashenko, the president of Belarus, has jailed opposition leaders and arrested tens of thousands for protesting against last year’s highly dubious election; many were beaten and tortured. Even in exile, his opponents fear him. Now, in retaliation for the resulting European Union sanctions on his regime, he is “weaponising” vulnerable people. The European Commission has accused him of gangster tactics, encouraging people from the Middle East and Africa to come to Minsk in the belief it will be easy to enter the EU, and providing transport to the Polish border, where thousands now wait. Armed guards are reported to have forced many across, knowing that they will be rejected. In the words of one Syrian refugee: “We are just an instrument to put the pressure on.” Mr Lukashenko’s actions are cynical and despicable. But they are enabled by the cynicism of others. Thousands are at the border zone, with children and the elderly among those trapped in sub-zero temperatures with no food or shelter; eight people are known to have died of exposure in recent weeks, and aid workers believe the true figure is higher. Yet Poland is treating the arrival of these desperate people not as a humanitarian crisis, but an invasion. It has declared a state of emergency at its border, deployed thousands of troops and changed the law to allow summary expulsions, ignoring asylum requests. It plans a Trump-style wall. It has refused to allow EU observers, humanitarian workers or journalists to enter the 3km zone. While Lithuania and Latvia earlier accepted EU help in dealing with crossings from Belarus, Poland has rejected such offers. Locked in conflict over the rule of law with Brussels, Warsaw is exploiting the migrants to capitalise politically on both anti-EU and anti-migrant sentiment and has gone to revolting lengths to demonise and smear them. The bloc as a whole has its share of responsibility. Refugees make up only 0.6% of its 445 million population, compared with 4.4% of Turkey’s 84 million population. But it has proved incapable of reaching a collective strategy as eastern countries like Poland shut the doors, wealthier northern nations claim the moral high ground while selectively taking small numbers, and arrival points in the south, such as Greece, say they cannot cope without substantial help – and turn to increasingly punitive responses. The UK, too, is increasingly hostile, with the government seeking to give Border Force staff immunity from prosecution if migrants die while they are pushing back boats. Such approaches and the accompanying rhetoric do not merely respond to political pressures; they fuel anti-migrant feeling. In the short term, the EU may be right that putting pressure on airlines to halt the flights into Belarus, warning them they will face sanctions, may help to tackle the immediate problem. But it will not resolve the underlying issue that war and insecurity drive people from their homes, and more will be forced out in future. A fairer and more humane response across the continent is possible. Current events are further proof that it is essential.A group of law students have filed a lawsuit at Wellington’s high court against New Zealand’s minister of energy over her decision to grant two new onshore oil and gas exploration permits just six months after the government declared a climate emergency. “Aotearoa New Zealand’s current approach to climate action is embarrassing,” said Phoebe Nikolaou, a member of the Students for Climate Solutions group. “I might be the claimant today as a law student, but I’ll be the lawyer soon, and this will be my life’s work … Keep fossil fuels in the ground.” The students claim Megan Woods’ June decision to issue exploration permits in the Taranaki area is inconsistent with the government’s legal obligations under the country’s Zero Carbon Act and the Paris agreement and that she failed to consider key facts like the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s recent warnings about climate change’s severity. When asked about the lawsuit, Woods said, “As the matter is before the courts it would be inappropriate for me to comment, but these decisions should come as no surprise as they were announced in 2018 as part of our world-leading ban on new offshore oil and gas exploration.” She did not rule out granting further permits in future. This is the second major judicial review related to climate policy in Aotearoa this year; the advocacy group Lawyers for Climate Action have also sought judicial review of the Climate Change Commission’s official advice to the government. They argue the advice is inconsistent with the Paris agreement’s target of limiting global warming to 1.5C. In 2018 the government banned new offshore exploration for oil and gas reserves and in 2020 it declared New Zealand was facing a climate emergency. However it has allowed energy companies to continue to apply for permits for onshore oil and gas exploration. Earlier this year, Woods indicated that further onshore exploration permits could be granted in 2022 as well, which would allow oil and gas exploration up until 2032. The oil and gas industry has historically been a mainstay of the economy in the Taranaki region, where the June permits were granted; many in the area worry about the short-term economic consequences of shifting away from fossil fuels without significant government support. Climate experts have called for a halt to the development of new oil and gas fields. The International Energy Agency, one of the world’s leading climate bodies, recommended in May that to limit global warming to 1.5C no new oil and gas fields, coalmines or mine extensions should be approved. Lachlan Craig, another of the students, said: “Climate change cannot be this generation’s nuclear-free moment if we continue fossil fuel exploration and drilling.”Two diamond bracelets that Marie Antoinette sent away in a wooden chest for safekeeping before she was guillotined during the French Revolution, have sold at auction in Geneva for 7.46m Swiss francs (£7.04m). The sum was several times higher than the pre-sale estimate, amid a growing interest in items of jewellery and clothing belonging to the former French queen. The buyer was bidding by telephone and not identified. The Austrian-born monarch who arrived in France aged 14 to marry the future Louis XVI had the diamond bracelets custom made in 1776, two years after she became queen. Each bracelet is composed of three strings of diamonds and a large barrette clasp, totalling 112 diamonds, including “old cut” stones and silver and gold. Marie Antoinette was known to have carefully wrapped her jewels in cotton herself, hoping to keep them outside revolutionary France. She sent the two diamond bracelets in a wooden box to a former Austrian ambassador who was in Brussels, with a letter instructing him to keep them in a safe place. Max Fawcett, head of Christie’s jewellery department said before the sale: “Despite Marie Antoinette’s capture in the French Revolution and her unfortunate death in 1793, the bracelets survived and were passed on to her daughter, Madame Royale, and then the Duchess of Parma.” Marie Antoinette’s surviving daughter, Marie Thérèse received the jewels on her arrival in Austria, the auction house added. The bracelets were kept within royal lineage for more than 200 years, Christie’s said. “To find jewels with over 200 years of French royal history is truly something that collectors and passionate jewellery people from all over the world will be keeping an eye on,” Fawcett added. “We have seen the results before of things sold by Marie Antoinette, that there really is no limit to how high these can go and I’m expecting fireworks [at the auction].”Forced on to the back foot by its failed defence of Owen Paterson, who resigned from parliament last Thursday, the government is trying to avoid reversing any further from its plan to overhaul the regime governing standards in parliament. But the issues raised over recent days are too important to be sent packing with the MP for North Shropshire, who repeatedly broke lobbying rules. Lord Evans, who chairs the committee on standards in public life, said last week that the proposal to put a new Tory-dominated committee in charge of MPs’ conduct “is deeply at odds with the best traditions of British democracy”. He was not exaggerating. MPs have been told that they will, after all, be able to vote on the report of the standards committee that recommended Mr Paterson’s 30-day suspension. Chris Bryant, the Labour MP who chairs it, has announced that a senior judicial figure has been appointed as an adviser, following criticism of the way that Mr Paterson’s case was handled. But there is little sign, so far, that ministers are reconsidering their attitude to the second jobs held down by a quarter of all Tory MPs (and three of Labour’s), or that they plan to revise their contemptuous reaction to the thorough review of standards issued by Lord Evans’ committee earlier this month. These are serious errors. Public trust in politicians is already low, relative to other authority figures. The prime minister may revel in his reputation for insouciance, spontaneity and clownishness. But personal popularity is no substitute for confidence in government. Already this year, the Greensill lobbying scandal has damaged the standing of one of his predecessors, David Cameron, and the civil service. Then Mr Paterson was forced out. Now Sir Geoffrey Cox, the former attorney general, is revealed to have spent a month in the Caribbean advising the British Virgin Islands in relation to corruption charges brought by the UK Foreign Office. Sir Geoffrey earns £400,000 for this work on top of his £81,932 MP’s salary. There is a powerful case for ruling out second jobs, even if this might convince some senior members of parliament to give up their seats in favour of higher pay. This is something that must be looked at. In the short term, very strict limits should be placed on MPs’ outside earnings, and on the time that they are allowed to spend working for people other than constituents. It makes no sense, and fosters cynicism, when the public is on the one hand asked to sympathise with MPs over increased workloads (in part an effect of cuts to other services) and social media abuse, and on the other hand is told that they can do two jobs – or that £81,932 (plus allowances) isn’t enough to live on. Examples such as Sir Geoffrey must be used to highlight, not distract from, the bigger picture. The key fact is that a strong set of recommendations on lobbying has just been made. If adopted, these would strengthen the independence of the panels involved in public appointments and the ministerial code. They would also ensure that the existing ban on paid advocacy is upheld and extend the period during which former ministers and officials are banned from lobbying. Boris Johnson’s bullish approach last week was a miscalculation. The question now is whether his critics can force him to make more than a tactical and temporary retreat. He has his own dog in this fight, having been investigated multiple times by the standards commissioner. The detail of the parliamentary oversight regime that he wants to wreck may be arcane. But the principle it stands for, that MPs must be held to account, could not be more important.Thousands of women are missing from the breast implant register set up as a result of the PIP breast implant scandal, new figures suggest. The list was recommended after thousands of women were fitted with faulty implants, supplied by the now defunct French firm Poly Implant Prothèse (PIP). The list records the details of every person who has breast implant surgery in case of a product recall or another safety concern. Almost 60,000 patients in England and Scotland have been added to NHS Digital’s breast and cosmetic implant registry since it was set up in 2016, allowing them to be traced if their implants are affected by safety concerns. Northern Ireland joined the registry this year. New data for 2020, published on Tuesday, shows that operations on 10,500 people were recorded in 2020. However, officials estimate this represents only about half (55%) of the number of cases, suggesting approximately 8,485 people were not added. That means they may be untraceable if their implants are subsequently found to be faulty. Thousands of breast implant patients are now being urged to ensure their details are recorded on the register to safeguard their health. Lee Martin, an NHS breast surgeon and chair of the breast and cosmetic implant registry steering group, said: “We want all patients, past and present, to be aware that the registry exists and ensure they are included by speaking to their surgeons. “As a surgeon, I know first-hand the importance of patient information being included on the registry. It’s crucial in providing good patient care, and provides patients with assurance that they will be followed up with if there are issues with their breast implants in the future.” As well as containing the details of patients and their implants, the registry also allows the identification of trends and complications relating to specific implants. Alison Lattimer, a patient representative on the steering group, added: “As someone who has undergone reconstruction surgery myself, following breast cancer, I understand just how crucial the registry is in protecting the future health of those undergoing breast implant surgery. I would urge anyone considering having reconstruction surgery, or those who have done so in the past, to check with their surgeons and make sure they are on the registry.” PIP implants were withdrawn from the UK market in 2010 after it was found they had been filled with non-medical grade silicone intended for use in mattresses. An estimated 50,000 women in the UK were fitted with the implants, but the precise figure is not known.The world’s most respected climate analysis coalition, the Climate Action Tracker (Cat), announced that temperature rises will top a disastrous 2.4C by the end of this century, based on the short-term goals countries have set out at Cop26. The UK Met Office said that a billion people would be affected by extreme heat stress if the climate crisis raises the global temperature by just 2C. That includes heating to the point that the human body cannot cool itself by sweating and even healthy people sitting in the shade will die within six hours. All four UK health secretaries pledged to build climate-resilient health services, alongside 46 other countries making similar commitments. Health services are a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions, accounting for around 4.6% of the worldwide total. Canadian and British scientist advisors said substantial changes in behaviour are needed to tackle the climate emergency. Canada’s chief scientific adviser, Mona Nemer, said there would need to be a “profound behavioural and cultural change in terms of our relation to the Earth”. Cop26 delegates expressed unease about the lack of progress made in discussions, with only four days to go before the official end of the conference. “Everything is still to play for but there’s a long way to go,” said Tracy Carty, climate change policy and advocacy lead at Oxfam. Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, hailed Joe Biden’s efforts to tackle the climate crisis, but said the US has “to deliver to get credit on climate change”. Extinction Rebellion Scotland activists have set up a 24-hour vigil outside JP Morgan Chase – the bank that invests more money in fossil fuels than any other in the world. See what happened on Day 8 here.The brother, sister and mother of a woman whose mummified remains were found on a mattress will not face trial, a judge has ruled. Sean Morris, the recorder of York, decided on Tuesday that the charges – preventing the lawful and decent burial of a dead body without lawful excuse – should remain on file. “These three defendants suffer from an extremely rare mental affliction which has created a unique situation for the criminal courts,” he said. Rina Yasutake, 49, a talented artist who was thought to have attended Cambridge University, was found dead on a mattress in September 2018. Her body had lain there for about six weeks. The Japanese artist, described by locals in the North Yorkshire market town of Helmsley as “reclusive”, was discovered after a pharmacist became suspicious that her siblings were buying litres of surgical spirit and “smelled of dead bodies”. Her sister Yoshika Yasutake, 55, brother Takahiro Yasutake, 49, and mother Michiko Yasutake, 78, pleaded not guilty to preventing her lawful burial in October last year. North Yorkshire police has not disclosed details of how she died. The Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) offered no evidence at York crown court on Tuesday and Jonathan Sandiford QC said it was not in the public interest to pursue the matter to trial. The facts of the case were outlined at a previous hearing before Scarborough magistrates court in 2019, when the prosecution said police had been notified by a member of pharmacy staff that she had grave concerns about excessive quantities of surgical spirit a Japanese couple had been buying. Prosecutor Sarah Tyrer told the court that “reference had been made that they were using it for cleansing an individual called Rina Yasutake”. “The pharmacist noticed – and I quote – that they ‘smelled of dead bodies’,” the prosecutor added. Later that day the police discovered Rina’s body – lying on a mattress in one of the bedrooms “in an advanced state of decomposition to the point of apparent mummification”. Tyrer said it was believed she had been dead for approximately six weeks. On Tuesday, Sandiford said any sentence following a trial would have been limited to a supervision order or an absolute discharge. The matter would be left on file, with the understanding that the three defendants would accept any welfare checks or visits by social services or the police in Helmsley. The judge added that a trial would put the criminal courts “to vast expense and time in these troubled times when really it would be to no end”. Morris described the “highly unusual circumstances” that led to him being asked to allow the case to lie on file. “But unique cases and unique circumstances require unique disposal,” he said. After the discovery of Yasutake’s body three years ago, her former classmate Sarah Matthews said she had been “a very hard-working teenager with a bright academic future”. The pair shared a dormitory at Queen Mary’s boarding school for girls in the late 1980s, and Matthews thought she had gone on to study at Cambridge University. A joint statement from North Yorkshire police and the CPS described the matter as a “very complex, sensitive and sad case”. It said the decision not to proceed had been considered at the highest level within CPS Yorkshire and Humberside, and in discussion with the police. “It was agreed that it was not in the public interest to prosecute, and that the case should be left to lie on file,” it said.Geoffrey Cox: (reaching for the phone) Yes? Dominic Raab: Thank God I’ve managed to track you down. Cox: Who is it? Raab: Dominic. Cox: Dominic who? Raab: Dominic Raab. The justice secretary. Cox: What do you want? Have you any idea what time it is? Raab: Er … Cox: It’s the middle of the bloody night here in the British Virgin Islands. Raab: I can’t help that. We’re up shit creek back in the UK. The government is up to its neck in sleaze and the Daily Mail is reporting that you’ve earned more than a mill outside parliament in the last year and voted from the BVI. Cox: Is that all? I’d rather thought it was more than that. So what do you want? Raab: It’s like this. I’m the mug who had been landed with the morning media round and I know I’m going to be asked about you. So I need you to give me some good reasons why you’re earning so much money from moonlighting? Cox: That reminds me. Did you see that another Tory MP, Karl McCartney I think, was reprimanded by the commissioner for standards for failing to declare his interests working for a company called Moonlighting Systems? Raab: This isn’t a joke … Cox: Well, I found it funny. But yes, I will help you out. Though you will have to pay. A bloke can’t work for nothing. My usual rate is about £600 per hour so this conversation has already cost you about £60. Raab: What? Cox: That’s now £65 … Raab: That’s extortionate … Cox: Stop being so petty. Besides, I’m only following the prime minister’s example. He was the one who said the £250K for his frankly pisspoor column for the Telegraph was just chicken feed. And I’m inclined to agree with him. Raab: But … Cox: Look. You’re lucky that I’m not charging you double for an out of hours service. So never say that I don’t do my bit to help the Tory party. Raab: OK, OK. Just invoice the treasurer and he will sort out the payment in exchange for a peerage. Providing he’s already stumped up a donation of three million. Right then. Talk me through what you’ve been up to. Cox: It’s all totally above board. The UK government – your old department, the Foreign Office, actually – is investigating whether there’s any evidence of corruption or abuse of office by the BVI government in recent years … Raab: So you’re there to make the charges stick? Cox: Good God, no. I’m defending the prime minister. Tax havens deserve the very best legal representation. Raab: Yup, OK. But this isn’t the kind of thing that’s going to play out well on the Today programme or LBC. I need a more positive spin. Cox: That’s not my problem. It’s all Boris’s fault anyway. He’s the one who’s really landed you in the shit. If he hadn’t made that ludicrous effort to save Owen Paterson from his Commons suspension, then the media wouldn’t be poking their noses into Tory MPs with second and third jobs. Raab: You’re right. Boris is a complete halfwit shit. We both know that as we’ve both been turned over by him. But just give me a break. Please. Cox: OK. Well, we could say I’ve been trialling working from home. Or rather working from the beach. I know it didn’t work out so well for you. You failed to do your job when you were on holiday even when the sea was closed. But it’s turned out just hunky dory for me. So how about using the line that I’ve been modernising parliament …? Raab: That’s more like it … Cox: When you think of it that way, I’ve been doing very important work. Shining a light on how tax havens can avoid scrutiny: Westminster can learn a lot from that. Throw in the remote working, the pina coladas and the proxy voting and I’m a genuine pathfinder for a new generation of MPs who aren’t happy only earning £82K a year. And it’s not as if I’ve broken any rules on lobbying … Raab: You’re right. Just one last thing then. How can we spin it so that you’ve actually been working for your constituents? Cox: What are they? Raab: They are the people who elected you … Cox: Elected? I had no idea. I thought I was just appointed by the party … Raab: Well, you sort of were given that you have a majority of more than 20,000 in your west Devon constituency. But is there anything you’ve done that might have benefited even one of your constituents? Cox: Hmm … I did recommend a decent, beachside restaurant to someone who said they came from Torridge … Raab: That’s perfect. I reckon I’m sorted now. Thanks ever so much. Cox: You do realise this has been a complete waste of time. Having sent you out to defend me, Boris will have trashed me by the end of the day. So you’ll be made to look a mug. Just look what happened to Kwasi Kwarteng last week. The poor man still hasn’t recovered. Raab: I’m afraid you’re probably right. Enjoy the rest of your stay. Cox: Thank you. That will be £360. Shall we round it up to £400? A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.A retired lecturer recently diagnosed with a terminal illness has complained of police heavy-handedness after claiming he was injured when six officers raided his home after he achieved his bucket-list desire to moon at a speed camera. Darrell Meekcom, 55, from Kidderminister, who was diagnosed with multiple system atrophy (MSA) last month, pulled down his trousers and bared his bottom to a camera believing it was “a good laugh”, he told his local newspaper. But within 20 minutes, he found six officers at his front door, banging on his window, and was restrained and arrested on suspicion of committing public order offences. Meekcom, who reportedly formerly lectured medical students at Birmingham City University, said he had reported the incident to the Independent Office for Police Conduct. He claimed he suffered a blow to the head and officers damaged his front door and back gate, with the incident being videoed by his wife as he was taken into custody. “There were six of them restraining me, trying to get their arms up my back,” Meekcom, a father of two young children and who also has Parkinson’s disease, told the Shuttle in Kidderminster. In the video, which has appeared online, he is seen lying on the ground in his garden as police arrest him, saying: “I’ve just been diagnosed with multiple system atrophy. I’m terminally ill. It was one off my bucket list. Haven’t you ever wanted to moon at a speed camera?” As one officer replies “No”, he continues: “Well I did.” “I felt like I had been abused. It was outrageous bullying. They could have killed me very easily,” he told the paper. He said he suffered blurred vision and a seizure and attended hospital after the incident. West Mercia police said in a statement: ”Around 1pm on Friday 5 November officers received a report of indecent exposure on Stourbridge Road, Kidderminster. Officers attended and after a search of the area, located a person of interest … A 55-year-old man from Kidderminster was arrested on suspicion of public order offences and dangerous driving and released on bail.” Enquiries are ongoing.Good morning. Cop26 is in its second week but, despite optimistic talk, new analysis of pledges paint a far more grim picture of our future. The NBN has ended up costing almost as much as the estimated cost of a full-fibre plan. The technology in the Coalition’s cut-down version cost up to three times more than forecast and was closer to the initial estimated cost of a revised version of Labor’s full-fibre plan, according to figures the government has sought to keep secret for almost a decade. Redacted figures, obtained by Guardian Australia, show NBN Co estimated the cost of using the hybrid fibre-coaxial was between $800 and $850 a premises and fibre-to-the-node was $600 to $650 a premises. In reality, as NBN Co encountered upgrade issues with both types of technology, pushing the average costs to $2,752 and $2,330 respectively. Temperature rises will top 2.4C by the end of this century, based on the short-term goals countries have set out during Cop26, according to research by Climate Action Tracker. The findings should serve as a “reality check” to the talks, said Niklas Höhne, one of the authors. “Long-term intentions are good, but their short-term implementation is inadequate,” he said. Bill Hare, the chief executive of Climate Analytics said: “We are concerned that some countries are trying to portray [Cop26] as if the 1.5C limit is nearly in the bag. But it’s not, it’s very far from it.” Australia is doing little to help, with the government’s policy response to the climate crisis ranked last out of 60 countries, and an overall ranking of 54. Oil and gas companies are extending their advertising presence in sport, raising concern from athletes. Former Wallabies captain David Pocock says it has been “difficult to watch” a sponsorship deal emerge between fossil fuel giant Santos and the Wallabies. “I really think fossil fuel sponsorship is the new cigarette sponsorship, where they are advertising a product that we now know is destroying our home planet and our futures,” he said. Australia NDIS providers used unauthorised restraints on clients more than 1m times in 2020-21. There are now calls for an investigation after the figures detailed a 240% increase in methods including sedating or strapping down a person, or depriving them of their belongings. Covid cases in NSW continue to decrease, despite predictions that “freedom day” could prompt up to 1,900 daily cases. But why has this been the case? Health experts name five key reasons why NSW has managed to keep case numbers so low, including underestimating the effectiveness of the vaccine and maintaining health measures. The Morrison government will invest $500m into a new $1bn fund to help commercialise low-emissions technology, including carbon capture and storage and soil carbon. The world The EU has condemned the president of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko, for acting like a “gangster”. His government has been been accused of sending refugees to the EU’s external border to punish the bloc for criticism of his crackdown on dissent. Ireland has begun making contingency plans for a possible trade war between the EU and the UK in the event that Boris Johnson walks away from the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol. An economic meltdown is putting pressure on the Pakistani prime minister, Imran Khan, as record inflation causes unrest and pushes the price of sugar higher than petrol. Chile’s President Sebastián Piñera has been impeached by the lower house of congress after the Pandora papers revealed new details of a controversial deal to sell his family’s stake in the Dominga mining project. Recommended reads When is it OK to complain about a meal or send it back to the kitchen when dining out? And how can you do it nicely? After a salty experience at one of her regular cafes, Nadine von Cohen wanted to know more about the etiquette on this age-old conundrum, so she asked the people in the know. Chefs, waiters and hospitality professionals share their opinions on how to send food back, and when it’s appropriate to do so. “We can’t really take food back just because you don’t like it,” says a cafe manager, Lynsey Martin. South Korean horror drama Squid Game has quickly become Netflix’s most-watched series. For those who haven’t seen it, the premise is simple: a group of contestants on the poverty line are pitted against each other in a series of deadly games, all for the entertainment of the super-rich. At its core – and partly why it’s so compelling – is the class struggle. But long before the Korean hit, the rich were using the poor for blood sport in action classics like Surviving the Game and the Australian cult horror Turkey Shoot. Listen In 2019, a 29-year-old Yamatji woman – known as JC – was homeless, suffering from poor mental health and walking through Geraldton holding a kitchen knife, when the police were called. Sixteen seconds after a police officer began to approach her, she was shot and later died. Last month a jury found the officer not guilty of both murder and manslaughter. In today’s Full Story, Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to ABC reporter Rebecca Trigger and Noongar human rights lawyer Hannah McGlade about the life of JC, and what happened in those 16 seconds. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Ranging in age from eight to 87, Scrabblers hit the boards in western Sydney this year vying for national supremacy. Sport editor Mike Hytner recommends this match report on a competitive board game with mind-bending wordplay for today’s Australia Reads podcast. Listen to the best of Guardian Australia’s journalism on Australia Reads podcast on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport An unnamed Carlton AFL player is refusing to have his Covid-19 vaccinations before the club’s pre-season training. It is understood he is the only Blue who hasn’t agreed to be vaccinated and is the first AFL player to refuse the jabs. Media roundup Cracks in Sydney’s inner west trams are so extensive they have been seen to open and close on straight stretches of the network, reports the Sydney Morning Herald. A 21-year-old woman at the centre of the Northern Territory’s lockdown has told the NT News she is “livid” that a social media post by the chief minister incorrectly labelled her as a sex worker. And the Victorian crossbench MP Andy Meddick has revealed the extent of abuse his office has been subjected to after receiving threats that his family would be “exposed to snipers and kidnappers” if he voted in support of a proposed pandemic bill next week. Coming up The housing affordability inquiry will hear from community and Indigenous housing associations. Victoria will announce its Australian of the year. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Iain Duncan Smith is facing questions over his £25,000-a-year second job advising a multimillion-pound hand sanitiser company after he chaired a government taskforce that recommended new rules benefiting the firm. The MP and former Conservative party leader chaired the Task Force on Innovation, Growth, and Regulatory Reform, which reported back in May after he and two other MPs were asked by Boris Johnson to recommend ways of cutting supposed EU red-tape. However, the fresh spotlight on moonlighting by MPs has now prompted questions about the taskforce’s recommendations that alcohol-free hand sanitisers should be formally recognised as suitable for use in the UK. The report made no reference to Duncan Smith’s relationship with Byotrol, which provides the NHS with 92% of its non-alcohol sanitiser. It retains the former Tory leader as an adviser for £25,000 a year, according to his declaration in parliament’s register of members’ interests. In a message to investors after the recommendations of Duncan Smith and his fellow former ministers George Freeman and Theresa Villiers, Byotrol welcomed how an “influential UK government-sponsored taskforce has recommended a regulatory ‘green light’ for alcohol-free hand sanitisers”. Its directors were also quoted in a report as saying that it delivered a “powerful boost” to the firm. The taskforce said in its report: “Current guidelines in the UK on non-alcohol based hand sanitisers are unclear. As a result, there is confusion in industry and among consumers as to what products are safe and effective to use, and we may be unnecessarily limiting the range of sanitising products available.” It called on the government to review guidance “to place alcohol- and non-alcohol-based on a level playing field”. Duncan Smith was a director of Byotrol between June 2009 and May 2010 and has previously declared share options. Both have been approached for comment. Byotrol, which is based in Cheshire, said in August that its revenue almost doubled and its pre-tax profits rocketed by more than 600% following “exceptional demand” for its sanitising technologies due to the pandemic. It reported a revenue of £11.2m for the 12 months to 31 March, up from £6m the previous year. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said: “The prime minister needs to explain why he think it is justified for one of his MPs to be paid by a company that stands to benefit from a recommendation of a taskforce chaired by that same MP. This is exactly the kind of brazen conflict of interest that proves that the Conservatives think it is one rule for them and another for the rest of us. “Did this MP declare an interest when these matters were discussed and reported on by the taskforce? Why is the prime minister failing to act over these glaring conflicts of interest?” Steve Goodrich, head of research and investigations at Transparency International UK, said: “The informality of a government taskforce might seem like an agile way to develop new policy but without basic governance arrangements it provides an open door to vested interests. If those proposing a major reform [could] benefit from it financially, this should at least be a matter of public record and probably should be subject to independent review.” The health sector featured prominently in the recommendations of the taskforce, which called for the ripping up of EU data protection laws and the system for clinical trials for drugs. Brexit afforded the UK a “one-off opportunity” to set out a bold new UK regulatory framework, it said. Duncan Smith, MP for Chingford and Woodford Green, is one of a number of Conservatives who have been moonlighting in the health sector. As well as being retained by Byotrol, Duncan Smith is a member of the international advisory board of Tunstall Health Group, earning £20,000 a year for up to 30 hours of work on top of his basic annual MP’s salary of £81,932. Others Tory MPs working in the healthcare sector – in some cases for companies that have benefited from lucrative Covid-19 contracts – include Steve Brine, a former junior health minister. Brine works with Remedium Partners, a recruitment agency for the NHS, and also for Sigma Pharmaceuticals. NHS test and trace announced in May that Sigma would provide lateral flow device test kits to community pharmacies. Brine’s declaration in the register of members’ interests states that he is a “strategic adviser” to Sigma and receives £1,666 a month. “I am a strategic adviser to both, not a lobbyist,” he said. Richard Fuller, the MP for North East Bedfordshire, earned £65,000 from a second job at venture capital firm Investcorp Securities Ltd, which included £30,000 for “consultancy work on the impact of Covid on portfolio companies”. Those companies included Cambio, a private health firm which secured a £63,000 NHS contract without competition from other providers. Alun Cairns, the former Welsh secretary, took a job advising a science company, BBI Group, involved in Covid testing in July during a period when the government was under pressure to increase testing.The Tory MP Geoffrey Cox was facing mounting pressure to quit, as Labour referred him to the standards commissioner amid suggestions he used his Commons office for legal work and a senior Conservative figure handed in their resignation over the government’s botched bid to overhaul sleaze rules. After it was revealed the former attorney general moonlighted as a lawyer working for the British Virgin Islands (BVI), Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, called for an investigation into Cox appearing to use taxpayer-funded parliamentary facilities to appear in a court hearing virtually. She said it was a “brazen breach of the rules”, coming in the wake of disgraced former Tory MP Owen Paterson being found to have committed an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules and holding meetings linked to the two businesses he was paid more than £100,000 in his parliamentary office. Footage of Cox reportedly at a hearing in September showed a background similar to those of MPs’ offices. After it surfaced, Rayner urged the standards commissioner to investigate, and called it “a slap in the face and an insult to British taxpayers”. Some of Cox’s own disgruntled colleagues also vented their fury amid anger at MPs’ second jobs, and Boris Johnson’s spokesperson issued pointed remarks saying all those elected to parliament should be “visible to their constituents”. Cox, 61, declared his extra earnings as a barrister and did not break any rules. But he faced fury for the many hours spent on work unrelated to the Commons and the £150,000 he was paid for giving legal advice to the BVI in relation to corruption charges brought by the UK Foreign Office. He also spent up to a month in the Caribbean tax haven earlier this year but continued to vote in parliament by proxy – a system devised for parliament to continue its work during lockdown. Since being sacked as a minister in a February reshuffle, Cox has spoken in the chamber once. He was revealed to have made £49,154 for 51 hours of legal work for Khan Partnership Solicitors, while he received £14,999 for 14 hours of work for Fidlaw, a business law firm. In the most recent update to the register of MPs’ interests, Cox said he would get an annual salary from 1 November of £400,000 from Withers, the international law firm. About £66,666 would cover this year and he would work for them for 41 hours a month. He registered a total of £970,000 income in the last year, for 705 hours of legal services. Earlier Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, said Cox’s work overseas was “a legitimate thing to do as long as it’s properly declared” and that it was “quite important” to have “some knowledge of what’s going on” in the BVI. Johnson’s botched bid to overhaul sleaze rules saw Andrew Bowie, a Conservative vice-chair with portfolios for youth and the union, hand in his resignation. Bowie has agreed to stay in the role until a replacement is found. Some newer Tory MPs also rounded on Cox, saying he was “tarnishing the reputation of those of us who don’t have second jobs”. One said “he needs to make a decision as to what he wants to do with his life – either he should do his legal jobs and work wherever that takes him, or be in parliament – he shouldn’t be doing both”. Another said there was an “old guard mentality” to second jobs among veteran MPs in safer seats, and that they were “taking the piss while some of us are solely focused on being a parliamentarian, care about constituents and work hard”. But another Conservative MP claimed Cox’s constituents in the Torridge and West Devon seat he has represented since 2005 were well aware of his work outside parliament, and this had been highlighted on leaflets distributed in the constituency by opposition parties at past elections. Jolyon Maugham QC, who was a tax specialist, said: “I think most of Cox’s constituents would expect him to see their welfare, and that of the communities in Torridge and West Devon, as his main concern. If he isn’t prepared to do that – if he wants to be off arguing cases in tax havens – he shouldn’t be an MP.” Johnson’s spokesperson said it was “incumbent on MPs to be visible, to demonstrate to constituents that they are active on behalf of them”. Asked whether Cox had failed to act in that way, the spokesperson said: “It is up to constituents to make that judgment.” He also confirmed the government would press ahead next week with retracting a motion to overhaul the standards procedure that sparked fury amid the Paterson debacle. The spokesperson said MPs would get a chance on Monday to endorse a standards committee report that detailed Paterson’s breaches of the MPs’ code of conduct. Cox’s office did not respond to a request for comment.Thank you very much for joining me for the goalfest. Suzanne Wrack’s report will be here very soon. It was all very easy for Chelsea, who will be slightly disappointed to not hit double figures. 90 mins: The referee is injured but she seems to have been injured and his biting her wrist in pain. Medical staff from both clubs have come onto the pitch but she’s sent them away. Three minutes added on. 88 mins: England keeps being unselfish but it is not helping her team; she collects a pass inside the box, puts it onto her right foot but then tries to pass - when shooting looks the best option - losing the ball as it is intercepted. 86 mins: Boho Sayo gets the ball on the left flank, she cuts inside and hopes for the best with her shot from 20 yards but it flies high and wide. 84 mins: Guede takes aim from 25 yards for Servette as they look for a consolation but it loops well over the bar. 82 mins: The pace has dropped off and Chelsea do not look like they can increase it with ease as they could earlier on. 80 mins: Fair play to the 12,782 tonight who have made noise throughout and are enjoying the occasion despite their team being well off the pace. 78 mins: Bright, who I assume is just bored, takes a poor touch which loops up and bounces towards her weaker left foot but she does not care, so takes a swipe from 35 yards, barely makes contact and watches the ball dribble wide. 75 mins: England gets her first sniff of goal but she decides to try and pull it across for a teammate to tap in. Sadly for those in yellow, a defender reads the danger and sends it behind. 73 mins: Servette have spent a bit more time in the Chelsea half in recent times but they just look too tired to muster anything. 71 mins: Boho Sayo lifts a looping cross into the box for Lagonia to attack but she is offside and the flag goes up to end the attack. 69 mins: Spence has another chance to let fly from distance, this time drilling the ball across goal from 20 yards but it goes inches wide. 67 mins: Mjelde comes on for Carter. She has not played since suffering a knee injury in the Continental Cup final in March. England is also on for Chelsea. 65 mins: Spence tries to get in on the act with a shot from the edge of the box but it pings back off the crossbar and away. 63 mins: Chelsea have lost a bit of their spark since the changes were made, it has to be said. Admittedly, they are seven goals to the good, so they probably aren’t too bothered. 61 mins: Musovic has just had a touch, admittedly it came in the form of a backpass but it’s something to keep her awake. 59 mins: Charles lifts a cross into the area but it bounces onto the top of the net. Hopefully the substitutions will not take the sting out of Chelsea’s game. 57 mins: The Chelsea subs begin: Reiten, Cuthbert and Eriksson are replaced by Fox, Charles and Andersson. 55 mins: Reiten just about gets the ball under control and lifts a cross to the back post but a Servette defends flicks it clear. 53 mins: The ball goes into box where Kerr controls, but to go against everything else that has happened in the match, she is well tackled and Chelsea win a corner. 51 mins: A delay to the restart as a Servette player is treated for something or other but they might just be looking for an excuse to get off the pitch. Another smart move by Chelsea sees Kerr lay the ball across the box into the path of Reiten who slots into the corner. 47 mins: Cuthbert sends the ball through for Kerr to latch onto; she chips the goalkeeper at the first time of asking but the ball bounces just wide. Servette made a half-time change, with Maendly coming on for Fleury. Will we get to double figures? Almost certainly. Just eaten an olive stuffed with garlic, so I am primed for the second half. The sixth goal. The stats say Chelsea have had 15 shots but it also says Servette had one in the opening 45 minutes and I have completely forgotten about it. I genuinely do not think Musovic has touched the ball but I could be wrong. Servette cannot cope with Chelsea’s quality and it has been as one-sided as the score suggests. Chelsea have played well in the final third but no one in maroon has really tried to stop them. 45 mins: One minute added on. 42 mins: Fleming lines one up from 25 yards and strikes it well but her shot is straight at Pereira who very happily takes hold. Moments later, Cuthbert swings in a cross from the right for Kerr to attack but she gets under the ball, heading it straight up in the air for Pereira to claim. 40 mins: Servette need to be more intelligent here. They are getting absolutely hammered but are leaving three players up top at all times. There is naive and there is NAIVE. Servette cannot have come up against a side as good as this and they can’t cope with the quality on show. Fleming scores the latest goal by getting beyond the defence and smashing a shot in at the near post. 36 mins: Boho Sayo gets caught on the top of the foot by Leupolz and goes down in pain. She has some treatment and looks OK to continue. 34 mins: Fleming pulls the ball back to Spence to take a first-time shot on the move but she hits it straight at Pereira. 32 mins: Chelsea are quite happy to knock the ball around their back three for long periods but they can then move the ball up the pitch quickly and once their midfielders have possession, they can open the defence instantly. This is proved by their latest move up the pitch, which sees Reiten collect a crossfield pass, before putting it onto her right foot and curling a shot just wide from 20 yards. 30 mins: Hayes will be able to give those who have started both tonight and against Aston Villa at the weekend a rest soon after the break. 28 mins: Servette are learning a cruel lesson about the difference in standard between the Swiss league and the WSL. The Servette defending is truly woeful. The ball is goes through for Fleming to chase - she is given acres of space by the centre-back, so collects easily and knocks to Kirby to take her time over before dinking in from a yard or two. 24 mins: Chelsea are in total control and quickly moving from first to fifth gear, which Servette cannot cope with. Needless to say, the scoring has not finished here. 22 mins: It is almost five, as Kerr gets the wrong side of the defence again but she sends the ball over from a tight angle inside the box. This is far too easy. Kirby plays a lovely ball between the centre backs for Kerr to latch onto, she takes a touch and pokes home. Servette are having a long chat about how to sort this but I am not sure there is an answer, as there is just a gulf in class. Servette get a corner but it is poor and ends up heading out of the box and away from everyone in maroon and yellow. Chelsea quickly break down the other end where Reiten plays a better cross to the back post for Leupolz to control into the path of Kerr, who sweeps home from six yards. Game over. Spence passes the ball to Kerr, who plays a delightful first-time flick through the Servette defence for Kirby to latch onto, she takes a touch and then beats the goalkeeper to double the lead. 14 mins: Servette give some indication of what they can do going forward with some slick passing in a quick break but it ends when the final ball finds Boho Sayo a good few yards offside. 12 mins: Play is stopped as Reiten has some sort of mouth issue and does a bit of spitting to sort it out. She is OK and play restarts. 10 mins: Centre-back Bright is operating as a right-winger, which is a sign of Chelsea’s domination. The German international latches onto a Bright pass into the box, takes a touch with her right and then thwacks it across the goalkeeper with her left. I am not sure Servette have made it out of their half thus far. It could be a long evening for them. 6 mins: There is a lot of action in the Servette box as Reiten finds Kirby once more, she tries to create space for herself but is crowded out by maroon shirts. 4 mins: Chelsea should be a goal ahead. The ball is pulled back to Kirby on the penalty spot, she lines up a shot but it is straight at Pereira who palms it straight back to the forward, only to whack the ball against the crossbar. 2 mins: Nakkach goes down in agony near the halfway line after getting a stray arm in the face but she gets up without issue. Peep! Peep! Peep! Here we go. There are more than 10,000 people in the stadium tonight, which is great to see. Almost all of them have a flag, too. The game is live on YouTube. You can watch it here: Some WSL news ... Zecira Musovic starts in goal for Chelsea as she gets the chance to get some minutes under her belt. The Sweden international has only made one league appearance this season, so will be desperate to show what she can do, although it could be a quiet night for her considering Servette’s record in this competition this thus far. It looks like we will get a decent crowd tonight. Servette’s head coach Eric Severac is on LinkedIn, allowing us to learn that he was previously finance director at The Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva. This seems like a change of pace. I was at the mini Etihad for Chelsea’s FA Cup semi-final win over Manchester City last weekend. They dominated that match from start to finish against a relatively out of form City, so they will not be concerned about tonight’s opposition. Kit news! Get in the mood for the match with Suzanne Wrack’s preview. Servette (4-3-3): Pereira; Soulard, Hurni, Spalti, Fleury; Lagonia, Tufo, Nakkach; Tamplin, Boho Sayo, Padilla-Bidas Subs: Droz, Bourma, Felber, Maendly, Guede Redondo, Grivaz Chelsea (3-4-3): Musovic; Carter, Bright, Eriksson; Cuthbert, Spence, Leupolz, Reiten; Fleming, Kirby, Kerr Subs: Telford, Berger, Ingle, England, Ji, Mjedle, James, Charles, Andersson, Fox It all seems quite straightforward for Chelsea this evening. They are playing a team who have conceded eight in their opening two group games, while Chelsea remain unbeaten after tough tests against Wolfsburg and Juventus. The chances of a slip up at Servette are next to nothing but they will need to avoid complacency and put in a fully professional performance. Servette have never come up against an English side and Chelsea boss Emma Hayes thinks they are an unknown quantity, which adds a bit of mystique to the fixture as we all find out together about the Swiss side. Chelsea have kept clean sheets in their past two games, so come into the match in great form, having reached the FA Cup final by brushing aside Manchester City and followed it up with a stoic victory over Aston Villa by a single goal. Let’s hope for some goals. Kick-off: 5.45pm GMTEmma Raducanu arrived in Linz with the simple goal of gaining more experience and match play in her final week of an unimaginably intense year, but she was unable to avoid that enormous, growing target on her back. Starting, illogically, as the top seed in just her seventh tour event, Raducanu fought until the end but succumbed to an impressive opponent and a hip spasm in the final games, losing 6-1, 6-7 (0), 7-5 to Wang Xinyu of China in a high quality second round match at the Upper Austria Ladies Linz. After her defeat, Raducanu was in positive spirits as she dissected her match with a smile on her face, noting her opponent’s performance and her satisfaction at her own level. “I thought that it was a really high level match. I thought that Xinyu played extremely well, especially the first set. I’m proud of the way that I performed to try and get back in the match when everything was going her way and she was playing extremely well,” she said. Raducanu was facing a talented contemporary who enjoyed a more spectacular junior career, reaching number two in the ITF rankings. Wang, 20, had advanced through qualifying and she has been in strong form for weeks. She produced a dominant first set, controlling the baseline with her forehand as she finished the set with 13 winners and just three unforced errors. But even as she struggled to win games, Raducanu was fully invested and she continually fought through the second set, roaring after victorious points and mouthing “fight” to herself between rallies. As Raducanu remained in touch, Wang’s level had significantly dropped and they soon found themselves in a tiebreak, which Raducanu played flawlessly to level the match. Throughout an intense third set filled with big shotmaking and high octane exchanges, both talented young players performed at a relatively high level and they held all eight games to reach 4-4. But after a particularly bruising rally on the opening point, Raducanu pulled up with a hip spasm. She lost the game to love and took a medical timeout before saving two match points to brilliantly reach 5-5. Wang’s focus, however, did not waver and she quickly reeled off the final two games to seal her victory. Raducanu finishes her breakout season with a 2-3 record since her US Open triumph. That she has not immediately adjusted to the week-by-week grind of the tour with so little experience was predictable and there is no shame in it. She is still learning what it means to be a professional player at the highest level, which she has frequently acknowledged. “A lot has happened this year,” she said. “Where I was in January, February, March, I would have taken it. I have learnt how much room I have to develop physically and what playing on the tour week in, week out actually needs because clearly my body is still trying to get up to speed. I was honestly quite happy with the level I put out and tried to fight back.” With her season now finished, Raducanu, who turns 19 on Saturday, can now take a rare holiday. “I haven’t been on a holiday for seven years, so it would be nice to have an opportunity to go somewhere,” she said, smiling. When she returns, she will start work with her new coach, Torben Beltz, as they prepare for her first full season on the tour. Andy Murray advanced to the second round of the Stockholm Open, his final tournament of the year, with a 6-1, 7-6 (7) win over Viktor Durasovic, a 354-ranked Norwegian qualifier. Murray, who is holding a coaching trial with the Spaniard Esteban Carril, now has a far loftier challenge in his second round match against Jannik Sinner, the top seed.The US is the graveyard of UK retailers, runs ancient retailing wisdom that was reinforced when Tesco fell flat on its face, and lost the thick end of $2bn, by backing a venture called Fresh &amp; Easy a decade ago. Primark, AB Foods’ discount clothes retailer, is actually Irish, so won’t count towards the tally even if its new US push fails. But there are at least a couple of reasons why this stateside adventure, which will take store numbers from 13 to 60 over five years, looks a more credible proposition than Tesco’s ego-driven expansion. First, ABF opened its first Primark in the US almost five years ago and spent time tweaking the format for local tastes. The chief conclusion, perhaps counterintuitive, is that stores should be smaller than European versions to achieve similar financial returns. Tesco also claimed to have done its research, of course, but none of it amounted to waiting for profits before committing more capital. When early sales levels disappointed, the supermarket group concluded, optimistically, that what it really needed was more outlets to achieve efficiencies. An intended low-risk experiment quickly became a costly blunder. Second, Primark is confident it scores better on price than local rivals while offering more fashion pizzazz. Tesco was in a different game. It was pushing an upmarket format that was unlike its UK model but looked similar to those of established west-coast chains such as Trader Joe’s and Whole Food Markets. It wasn’t offering anything new. None of which guarantees that Primark will win in the US, but the refusal to offer an online transactional website – which has been cited for years to predict “peak Primark” – suddenly looks less and less of a danger. Retail property, for those who can bring in loyal punters, is very cheap these days. Bitcoin yet to match gold’s veteran bankability Bitcoin is soaring to new price highs because it is a hedge against inflation and a form of “digital gold”, says a currently popular refrain. It makes no sense. The point about gold is that it has earned its reputation as a store of value (and not always reliably, it should be said) over a couple of thousand years and over many inflationary cycles. By contrast, digital currencies, in the grand sweep of economic history, have existed for about five minutes. That’s no basis on which to make inflation-protection claims. Of course, buyers of bitcoins and other crypto currencies may believe they are protecting themselves against the profligacy of central banks. But a motive for buying doesn’t mean the asset has suddenly acquired the characteristics fondly imagined. How, for example, would “digital gold” proponents explain the near-50% plunge in bitcoin’s value between May and July this year? That investors were universally relaxed about inflation in those months? Come on, we know that wasn’t the case. The unsatisfactory, but surely accurate, explanations for the latest burst of enthusiasm for bitcoin and its imitators seem simple. Appetite for pure speculation is alive and kicking; punting on crypto has become easier via innovations such as the first bitcoin exchange-traded fund in the US; and serious marketing budgets are promoting crypto trading. Inflation-related theories may make the exercise feel high-minded, or even mainstream, but they have very little to do with it. Sunak’s post-Brexit regulation may fall flat The UK has left the European Union, so it is reasonable for the Treasury to want to unpick a few EU financial regulations. Not every piece of legislation that was created in Brussels was well designed. It is easy to see that the UK, as Europe’s leading financial centre (still), might wish to do a few things differently. It’s just that chancellor, Rishi Sunak’s, language around this ambition does not inspire confidence. “Today’s proposals will support the future strength of the UK as a global financial centre, ensuring an agile and dynamic approach to regulation that supports the growth of the UK economy, without diverging from our continued commitment to high international standards,” said Tuesday’s high-level statement. The worrying words in that sermon are “agile and dynamic”. Wasn’t roughly the same claim made about the “light touch” era of the 1990s that tolerated undercapitalised banks and timid regulators and culminated in the financial crash of 2007-09? The nod to “high international standards” is intended to counter that objection, but let’s see. Agile regulators are great until they are bent out of shape by the people they are meant to be regulating.The White House on Tuesday condemned the Republican congressman Paul Gosar for tweeting a video which depicted him striking the New York Democrat Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez with a sword and appearing to threaten Joe Biden. “There is no place for any type of violence or that type of language in the political system,” the principal deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, told reporters at a daily briefing. “It should not be happening, and we should be condemning it.” The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, said “threats of violence against members of Congress and the president of the United States must not be tolerated” and called on the House Republican leader, Kevin McCarthy, to “join in condemning this horrific video and call on the ethics committee and law enforcement to investigate”. Twitter attached a hateful conduct warning to Gosar’s tweet, which was also posted to Instagram on Sunday, but kept it up online. “This tweet violated the Twitter rules about hateful conduct,” Twitter’s message said. “However, Twitter has determined that it may be in the public’s interest for the tweet to remain accessible.” The roughly 90-second video presents an altered version of a Japanese anime series, interspersed with shots of border patrol officers and migrants at the US border with Mexico. In one section, characters whose faces are replaced with those of Gosar and fellow extremist Republicans Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia and Lauren Boebert of Colorado are seen fighting other characters. Gosar’s character strikes another, made to look like Ocasio-Cortez, in the neck with a sword. The video ends with an apparent threat to Biden. Ocasio-Cortez was in Glasgow on Tuesday, attending the Cop26 climate summit. On Twitter, she wrote: “A creepy member I work with who fundraises for neo-Nazi groups shared a fantasy video of him killing me and he’ll face no consequences because [McCarthy] cheers him on with excuses … well, back to work because institutions don’t protect women of color.” Ocasio-Cortez listed other instances of threatening behavior from Republicans in Congress. “Remember when [Ted] Yoho accosted me on the Capitol [steps] and called me a f[uck]ing b[itch]. Remember when Greene ran after me a few months ago screaming and reaching. Remember when she stalked my office the first time with insurrectionists and people locked inside. All at my job and nothing ever happens. Anyways, back to business.” The congresswoman also called Gosar “just a collection of wet toothpicks anyway”. “White supremacy,” she said, “is for extremely fragile people and sad men like him, whose self concept relies on the myth that he was born superior because deep down he knows he couldn’t open a pickle jar or read a whole book by himself.” In a statement, Gosar described the video as a “symbolic portrayal of a fight over immigration policy” and said: “I do not espouse violence or harm towards any member of Congress or Mr Biden.” Gosar is an ardent Trump ally who in 2018 was the subject of a campaign ad made by six of his siblings, exhorting voters to ditch him. He is also among lawmakers whose phone or computer records are sought by the House committee investigating the deadly attack on Congress on 6 January, in which Trump supporters sought to overturn the former president’s election defeat. On Monday, Eric Swalwell, a House California Democrat, said: “These bloodthirsty losers are more comfortable with violence than voting. Keep exposing them.” The Yale historian Joanne Freeman, author of The Field of Blood, a well-regarded history of violence in Congress before the civil war, wrote: “Threats of violence lead to actual violence. They clear the ground. They cow opposition. They plant the idea. They normalize it. They encourage it. They maim democracy. And run the risk of killing it.” The Associated Press contributed to this reportLike the main characters in Four Weddings and a Funeral, the cricket teams of England and New Zealand don’t seem to be able to go to a party without running into each other. There have been five meetings at major international tournaments since the start of 2015, and so far as England are concerned four have been raucous celebrations, and one very much a wake. England’s humiliating thrashing in Wellington at the 2015 ODI World Cup was instrumental in propelling them towards their current state of white-ball excellence, with both of the sides that will meet in Abu Dhabi on Wednesday impacted in different ways by the team led then by Brendon McCullum. Since then their stars have seemed aligned, and now they are set for yet another sequel. It is a match that became massively harder to predict in a single instant on Saturday night when Jason Roy set off for a single and his calf muscle refused to cooperate. While England will be particularly pained by the absence of their opener – a man Eoin Morgan said “epitomises everything that we are about in the changing room and the way that we play” – in many ways this is a match between two teams both suffering, in very different ways, from the same injury. The impact on England is obvious, and it has forced them to approach their most important game of the tournament so far with an unwanted reorganisation. But that too impacts on New Zealand, whose tactical planning has been thrown into disarray. Had Roy been fit England would almost certainly have been unchanged for this game and New Zealand’s task would be more daunting but also more predictable. In his absence New Zealand have at the centre of their preparations a lot of guesswork and crossed fingers. “I suppose whenever there’s an injury, someone else comes in and you’re not to know who they are until the toss,” Kane Williamson said. “But you try and prepare and plan as best you can and then when you go out there you’re sort of competing in the moment. Jason’s a big player for England but their depth is one of their strengths and we’ll try to plan accordingly to the best of our ability. Largely we want to focus on the sort of cricket that we want to play and keep developing on that as we’ve been doing throughout this tournament.” Roy’s injury has taken what would have been a simple selection decision – likely an unchanged side – and made it extremely problematic, in a way that illustrates the tactical complexity of Twenty20 cricket. The easiest decision is the identity of his replacement as opener, one Morgan has already made. He said on Tuesday that he was “blessed with guys who can bat at the top of the order and actually want to”, a sentiment that Dawid Malan put more memorably earlier this summer when he said there were “about 10 guys in this team” who “would all chew Eoin’s arm off for an opportunity to open”. But the likelihood is that Malan will remain frustrated in his pursuit of that position, and that Jonny Bairstow – who has opened in four of England’s last five T20 meetings with New Zealand – will join Jos Buttler at the top of the order. This is potentially fruitful, bringing an established, aggressive batter into the powerplay where an explosive start can effectively decide the match. But it is also fraught with danger, exposing Bairstow to the Kiwis’ best bowlers, Trent Boult and Tim Southee, at the point when they are most dangerous. But that still leaves a space in the team, and England’s more difficult decision is who to move into it. Here they must first choose whether to maintain the batting-heavy strategy that has seen them rely throughout the competition on two specialist batsmen, Liam Livingstone and Moeen Ali, to between them bowl at least four overs, or whether to pick another bowler, most likely one of the bowling all-rounders, Tom Curran and David Willey. “I suppose replacing him with another bowler would mean that you have 28 genuine overs on the field and a lot of options,” Morgan said. “If you were to go with a batter, it would mean a like-for-like replacement. When we turn up and look at the wicket, if it’s going to be a really good batting wicket you might need the extra bit of bowling. If it’s not, you might need the extra bit of batting.” It may help their decision-making that New Zealand have settled on a bowling-heavy strategy, and the best way to counter a side with significant bowling strength is obviously to bolster the batting. The specialist batters available to Morgan are James Vince, recently added to the squad to replace Roy and another who prefers to open, and Sam Billings, who seems a better fit for the newly vacated spot in the middle order. For all their injuries England are still not short of options and for now their best one, as a movie scriptwriter might say, is to keep them guessing till the end.Matty Cash could make his debut for Poland in Andorra on Friday and then he will travel to Warsaw for Monday’s home match against Hungary. The latter will be the first time the Aston Villa full-back will have set foot in the country his grandfather was forced to leave 81 years ago. “We lost my grandad six years ago – he’d definitely have been very proud to see me represent Poland,” says Cash as he prepares to take an exciting new step in his career and contribute a happy new chapter to a remarkable family tale. It is a tale that reflects part of Poland’s turbulent history and explains why a Slough-born 24-year-old who speaks little Polish will be fulfilling a long-held dream when he wears the country’s colours. “It’s quite a crazy story really, a bit complicated,” says Cash as he begins recounting how his grandparents ended up in England. Ryszard Tomaszewski, Cash’s maternal grandfather, was born three years before the outbreak of the second world war in the city of Stanislawow, which was then part of the Second Polish Republic but is now in Ukraine (and named Ivano-Frankivsk). Ryszard’s father, Wladyslaw, was killed in a war that brought atrocities and ruin to the city, whose people suffered at the hands of the Nazis and then the Red Army. In 1940, after the Soviet Union took control of the city as part of the dismemberment of Poland, Ryszard was deported to a work camp in Siberia with his mother and two sisters. They languished there for nearly two years. In July 1941, after Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union, Stalin’s need to forge new alliances resulted in the Sikorski-Mayski agreement being signed in London between the Polish prime minister and the Soviet ambassador to the United Kingdom. The next month Stalin granted an “amnesty” to the tens of thousands of Polish citizens held in Soviet camps. The Tomaszewski family were released. They set about trying to build a new life. First they went to Iran, then to India and then to Tanganyika, whose British colonial rulers agreed to set up camps to accommodate 6,000 Poles formerly held in Soviet captivity. In 1948, after six years in Africa, the Tomaszewski family boarded a ship back to Europe, arriving in Liverpool in the hope of settling at last. Ryszard was 12. He did well at school and qualified as an engineer before, in 1964, meeting a Polish woman who was over visiting her sister in Ealing. Ryszard and Janina fell in love and got married. Their daughter, Barbara, is Matty Cash’s mother. His father is Stuart Cash, a former left-back who played for a number of clubs including Chesterfield, Brentford and Rotherham. “This has been a very proud moment all around my family, especially on my mother’s side,” says Cash of the call-up. “I’ve got relations in Poland but I’ve never been there and never met them, but my mum has been on the phone to them constantly and everyone is so excited. “Even the response I’ve had from people on social media has been unbelievable. I can’t wait to get going and meet everyone. I only speak a few words of Polish but my mum speaks it fluently and she has been helping me brush up.” The next two matches are crucial for Poland’s World Cup qualification hopes: win them and they could finish above England in Group I or, more likely, secure a play-off place. It is a good time for Cash to join up. His desire to represent the country is not new: it is just that the Polish FA’s previous president, Zbigniew Boniek, had a policy of not tapping into the Polish diaspora. When Cash first got in touch, he was rebuffed. That changed when Cezary Kulesza took the helm of the Polish FA in August. “The last president, I believe, didn’t really want to listen to me,” says Cash. “Not in a rude way, he just wasn’t into the idea of me coming to play for Poland. But the new president came and he has been really helpful and wanted to get it done quickly, as did the manager [Paulo Sousa]. That all helped push it on.” In October, his application for a Polish passport was approved. “A few days before I went to the Polish embassy to pick it up the manager rang me and said it would be great for us to have a sit-down,” says Cash. “So we did and it was really positive, a great chat. About the way we’re going to play and he went through loads of things about tactics, formations, what training will be like. “I feel like I can definitely fit into it, 100%. I already knew from watching their games how passionate and aggressive they play so hopefully I can implement that too. “We spoke about the importance of getting me in the mix now. The games we’ve got coming up are very important and I’ve prepared myself for it. It’s going to be brilliant. The fact that the game against Hungary will be my first time in Poland just makes it more special. I’ll be doing everything I can to help me and the team get to the World Cup.”The activist and Nobel laureate Malala Yousafzai announced she had got married on Tuesday in a small ceremony in Birmingham. The campaigner for girls’ education and the world’s youngest winner of the Nobel peace prize said on social media she had married her partner, Asser Malik. “Today marks a precious day in my life,” she wrote. “Asser and I tied the knot to be partners for life. “We celebrated a small nikkah [Islamic marriage contract] ceremony at home in Birmingham with our families. Please send us your prayers. We are excited to walk together for the journey ahead.” Yousafzai became the youngest winner of the Nobel peace prize in 2014, then aged 17, alongside the Indian children’s rights activist Kailash Satyarthi. Last year Yousafzai graduated from the University of Oxford with a bachelor’s degree in philosophy, politics and economics (PPE). “So happy for you my bestie!! Such a precious day that we witnessed today,” her friend, the education activist Vee Kativhu, said on Twitter. “So so happy for you my little one! Masha Allah My love and regards to all family,” Muniba Mazari, the national ambassador for UN Women Pakistan, said on Instagram. Yousafzai began blogging for the BBC in 2009 about her experiences during the Taliban’s growing influence in the Swat Valley region of Pakistan. Attempting to silence her, the Taliban shot the then 15-year-old Yousafzai in the head in 2012, which she survived. “Instead of silencing me, they amplified my voice beyond Pakistan,” she wrote in her 2019 book We Are Displaced. In 2013 Yousafzai co-founded the Malala Fund, an international non-profit advocating for girls’ schooling. In her 2014 Nobel acceptance speech she said: “This award is not just for me. It is for those forgotten children who want education. It is for those frightened children who want peace. It is for those voiceless children who want change.” “I am here to stand up for their rights, to raise their voice.” In 2017 Yousafzai became a United Nations messenger of peace to help raise awareness of the importance of girls’ education. Wedding well-wishers on social media included the climate activist Greta Thunberg, British Vogue editor Edward Enninful and thousands of others.