Britain is in an “incomparably better” position in the fight against Covid than it was at the end of 2020, Boris Johnson has said in his new year’s message, while Keir Starmer stressed his belief in a brighter future but said the virus remained a real threat. Both party leaders focused on the effect the pandemic had had on the country in their messages. The prime minister admitted there was anxiety about the Omicron variant and growing numbers of hospital admissions, and urged those who had not been vaccinated to get their jabs. There was “one overriding reason” that tougher restrictions were not needed in the face of daily case numbers hitting record levels, he said – people “heroically, voluntarily and in almost incredible numbers heeding the call to get vaccinated”. Johnson was buoyant about the speed of the booster rollout, saying it was “precisely because of that huge national effort that we can celebrate tonight at all”. He still urged everyone in England to be cautious, take a test if going out and remember the importance of ventilation, and he told those in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland – who face tougher measures – that they should follow the respective rules in force across each nation. He also called people who were still unvaccinated or unboosted to get their jabs. “Look at the intensive care units and the miserable, needless suffering of those who did not get their booster. That could be you,” he said. “So, make it your new year’s resolution – far easier than losing weight or keeping a diary – find a walk-in centre or make an online appointment.” The Labour leader also called on people to “make the right choices, to come together” and forge a new sense of direction that he said would lead to a brighter future. Buoyed by a boost in the polls while the Conservatives’ vaccine bounce diminished, Starmer promised to set out “the ideas that I believe can build a new Britain” over the next 12 months. “Given the last two years our country has been through it would be all too easy to lose heart. But, like you, I believe in Britain. I believe the best still lies ahead for Britain,” he said. “That – if we make the right choices – together we can seize the future and make it work for every family in every part of Britain. That must be the true legacy of all the sacrifices and pain of the past two years of the pandemic.” Patriotism was not enough for success, he said, stressing the UK needed a leader who “can translate that pride into the action we need”. He said the events he was most looking forward to next year included the Commonwealth Games in Birmingham, the Queen’s platinum jubilee and – as a football lover – the World Cup. The Liberal Democrat leader, Ed Davey, used his new year message to stress he hoped 2022 would be “the year we will finally beat Covid” – but said it would begin with “many worries”. He said a potential “cost of living crisis” was already brewing, with heating bills on the rise and the threat of inflation, a “staff shortage crisis” with people off work isolating and a “political crisis” with the government divided and distracted at a crucial point in the pandemic.Normally the summer Olympics are the pinnacle event for me to cover, but this year was not at all normal and I decided to give Tokyo a miss. Not only did my family not want me going, there were other factors to discourage me, not least the new rules that meant I might have very limited access. So instead my year was dominated by football, the peak being the final of the Euros at Wembley, a game that brought the country to a standstill and became one of the most-watched moments in British television history. West Bromwich Albion v Arsenal, The Hawthorns – 2 January 44mm lens 1/1600 f4.5 ISO 4000 My year started off in a very cold fashion with a trip to the Hawthorns, the highest professional league ground in the country. Despite the freezing conditions I loved it. It is pretty rare to shoot a football match in snow, thanks to either modern heated pitches melting it, or the games getting called off due to safety concerns for spectators. Back in January that obviously wasn’t the case as all games were being played behind closed doors. It was quickly apparent that the home side probably wished it had been postponed. They lost 4-0 to Arsenal, a dismal performance indicative of their season as a whole. The reason I like this picture is the bleakness of it all. Heavy snow falling in an empty stadium as all 10 outfield West Brom players, each one separate from the other, trudge back to the centre circle after conceding a goal. A very black and white image – perhaps a Christmas card for a Wolves fan? Ealing Trailfinders v Saracens, Trailfinders Challenge Cup – 16 January 400mm lens 1/2500 f4 ISO 640 In mid-January this special challenge match was the only senior men’s rugby game in Britain as all the others had been cancelled for Covid reasons. Ealing are a Championship team, in the second tier of English rugby, and Saracens were just about to start their season at this new level following their demotion from the Premiership. Most rugby matches I usually cover are in large stadia with tall stands circling the pitch. This wasn’t the case at Ealing and most of the pitch was bathed in low winter sun. Shooting backlit was beautiful, all I needed was the play to come near me into the right patch of light. For ages it seemed stuck at the other end, time ticking by and the sun rapidly descending. Eventually a maul formed where I needed it and I managed to get a few frames before clouds rolled in and everything went dark. Arsenal v Manchester United, Emirates Stadium – 30 January 560mm lens, 1/1600 f4 ISO 4000 It was injury time at the end of this very dull 0-0 draw back in January. I was cold and had very few decent pictures. Suddenly the Arsenal striker Alexandre Lacazette launched himself at the ball across the back of Harry Maguire and flipped over in mid-air. It just goes to show you never know when something might happen to brighten up your day. Spurs v Chelsea, Tottenham Hotspur Stadium – 4 February 105mm lens 1/1250 f4.5 ISO 4000 One of the advantages of working in an empty stadium with a game played behind closed doors is that it gave me opportunities to put remote cameras in places I normally wouldn’t be allowed to, such as here in the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium, on stairs right at the top of the massive South Stand. While I was down at pitch-level, I was setting off this camera up there. I love the view looking down on the goal, all neat symmetry and perfect lines. Even the groundsman with rubber gloves on, ready to pick up a loose ball from behind the goal, is standing right in the middle. As Jorginho stepped up to score a penalty for Chelsea, the only goal of this game, all the elements lined up perfectly. This frame is also a reminder of the pandemic age of football, a time when the game carried on without fans. England v Italy, Twickenham – 13 February 560mm lens 1/1600 f4 ISO 2500 The England captain Owen Farrell gets a fist in the face during his side’s 41-18 victory over Italy in the Six Nations. International rugby is such a hard, physical sport with a lot of close confrontations such as this. It is at moments like these that I often like to go in tight on the action with a very long lens. Sometimes it pays off, sometimes it does not. Wales v England, Principality Stadium – 27 February 145mm lens 1/1600 f4 ISO 3200 Normally for this game, which has always been one of my favourite fixtures, the Principality Stadium would be full of baying red-shirted fans. It is a perfect ground for rugby which, when full, crackles with intensity and passion. The Six Nations game there in February felt very surreal, the empty seats covered with giant waterproof sheets, one of which bore a fire-breathing dragon. I could not help but imagine what the noise would have been like as Wales won 40-24. Lawrence Okolie, World cruiserweight boxing champion – 6 April 50mm lens 1/125 f1.6 ISO 400 In 2012 Lawrence Okolie weighed 19 stone and was working in a McDonald’s at London Victoria station. It was the final day of the London Olympics and in a break from flipping burgers he watched Anthony Joshua winning the heavyweight boxing gold medal on TV. The following day Okolie quit his job and vowed to be a boxer. In early April I went to photograph the 28-year-old from Hackney just a few days after he became the WBO world cruiserweight champion. I decided to photograph Okolie in the tiny gym at the bottom of his garden in Essex, cradling his newly-won world champion belt. Rachael Blackmore wins the Grand National, Aintree – 10 April 28mm lens 1/2500 f11 ISO 1250 In the hour before every Grand National there is always a buzz among the photographers at the course. Everyone asks “where are you going?” or “what’s your plan?” This year was no different and I remember talking to Steve Cargill, a racing specialist, as we headed out on to the track. In unison we both said: “What if Rachael wins?” and realised our goals were very similar, we had to be at the finish in case Blackmore created history and became the first female jockey to win the world’s most famous steeplechase race. I had photographed her success at Cheltenham the previous month, where she was crowned leading jockey, so knew she was in terrific form. Sure enough her horse, Minella Times, carried her to victory at Aintree. It was a real pity that spectators were not there to witness it, just a few owners watching on. It was quite eerie afterwards as she enjoyed the moment while at the same time caring for her horse, dousing it with water while the TV screen replayed her historic win in the background. Arsenal fans protest, Emirates Stadium – 23 April 70mm lens 1/2000 f4.5 ISO 500 For a couple of weeks of the Premier League season in April and May it seemed the news agenda was not being set by matters on the pitch but rather what was occurring outside grounds. It was the time of fans’ protests, justifiably angered by six clubs announcing their intention to join a new European Super League. This radical proposal, which would have caused havoc to the game, came along when fans had been locked out for months. At Arsenal the fans’ grievances were directed squarely at the club’s owner, Stan Kroenke. Before a home match against Everton hundreds gathered. I went back inside the ground after photographing the demo. The game, in front of no fans, was desperate. Arsenal lost 1-0 but no one seemed that bothered with the result – the bigger news had been made outside. Manchester City win the Premier League – 11 May 16mm lens 1/400 f4 ISO 3200 Once I saw Caglar Soyuncu scoring the winner for Leicester at Old Trafford, I knew the most important pictures on that May evening would be taken on the other side of Manchester. United’s defeat meant City had won the Premier League. So I quickly got in the car after the final whistle and headed over to the Etihad. Sure enough hundreds of City fans descended on their ground to celebrate the title victory. One of them, pictured here, played up beautifully for the cameras, holding a can of lager and a flare in one hand, while smoking a rollup in the other. England v New Zealand, first Test, Lord’s – 5 June 840mm lens 1/1600 f5.6 ISO 800 There are times in Test cricket that are, let us just say, not quite as interesting as others. The third day of the first Test had been wiped out by rain, and the match was meandering towards a draw on the fourth afternoon. My mind started to wander. I had noticed, unusually for Lord’s, that quite a few pigeons had been pecking away at the square. This sort of bird activity I have always associated with the Oval. Anyway, I thought I would try to create a picture with them. Slowly a number started to congregate on a patch not far from the wicket being used. Kane Williamson, the New Zealand captain, played a shot then shouted for a run. The pigeons took off in unison, all apart from one, who stubbornly stayed put. England v New Zealand, second Test, Edgbaston – 10 June 115mm lens 1/1250 f7.1 ISO 800 When the England players came out at Lord’s for the national anthems before the first Test in early June, they all wore black T-shirts with slogans on the back. It was a moment, designed by the ECB, as a show of unity with people of all backgrounds. These slogans mentioned ageism, ableism, transphobia, homophobia and religious intolerance. I decided for the second Test in Edgbaston to try to show the players wearing these T-shirts together so I went up to the TV gantry to shoot down on to the backs of the England team. It was only after taking the picture that I realised something was missing – why no mention of racism on any of the shirts? Then, just a few months later, the story of Azeem Rafiq and his treatment at Yorkshire made the headlines and I could not help but think back to this picture. England v Germany, Euro 2020 last 16, Wembley – 29 June 23mm lens 1/1600 f4.5 ISO 2000 Raheem Sterling scores the first goal for England against Germany in their knockout match at the Euros. It may have been less than half-full but I cannot recall Wembley ever sounding louder than at that moment. For all the matches at Wembley during the Euros, only 16 photographers were allowed pitchside due to Covid regulations and I felt very privileged to be there. However, rules that had prevented us from putting remote cameras right next to the net had been relaxed. It was great to be back shooting pictures such as this, after a Premier League season where these sort of cameras had been banished to behind the advertising boards. Emma Raducanu, women’s singles fourth round, Wimbledon – 5 July 400mm lens 1/1600 f3.5 ISO 4000 I wish I had been there in New York when Emma shocked the sporting world by winning the US Open. This image, taken at Wimbledon in July, is not a nice picture and I did not like taking it but sometimes you have to photograph what is the story of the day. The reason I am including it in this selection is to show what an amazing transformation Raducanu had in just a few months. From breathing problems and having to withdraw from her last-16 match at Wimbledon to winning the US Open as a qualifier without losing a set – remarkable. Euro 2020 final, Wembley – 11 July 400mm lens 1/2000 f4 ISO 4000 The England manager, Gareth Southgate, consoles Bukayo Saka after missing the final penalty in the shootout, handing Italy the Euros title. When I look back at this picture now it stirs up so many feelings, mainly of sadness, but also of pride and hope for the future. When I am actually at a game like this, I deliberately try to divorce myself from too much emotion. This is easier said than done but somehow putting a camera in front of my face helps keep my equilibrium and gets me to focus on what needs to be done. In this case it was to show the heartbreak for England as they missed out on winning a first title in 55 years. Once I saw Saka miss and then wander back towards the centre circle I stayed focused on him, ignoring the Italian celebrations. The 19-year-old buckled into the arms of his manager, burying his head deep into Southgate’s shoulder. For one split moment their legs matched each other, united in their despair. The symbolism struck me immediately. Southgate, having missed a decisive penalty for England at Wembley in the 1996 Euros, knew exactly the anguish Saka was going through. He seemed to wrap his arms round the player in a protective manner knowing exactly the sort of abuse that was heading the young player’s way. Collin Morikawa, Royal St George’s, Sandwich – 17 July 61mm lens 1/2000 f22 ISO 320 It had been 10 years since I had photographed The Open. This picture was one I definitely could not have taken in 2011. Thanks to my current cameras having a silent function, I can now take pictures during the swing whereas a decade ago, without a silent shutter, that was forbidden. Now I can be up close to the player, just a few feet away in this case, and fire the shutter at any time. Royal St George’s was quite hard work for pictures this year, but one thing was in the photographer’s favour – the beautifully sunny weather. As Sandwich is the southernmost venue on the Open roster it also meant the sun set earlier than those courses in Scotland or northern England. This enabled me to get pictures such as this, as Morikawa, on his way to winning the title, teed off at the 18th on Saturday evening with the low sun sat perfectly behind him. With my shutter firing throughout his swing I manage to capture the beautiful bend of the club just before he hit the ball. England v India, The Oval – 5 September 41mm lens 1/2500 f 5.6 ISO 400 The classic view of this ground for photographers has always been across the pitch to the gas holders behind but, due to building work both inside and outside The Oval, that is no longer possible. However a very different view has now opened up, one from high on top the new M.A.R. Galadari stand. It is spectacular up there, a bird’s eye view of the pitch with the cluster of skyscrapers in the Vauxhall development shooting upwards. This image shows a small boy in Indian team kit as he peers over a wall, intent on watching every little moment of play, seemingly oblivious to the backdrop. Cristiano Ronaldo scores, Old Trafford – 11 September 168mm lens 1/2000 f4 ISO 800 Manchester United’s home game against Newcastle in September was about one man. T-shirts for sale outside the ground proclaimed this match as “The Second Coming of CR7”. It seemed a foregone conclusion that once Freddie Woodman, the Newcastle keeper, had spilled a shot just before half-time, you-know-who would be there to pounce on the rebound. One swing of the golden-studded boot and, 12 years after scoring his previous goal for Manchester United at Old Trafford, Cristiano Ronaldo had scored again. Anthony Joshua’s ring walk at Tottenham Hotspur Stadium – 25 September 155mm lens 1/500 f2.8 ISO 6400 As he walked out of the tunnel to defend his world heavyweight titles against Oleksandr Usyk, Joshua turned around to adoring fans and tapped his glove on his heart. Looking uncannily like Muhammad Ali in his pristine white gown, the British boxer seemed confident and relaxed, soaking up adulation from the phone-wafting spectators. They were all in for a very uncomfortable night as Usyk defeated a lacklustre Joshua. Even though there is hardly any light where this photo is taken, what is there is very soft, a perfect balance from tunnel, television and phone. London Marathon – 3 October 300mm lens 1/640th f2.8 ISO 6400 This marathon has always been one of my favourite events to cover. After last year’s elite-only race, it was great to see 40,000 runners on the capital’s streets again. Instead of going to the finish or one of the famous landmarks, I decided to do something a little different, going to a location that is very unglamorous but notorious for being incredibly hard. Just about at the 24-mile marker, where the dreaded “wall” often kicks in, are a series of tunnels under railway stations. These can produce dramatic variations in light and in this picture, of the leaders in the elite men’s race, I exposed for the dark conditions just as the runners entered the tunnel. Normally photographers like a dark background to show off the action but in this case it’s the opposite. Outside the tunnel went white, producing this very graphic and unusual athletics image. New York Jets v Atlanta Falcons, Tottenham Hotspur Stadium – 10 October 24mm lens 1/3200 f7.1 ISO 1000 For the first time in two years, the NFL was back in London as the Falcons hosted the Jets. One aspect of the sport I like, and which often makes good pictures, is the way the home team are announced and they run out to a big fanfare, often through fireworks. I positioned myself in the corner from where the Falcons players would emerge. The obligatory dry ice started to pump all around me (quite a weird feeling) and then just before the big moment, the sun popped out from behind a cloud. Rather than shooting with the players running towards me, I spun round and shot them backlit, dashing away from me through the swirling smoke. Frankie Dettori, Newmarket – 11 October 50mm lens 1/1600 f4 ISO 400 In early October the writer Simon Hattenstone and I went to Frankie Dettori’s house near Newmarket to do an interview that was timed for the release of his new book, Leap of Faith. I have photographed Dettori winning countless big races over the years and to see his trademark flying dismount off the most powerful of horses has always been a tremendous thrill. Before the shoot I asked Dettori to change into riding gear, so fair play to him for putting on the colours he wore to such great success on his favourite horse, Enable. After doing a few formal portraits just to warm him up, I steered him round to a paddock where I knew he had a couple of miniature donkeys called Pip and Plum. Well it had to be done. I asked him to pop on to Plum’s back and he obliged. Plum wasn’t having any of it and off Frankie came, stumbling as he exited. We all cracked up with laughter. From now on I don’t think I will ever watch his flying dismount the same way again. Newcastle fans v Spurs, St James’ Park – 17 October 35mm lens 1/1600 f4 ISO 3200 This was a pretty momentous day for Newcastle as they played their first game under their new Saudi owners. St James’ Park was buzzing with fans’ hope and anticipation. I was positioned in front of the Gallowgate End, Newcastle’s traditional home end, where almost everyone wears black and white. For the first few minutes of the game, and as the ball was at the other end of the pitch, I turned round and focused on a fan in the front row, decked out in a headscarf. Then Newcastle scored. The place erupted, a sense that all those years of despair had been left behind and here was a different Newcastle. Spurs went on to win the game 3-2. Marcus Smith, England v South Africa, Twickenham – 20 November 400mm lens 1/1600 f4 ISO 4000 As the final whistle blew just moments after he had kicked a last ditch penalty, England’s new rugby union superstar celebrated beating the world champion Springboks. Marcus Smith was the figurehead for a much-changed England team this autumn. They emerged from a desperately poor Six Nations campaign earlier in the year to beat Tonga, Australia and South Africa in consecutive weeks. I am looking forward to seeing a lot more of Smith in the coming years. Not just for his inspired play but also because his hair flying everywhere makes for great pictures. Twickenham is a great place for shooting rugby, especially under lights. The backgrounds go nicely dark and because the crowd is so far back, the players stand out even more. Sir Geoff Hurst, Cheltenham – 2 December 85mm lens 1/1600 f1.8 ISO 400 In early December I went to Cheltenham to shoot a portrait of the England football legend and the only man to score a hat-trick in a World Cup final. It was Hurst’s 80th birthday just a few days later and Donald McRae had conducted a poignant interview with him that had revealed some of the tragedies and hard times he had suffered alongside his many achievements. It turned out to be a rather bizarre photo session in a local park near Hurst’s home. The first thing he said to me, after seeing my various bags of kit, was “You going on holiday? This is just a quick snap isn’t it.” He quickly warmed up after chatting about how he did Joe Wicks’ workouts in this very park. I took him past the swings and on to a spot near a duck pond, an area I thought would be a bit quieter. It was not. A constant stream of dog walkers passed by quizzically looking at us. Eventually one stopped and asked Hurst: “You seen George and the kids today?” He turned to her and replied: “No. He may have flown over with them to the other pond.” Our national hero then proceeded to have a chat with this woman about the whereabouts of the park’s resident swan and its cygnets. I am sure she had absolutely no idea who he was. Hurst also told me that a few days earlier another woman came up to him and said: “I know who you are. You’re Glenn Hoddle,” to which Geoff said “Yes I am” and walked off. World Masters Cyclo-Cross Championships, Ipswich – 3 December 24mm lens 1/1250 f2.8 ISO 4000 What makes someone in their seventies travel right across the world in the middle of a pandemic to race their bike through mud and freezing rain? When I saw the 2021 UCI World Masters Cyclo-Cross Championships were being held in East Anglia, I could not resist having a look. The conditions were pretty grim, very dark and overcast, but it could have been a lot worse. It has been many years since I photographed cyclo-cross and I had forgotten what a brilliant but tough sport it is. I came away with the utmost respect for all the competitors even if I thought they were slightly mad. West Ham’s winner against Chelsea, London Stadium – 4 December 200mm lens 1/1600 f4 ISO 2000 It was late in this hotly contested London derby, the two teams level at 2-2, when the West Ham left-back Arthur Masuaku swung an intended cross into the Chelsea penalty box. Somehow the mishit swerved in the air, deceiving the goalkeeper Édouard Mendy, who dived in despair. The ball flew into the top corner of the net. West Ham had won and their push to the top four of the Premier League had continued.Every adult in England has now been offered a Covid booster jab, the government has announced. At the beginning of December, Boris Johnson warned in a televised speech that the UK was “facing an emergency in our battle with the new variant, Omicron”. The prime minister said all adults in England would be offered a booster jab by the end of the year, adding that he was launching a “national mission” to achieve that. The target date had previously been the end of January. Johnson’s announcement came after evidence showed that having two doses of the Covid-19 vaccine does not provide strong protection against Omicron. However, a third dose provides about 70% protection against symptomatic infection. On Friday, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the booster drive meant that “tens of millions of people” got to see “loved ones this Christmas”. He added that he was “incredibly proud” of the work the NHS had done to accelerate the programme, and thanked “the frontline staff, volunteers, armed forces and British public who have made it possible for us to meet this commitment”. More than 3,000 vaccination sites have been opened in England, with 180 new ones in December at football stadiums, shopping centres and Christmas markets. People have received letters and text messages inviting them to book booster vaccination appointments. Official data shows that more than 8m booster doses were administered in England – a 45% increase – in the period between 12 December and 30 December. The highest daily number of Covid booster jabs in England – 830,403 – took place on 18 December. More than 28.1 million people in England have now had their booster, including about 90% of those aged 50 and over who are eligible. This week, more than 1.5 million appointments were still available between 27 December and 3 January for anyone yet to get a top-up shot. The vaccines minister, Maggie Throup, said: “We have now offered all eligible adults in England a Covid-19 booster – a triumph for the NHS and the vaccination programme. “It’s never been easier to get your vaccine, with over 3,000 vaccination sites now open – so you can grab a jab in between shopping the January sales or watching your favourite football team play.”Humpback whales are becoming an increasingly common sight off the coast of Britain, according to a marine review of 2021, but dumped fishing gear is causing a rising number of stranded seals and dolphins. Walruses, pufferfish and furrowed crabs were among the marine creatures from far-flung places that visited the UK and Ireland this year due to the climate crisis, according to the Wildlife Trusts, while puffins returned to the Isle of Man for the first time in 30 years after a rat eradication programme. White-beaked dolphins were seen off Essex for the first time in more than two decades and native oyster populations have been re-established in Yorkshire, Essex and Northern Ireland after years of overfishing, pollution and disease. Sand lizards have been successfully reintroduced to Lancashire’s dunes. Conservationists said that 2021 had been a positive year for marine ecosystems around the British Isles, with schemes launched to restore seagrass meadows and huge kelp forests, which provide shelter for wildlife, including two species of seahorse. But a rise in cetacean strandings signalled trouble at sea. In Cornwall, more than 170 whales, dolphins and porpoises were stranded this year along with 247 seals, many injured due to fishing activity. Lissa Batey, head of marine conservation for the Wildlife Trusts, said: “It’s been a fantastic year for marine megafauna sightings, particularly in the south-west, but it’s clear that our oceans are under immense pressure from fishing, development, pollution, climate change and recreation. All these issues are having a huge impact on life at sea.” In Cornwall, a humpback whale was found stranded off Looe Island after being caught in fishing lines, while seven grey seals washed up on Mousehole beach within two days, linked with spider crab netting. Despite the strandings, significant numbers of humpback whales were spotted around the coast, once an extremely rare sight. More than 75 sightings have been recorded since 2019, a sign that populations are recovering after bans on commercial whaling, according to conservationists. The Isles of Scilly Wildlife Trust saw humpbacks feeding around the islands with one individual, named Pi, staying for more than two months. More were seen in the Firth of Forth and off Shetland. Matt Slater, marine conservation officer for Cornwall Wildlife Trusts, said: “Only a few years ago, it would have been extremely rare to see a humpback whale around the UK. But it looks like they are chasing big shoals of sardines that are now present around our shores. It is magnificent to see these creatures up close.” In 2021, an Arctic walrus nicknamed Wally was seen around the coast of the UK, often spotted lying on boats, perhaps driven by melting sea ice in the polar north. A second walrus was seen off Northumberland and around Shetland. In October, a pufferfish washed up in Cornwall for the first time in 20 years, a species rarely found this far north. The Wildlife Trusts also warned there had been a rise in human disturbances of marine animals, with three times as many incidents since 2014. An increase in jet skis and motorboats is a leading cause for concern. This year, the Wildlife Trust of South and West Wales witnessed a seal pup being abandoned by its mother after people were seen taking selfies with the pup. Dr Emily Baxter, senior marine conservation officer at North West Wildlife Trusts, said: “We’ve got amazing marine life in the UK and we’ve had some fantastic sightings this year, from sort of dancing sea slugs in Cumbria to puffins coming back. It’s important to remind people that actually, they don’t necessarily need to travel to far-flung places to see amazing marine life.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresWith Omicron surging around Australia, there’s good reason to veg out at home in front of the TV this New Year’s Eve and observe the outside world through this medium we call television. One day in the future, plugged into the metaverse, we’ll be astral projecting between virtual fireworks displays while high-fiving our digitally recreated long-dead ancestors, but for now we are still absorbing entertainment via moving images displayed on flat screens. The humble old teev offers various ways to count down the new year, including fireworks displays, recaps and movies. Fireworks and New Year’s Eve concerts The Omicron variant of Covid-19 has caused many fireworks displays to be cancelled around the world, including one in Melbourne that would’ve involved more than 350 drones – which may or may not have become sentient mid-performance and decided to rise up against their human overlords. You never know, maybe we dodged a bullet. Many displays are still going ahead, continuing that great human tradition of creating colour and spectacle by making stuff explode in the sky. The ABC will be broadcasting several of them, including the Sydney fireworks at 9pm AEDT for those who can’t be bothered making it to midnight. ABC’s pre-fireworks shebang kicks off at 8.30pm with The Early Night Show, co-hosted by the charismatic actor Hunter Page-Lochard, who played the titular character in ABC TV’s Cleverman and most recently co-starred in Fires. From 9.15pm, the ABC is broadcasting its NYE2021: Let’s Celebrate! concert at Sydney Opera House, hosted by Charlie Pickering, Zan Rowe and Jeremy Fernandez. Performers include Tina Arena, Missy Higgins, Casey Donovan and Genesis Owusu, taking you up to the countdown to midnight and more fireworks over Sydney harbour. Alternatively, viewers in Victoria can tune into channel Nine to watch City Of Melbourne: New Year’s Eve 2021, which starts at 11pm and is hosted by Catriona Rowntree and Clint Stanaway. 2021 recaps I appreciate the “yearly recap” format – it reminds me of high school exam cheat sheets. My wife verbally summarised the appeal of the format when, while watching The Yearly with Charlie Pickering 2021, she said “oh yeah, that’s right!” at least three times. Pickering’s special this year contains several laugh-out-loud moments but, obviously filmed pre-Omicron, already looks dated, with Pickering appearing near the beginning of the show sitting in a fairly crowded (albeit masked-up) studio. Funny moments include a segment called the Real Premiers of Australia, which recaps the argy-bargy exchanged between Australian premiers as if it were a reality TV program. For a more international perspective, Netflix has its very funny Death to 2021 special, a sequel to Death to 2020. For snappier recaps, there’s Jimmy Fallon’s compilation of his “news smash” segments, this six-minute rewind of the year from Vox, and – shorter still – a two-and-a-half minute Reddit-produced video, which is set to an annoying upbeat ditty but, to its credit, begins with vision of geese wearing sombreros. But, I hear you asking – nay, demanding – what about articles listing the very best Australian films and TV shows of the year? Here are a couple I prepared earlier: my lists of the best homegrown productions for both the big and small screen, featuring many hours of quality viewing. New Year’s Eve movies The perfect film to watch during NYE is something with a bit of a party vibe, or at least something that isn’t a total downer – so, no Lars von Trier films allowed. On ABC iView there’s Firestarter: The Story Of Bangarra, a terrific documentary (No 4 on my list of the best Australian films of the year) about the history of the amazing Bangarra Dance Theatre, which has been staging sumptuous visual and musical performances for decades. Nine is screening Dirty Dancing at 8:30pm, fondly remembered as one of the pedigree dance-themed flicks of the 80s – the crop top-wearing, leg-flailing domain of Flashdance, Footloose, Fame and (my favourite of the bunch) Breakin’ 2: Electric Boogaloo. For good family fun, NITV is screening Taika Waititi’s 2016 comedy Hunt for the Wilderpeople from 7.30pm. Elsewhere, SBS is showing The Blues Brothers at 9:25pm, The Full Monty is airing on Seven from 11pm and 9Gem is screening Ben-Hur from 8.30pm – with a running time of three-and-a-half hours, it’ll take up a good chunk of the night and get you over the finish line into 2022. Those hankering for a blockbuster spectacle can tee up the handsomely cinematic Godzilla vs Kong, which recently landed on Netflix. And if you haven’t seen the excellent Danish comedy/drama Another Round, check it out on SBS on Demand. Sports Adelaide Oval might be the most handsome sporting arena in the world and it showcases a sunset like nowhere else in Australia. So before the sky lights up with fireworks, why not check out the Adelaide Strikers against the Sydney Thunder in the Big Bash League and the many cutaways to the multicoloured gloaming? It’s screening at 7:15pm AEDT on channel Seven, Kayo and Foxtel. – Jonathan HowcroftJoão Cancelo suffered a violent attack at his home on Thursday evening, with the Manchester City defender left with visible facial injuries. He has branded the four intruders as “cowards”. The incident is being investigated by police, and Cancelo’s ability to travel with Pep Guardiola’s squad for Saturday’s match against Arsenal is in doubt. The 27-year-old posted a picture of himself on his Instagram account in which he was shown to be cut above the right eye and bruised. In the post, Cancelo said: “Unfortunately today I was assaulted by four cowards who hurt me and tried to hurt my family. “When you show resistance this is what happens. I don’t know how there are people with such meanness. The most important thing for me is my family and luckily they are all OK. After so many obstacles in my life this is just one more that I will overcome. Firm and strong, like always.” It is understood that City staff were at Cancelo’s home on Thursday evening to support him and his family. A decision regarding whether Cancelo can travel to London to face Arsenal is to be taken some time on Friday. A City statement said: “We are shocked and appalled that João Cancelo and his family were subjected to a burglary at their home this evening during which João was also assaulted. João and his family are being supported by the club and he is helping the police with their enquiries as they investigate this very serious matter.”A sizzling heatwave across southern Australia will close out 2021, a year marked by severe storms and above-average rainfall that leaves large areas of the east exposed to flooding in the new year. After a mild start to summer, the mercury in Melbourne is forecast to climb to 38C on New Year’s Eve after topping 34C on Thursday. The first day of 2022 will be similarly hot, with the Bureau of Meteorology tipping 37C for the Victorian capital. Most other capitals will nudge 30C, or be close to it. Adelaide is the other hot state capital, with 39C predicted for the final day of 2021 after 37.6C on Thursday and similar warmth forecast for Friday. The heatwave, which crested in Perth over Christmas, is the first extended hot spell for much of the country this summer. Many Australians, though, will remember 2021 – to the extent they ventured far from their locked-down or Covid-19 constrained homes – as one in which they needed to keep an umbrella handy. Coastal NSW, including Sydney, was pelted by multiple days of heavy rain in March. The week ending 24 March was the region’s wettest week in Bureau data going back to 1900. Four-day totals in some areas topped 900mm and the Hawkesbury-Nepean floodplain to Sydney’s north and west lived up its name. Less than three months later, it was Victoria’s turn to endure wild weather, with a complex low pressure system generating heavy rain and damaging winds that left as many as 200,000 people without electricity and toppled countless trees. More than 200mm of rain fell in west Gippsland catchment, resulting in major flooding. Other stormy highlights included a tornado that touched down near Bathurst in central western NSW in September. Major floods also swept down long rivers such as the Lachlan and Namoi, and filled the Menindee Lakes and other inland systems. As 2021 closes, regional NSW dams including Sydney’s are about 94% full, while Melbourne’s reservoirs are at 90% capacity. South-eastern Queensland, though, was one patch of eastern Australia that missed out on a lot of rain, with Brisbane’s Wivenhoe dam still under 50% full. In November, the Bureau declared a La Niña pattern had developed in the Pacific for a second year in row, a weather event that tends to favour above-average rainfall for northern and eastern Australia. As if on cue, Australia posted its wettest November on record, beating the previous November record set in 1973 with countrywide falls 124% above average. “Having two sequential La Niñas has particularly elevated the flood risk this spring and summer,” said Karl Braganza, the Bureau’s national manager of climate services. “When you have a really wet month leading into December, and into the monsoon season, that’s when we start to get worried about flooding from even moderate rainfall.” The extra rainfall was influenced by other weather patterns, including a negative phase of the Indian Ocean Dipole. Such events typically cause increased convection off north-western Australia, resulting in additional moisture making its way across the continent to the country’s south-east. Good rains during the past two years have increased soil moisture levels, which tend to moderate heatwaves through evaporation. One consequence is that 2021 will have been relatively cool, at least compared with recent years. The background warming from climate change has pushed Australia’s temperatures up about 1.4 C since 1900, reducing the likelihood of cool years – 2020, for instance, was Australia’s fourth-hottest on record. This year, though, will probably fail to break into the top 10 for warmth even with the scorching end to the year, Braganza said. “It doesn’t tend to get as hot during La Niña years but you can have extended runs of hot weather,” he said. Some of that heat will be felt this week. For areas such as western Victoria, which have not shared in the above-average falls, the present heatwave will be enough to nudge bushfire risks higher. “Southern Australia is one of the most fire-prone regions of the world in any year,” Braganza adds. During La Niñas, strengthening equatorial winds result in the Pacific Ocean absorbing more heat from the atmosphere, whereas El Niños cause the ocean to give some of that warmth back. This year will probably be about the fifth or sixth warmest on record globally, climatologists expect. That would make it cooler than 2020 but warmer than any year prior to 2014 thanks to the effect of that warming temperature background. “It’s another really warm La Niña year,” Braganza said. One threat from that heating is that coral bleaching remains a risk for the Great Barrier Reef, as Guardian Australia reported earlier this month. “There’s a heightened risk of thermal stress on the Reef out to February,” he said, with a tropical cyclone the best chance of reducing that threat. The current La Niña is forecast to linger into early next year, raising the prospects for a relatively cool and damp start to 2022 for most of eastern Australia, the bureau predicts. For inland northern NSW and southern Queensland, that forecast points to ongoing flood risks. “The dams are spilling, and there was quite significant [recent] rainfall,” Braganza said. “So they’re going to be on a reasonable flood alert for the rest of summer.” Extensive bushfires near Perth in February and again in recent weeks hint at the ever-present challenge of fires in the Australia landscape. And while eastern states are likely to have a subdued season as far as forest fires go, the added rain over the past two years elevates potential risks in coming summers. “Of course, there’s vegetation growth,” Braganza said. “ And we know things can dry out quite quickly.”Thank you for joining us on today’s live blog. We will be closing this page down but please follow the latest Covid developments on our new live feed here. Britain is in an “incomparably better” position in the fight against Covid than it was at the end of 2020, Boris Johnson has said in his new year’s message. The UK prime minister admitted there was anxiety about the Omicron variant and growing numbers of hospital admissions, and urged those who had not been vaccinated to get their jabs. There was “one overriding reason” that tougher restrictions were not needed in the face of daily case numbers hitting record levels, he said – people “heroically, voluntarily and in almost incredible numbers heeding the call to get vaccinated”. Johnson was buoyant about the speed of the booster rollout, saying it was “precisely because of that huge national effort that we can celebrate tonight at all”. Read the full story here. Quebec healthcare workers exposed to Covid-19 may have to go to work sooner than expected if staffing levels in the Canadian province’s facilities reach a critical point. Quebec’s health minister, Christian Dubé, made the announcement earlier this week, explaining that in a worst-case scenario the province would have no choice but to insist that isolating employees return to work. Cases of the Omicron variant have surged in the province: on Thursday, a record-breaking 14,188 new cases were reported, with 939 Covid patients currently in hospital and 138 in intensive care. The Quebec newspaper La Presse reported that hospitals in the province were getting close to activating the contingency plan. Read the full story by Guardian reporter Tracey Lindeman here. Israel has approved a fourth vaccine shot for vulnerable and immunocompromised people, becoming one of the first countries to do so, amid a surge in Covid in cases driven by the Omicron variant. The country also received its first shipment of Pfizer’s anti-Covid pills. Health ministry director-general Nachman Ash told reporters: Today I approved giving the fourth vaccine for immunocompromised people. I did this in light of studies that show the benefit of the vaccine, including the fourth vaccine, to this population, and in light of the fear they are more vulnerable in this outbreak of Omicron.” Health authorities reported on Thursday more than 4,000 new cases, a high not seen since September. Health Minister Nitzan Horowitz said Israel was in “a fifth wave”, with most cases probably related to the Omicron variant. Prime Minister Naftali Bennett said Israel, which was among the first countries in the world to offer a third shot to the general public, would be a trailblazer for the fourth jab. “Israel will lead the way in administering a fourth vaccine to the Israeli people,” he said. A US schoolteacher says she spent five hours in voluntary self-isolation in a plane’s toilet after testing positive for Covid on a flight to Iceland a few days before Christmas. Marisa Fotieo says she performed a rapid test after noticing her throat hurt while travelling from Chicago to Reykjavik, in Iceland, on 20 December. The test confirmed she was infected and so she remained in the toilet for the rest of the flight, with flight attendants providing food and drinks. It was not immediately clear whether she had had to present a Covid-19 test before boarding the flight. “It was a crazy experience,” Fotieo, who is from Michigan, told NBC News. “[There were] 150 people on the flight, and my biggest fear was giving it to them”. Fotieo shared the experience in the plane’s bathroom in a TikTok video that has been viewed more than 4 million times. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as we count down the final hours until 2022. As I’ll be reporting to you from Sydney for the next few hours here’s a quick rundown of how Covid is currently unfolding across Australia. The state of NSW has recorded another 21,151 new Covid-19 cases and six deaths while Victoria has recorded 5,919 cases and seven deaths - up from 5,137 yesterday. South Australia is refusing to adopt the new close close contact definition proposed by prime minister Scott Morrison on Thursday. Other changes Morrison introduced include shortening isolation periods for positive cases and restricting close contacts to someone who has been with a confirmed case in a home-like setting for more than four hours. The changes became active from midnight last night, with thousands now free to leave isolation. The new definition comes with a new standard for testing so that close contacts need to only get a rapid antigen test, with the hopes this will ease congestion on PCR testing sites. Here’s a round-up of today’s Covid news from around the world. The number of people to die from Covid in Eastern Europe has reached 1 million, as Russia climbed above Brazil to become the country with the second-highest deaths behind the US. South Africa said the country had passed its Omicron peak without a major death surge, offering hope to countries hit hard by the mutated variant. France reported 206,243 new confirmed Covid cases, a tally above 200,000 for the second day running. The UK reported 189,213 new Covid cases, smashing Wednesday’s record-breaking tally of 183,037 positive tests. The UK is dogged by a shortage of tests, as Wales assists England with 4m tests amid fears of New Year’s Eve celebrations turning into breeding grounds for the virus. Scotland’s first minister urged people to avoid household mixing after a record high of nearly 17,000 cases. India fears it is entering a new wave after cases surge, as confirmed Omicron cases also climb. Portugal cuts Covid isolation from ten days to seven, after the World Health Organization said on Wednesday slashing isolation was a trade-off between transmission and economic concerns. Germany will drop quarantine demands for UK travellers from 4 January after seeing its own Omicron cases jump above 3,000 recently. Malaysia detected 3,997 positive Covid cases, with the number among survivors of its recently deadly floods rising to 442 in total. Japan recorded over 500 new infections for the first time in two months. Five Bulgarian regions moved from yellow to red zones as the country recorded 3,449 new infections, a 139% jump on two weeks ago. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said all people should avoid cruises, following a rise in onboard Covid cases in a major blow to the industry. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew in London, for today. I’ll be back in the new year. Do get in touch with tips and stories via email or on Twitter for then. Bye for now. South Africa said on Thursday the country had passed its Omicron peak without a major death surge, the New York Times reports, which will offer heavilyhit countries a glimmer of hope as Covid case records are broken across the world. The Times reports: “We’ll be in for a tough January, as cases will keep going up and peak, and then fall fast,” said Ali Mokdad, a University of Washington epidemiologist who is a former Centers for Disease Control and Prevention scientist. While cases will still overwhelm hospitals, he said, he expects that the proportion of hospitalized cases will be lower than in earlier waves. ... There are many caveats. The case figures might have been distorted by reduced testing during the holiday season. And many people in the most affected area had some measure of immunity, either from vaccination, prior infection or both, that might have protected them from serious illness. However, research teams in South Africa, Scotland and England have found that Omicron infections more often result in mild illness than earlier variants of the coronavirus, causing fewer hospitalizations. Malaysia detected 3,997 positive Covid tests on Thursday, local media the New Straits Times reports, a 6% drop on the 4,262 on Thursday two weeks ago. The country’s R rate is currently 0.95. About 98% of Malaysia’s adult population is double-vaccinated, and 17% of the total population has been boosted. Deadly floods have hit Malaysia in recent days, with at least 48 people dead after the worst floods since 2014. There are fears the virus could hit survivors. Officials said on Thursday that Covid cases among flood victims stands at 442 people confirmed so far. In Japan, 502 new Covid cases were confirmed on Wednesday, up from 159 on Wednesday two weeks ago and exceeding the 500 mark for the first time in over two months. Japan narrowed its definition of an Omicron “close contact” on Tuesday, the Japan Times reports, amid concerns it would run out of quarantine facilities. The new rules bring Omicron in line with the definition for other Covid cases: on a plane, two rows in front of and behind where the infected person was sitting. Health minister Shigeyuki Goto said the decision was based on infections data. (Japan’s government previously expanded the definition of in-flight close contacts of people infected with Omicron to all passengers, later deciding they must all quarantine for 14 days at special facilities.) The Japan Times also has an interesting article on the human cost of its strict border controls. Japan pulled up its drawbridge amid the emergence of the Omicron variant, with the measures being extended by prime minister Fumio Kishida after their initial end-of-December expiry date. “What’s most stressful is the vagueness of the timeline,” said Kiki Lee, a 23-year-old exchange student from China. Lee, a first-year graduate student at Keio University, is unable to recieve scholarship funds as they it require her to be physically present in Japan. In the meantime she’s paying full tuition for remote classes. Michael Bugajski, 35 and from the US, has lived in Japan for over five years. Bugajski has lost his father, sister-in-law and her newborn infant since the pandemic began, but he couldn’t fly home to attend their funerals. “To hold onto the people you have, and to mourn for the people you don’t anymore. … If I’m looking forward to anything it’s just to have that moment,” Bugajski said. Read the full story here. Bulgaria detected 3,449 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, public broadcaster BNT reports, a 139% increase on the 1,443 cases recorded on Thursday two weeks ago. Bulgaria’s chief state health inspector, Angel Kunchev, said on Thursday the country should brace for a sharp increase in infections in early January, the Sofia Globe reports. Kunchev added that Omicron, despite appearing milder, could lead to greater hospitalisations and have a “devastating effect” on the health service and economy if it provokes a “tsunami” of infections. Five Bulgarian regions have been re-classified from yellow to red zones – Blagoevgrad, Kyustendil, Plovdiv, Haskovo and Silistra – based on the prevalence rate per 100,000 people on a 14-day basis. The nationwide 14-day morbidity rate is now 293.59 cases per 100,000 people. Bulgaria has reported 30,819 deaths from Covid-related causes, according to a Reuters tally. The eastern Europe’s Covid death toll climbed above 1 million on Thursday, Reuters said. Bulgaria has the lowest vaccine rate in Europe, with an estimated 26% of adults double-vaccinated. The UK health secretary Sajid Javid is being urged to ensure National Health Service (NHS) workers are prioritised for Covid tests or risk a “devastating” impact on patient care, The Guardian reports. Pressure is being piled on by the British Medical Association (BMA), which represents doctors. The BMA warned that the system for ensuring NHS staff receive tests was “not working”. It said its members were reporting problems with obtaining PCR and lateral flow tests, despite healthcare workers supposedly being given priority for both. The BMA’s chair of council, Dr Chaand Nagpaul, said: Being unable to get the tests means staff may not be legally allowed to work and, at a time of acute workforce shortages and winter pressures, this could be devastating for the care that can be given right across the NHS. It follows the Welsh government’s announcement on Thursday that it had lent an additional 4 million lateral flow testing kits to England to help alleviate the supply squeeze across the border, bringing the total offered to 10 million. My colleagues have the full story here. Ukraine recorded 5,930 positive Covid tests on Thursday, a 40% decrease on the 9,918 new cases on Thursday two weeks ago. Ukraine’s most recent wave peaked in early November, with daily cases sometimes rising above 25,000. Recent infections have receded but Omicron threatens to spark a new epidemic. A further 278 people died from Covid-related causes, local media Ukrinform reports – a 27% decrease on the 383 deaths two weeks ago. Ukraine has recorded 95,690 deaths from Covid-related causes. A Reuters tally on Thursday found eastern Europe’s Covid deaths has now risen above 1 million. The UK reported 189,213 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, smashing Wednesday’s record-breaking tally of 183,037 positive tests. Thursday’s new infections represent a 116% rise on the 87,565 new infections reported two weeks ago today – which was itself then a record-breaking daily tally. A further 332 people died from Covid-related causes on Thursday, a 127% climb on the 146 deaths recorded two weeks ago. It comes after a scarcity of Covid tests in the UK has sparked concern over New Year’s Eve celebrations, which prime minister Boris Johnson confirmed in recent days would go ahead, with no new restrictions until at least the New Year. Peter Openshaw, who sits on the UK government’s New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), said: “It’s very worrying indeed.” He added: We know the situations in which transmission happens and fortunately I don’t think we are facing the sort of lockdown that was necessary in order to cope in the very earliest part of this year. But we do know that crowding together in poorly ventilated spaces, particularly if you are shouting over loud music and so on, is absolutely perfect in terms of transmitting this very, very highly transmissible virus. Poland detected 14,325 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, a 35% decrease from the 22,096 infections on Thursday two weeks ago. Poland experienced spiking cases in late November and early December, with daily infections receding in recent weeks. But Omicron has driven fears of a new wave. A further 709 people died from Covid-related causes on Thursday, according to local media Polskie Radio – a 20% rise on Thursday two weeks ago. Poland has now recorded 96,415 deaths from the virus. A Reuters tally on Thursday found Eastern Europe’s Covid deaths had reached 1 million people. Poland’s health minister, Adam Niedzielskion, on Thursday announced a “fundamental reform” of Polish hospitals, with draft legislation planning to “professionalise hospital management”, he said. France will allow people from the UK to drive through as they return to EU countries, suspending a ban on British people returning to their homes in the EU after spending the holidays in the UK. The UK government clarified: “The French authorities confirmed on 30 December that UK nationals who are resident in other EU member states and who have travelled to the UK for the Christmas period will be able to transit France over the New Year period in order to return home to their country of residence.” “Transit for less than 24 hours in the international zone of an airport is listed under ‘essential reasons’ to travel,” the UK government guidance added. The number of people to die from Covid in eastern Europe has reached 1 million, according to a tally from Reuters. It follows Russia climbing above Brazil to become the country with the second-highest death toll, behind the US, with over 835,000 pandemic excess deaths. Russia said 87,527 people died from Covid-related causes in November, its deadliest month since the pandemic began. (The Reuters count includes Belarus, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Moldova, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia and Ukraine.) Omicron has yet to batter eastern Europe – as it currently is western Europe – but there are fears it might spark another wave imminently. Germany will drop quarantine demands for UK travellers from 4 January. Previously, even double-vaccinated people needed a negative test to enter and then had to quarantine for 14 days. The UK transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said it was a “welcome development”. Germany has now reported thousands of Omicron cases. Uwe Janssens, who heads the German Society of Internal Medicine and Intensive Care, told German media DW infections caused by the highly-mutated strain will dominate in Germany in the weeks to come. “It can be assumed that the omicron variant will certainly dominate in January, like in the other countries such as Great Britain, Norway, Denmark and Portugal,” Janssens said. Here’s a look at the UK’s record-breaking tally daily Covid infections yesterday in context. Ministers will be keeping keen eye on hospitalisations in the coming days and weeks. UK Covid figures for Thursday are delayed, the government’s data portal says, until around 8pm GMT. This is Jem Bartholomew taking over from my colleague Lucy Campbell for the next few hours. Do get in touch with tips and stories from around the world via email or on Twitter. France reported 206,243 new confirmed Covid cases in a 24-hour period on Thursday, a tally above 200,000 for the second day running. The record of 208,099 was set just the day before, on Wednesday, as the health minister, Olivier Véran, warned of a “tsunami” of infections. At the beginning of December, there were fewer than 50,000 daily cases. One month before that, the daily data broke the 10,000 threshold for the first time since mid-September. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said people should avoid cruise travel regardless of vaccination status, following a rise in onboard Covid cases, in a major blow to the industry that has been ravaged by the pandemic. The CDC on Thursday raised its Covid travel health notice level for cruise ships to 4, its highest warning level. “Even fully vaccinated travellers may be at risk for getting and spreading Covid-19 variants,” the health agency said. With several cruise ships already on the seas, the CDC said the passengers should get tested three to five days after their trip ends, and self-monitor for Covid symptoms for 14 days. The CDC has investigated or started an investigation into Covid cases on more than 85 ships already. It had eased its warnings for cruises by a notch from the highest level in June after cases had eased. As New Year’s Eve approaches, further changes are being made to coronavirus measures in different UK nations. Both Wales and Northern Ireland have announced a cut to self-isolation rules, the same as has been introduced in England. The PA news agency has broken down how Covid measures currently compare in the four nations. Northern Ireland On Thursday, it was announced the self-isolation period for confirmed Covid-19 cases will be reduced in Northern Ireland from 10 days to seven in line with England. The new rule will be subject to negative lateral flow tests on days six and seven, will apply retrospectively and take effect from Friday. It has already been announced that nightclubs will be closed on New Year’s Eve, while dancing will also be prohibited in hospitality venues. This will not apply to weddings. People must remain seated for table service, while table numbers will be limited to six. Ministers have also agreed that sporting events can continue with no limits on capacity, while the work-from-home message is being bolstered and legislation introduced to require social distancing in offices and similar workplaces. The guidance is for mixing in a domestic setting to be limited to three households. The first minister, Paul Givan, said on Thursday following a virtual meeting of the Stormont executive that no further restrictions would be introduced at this time, but that the executive would continue to assess the data as more information emerged. Wales The Welsh government also announced on Thursday that the mandatory isolation period for people who test positive with Covid-19 will drop from 10 days to seven, subject to two negative lateral flow tests on days six and seven. Initially the new rule was to be introduced on 5 January, but it will now come into force on Friday. Current rules in Wales state groups of no more than six people are allowed to meet in pubs, cinemas and restaurants. Licensed premises can offer table service only, face masks will have to be worn and contact tracing details collected, and 2-metre social distancing rules are in place. Nightclubs have been closed since Boxing Day and there is a requirement to work from home wherever possible. A maximum of 30 people can attend indoor events and a maximum of 50 people at outdoor events. People attending weddings or civil partnership receptions or wakes are also being told to take a lateral flow test before attending. Scotland Events have 1-metre social distancing and are limited to 100 people standing indoors, 200 people sitting indoors and 500 people outdoors. One-metre physical distancing is in place in all indoor hospitality and leisure settings. Table service is also required where alcohol is being served. Since 14 December, people have been asked to reduce their social contact as much as possible by meeting in groups of no more than three households. Allowing staff to work from home where possible has become a legal duty on employers. Care home visits have also been limited to two households. England On Monday, it was announced that no further coronavirus restrictions would be imposed in England until the new year, meaning the country has the most relaxed rules in the UK. However, Covid passes for entry into nightclubs and other venues have been in place as of 15 December. This applies to indoor events with 500 or more attendees where people are likely to stand or move around, such as music venues, certain outdoor events, such as music festivals, and any events with 10,000 or more attendees. Face coverings have also been made compulsory in most indoor public settings, as well as on public transport, and people have been told to work from home if they can. If a person in England has tested positive or has symptoms, they can stop self-isolating after seven days instead of 10 days if they receive two negative lateral flow test results on days six and seven. Those who are unvaccinated close contacts of positive cases must still isolate for 10 days. England’s guidance is that people should work from home if they can. Anyone who cannot work from home should continue to go in to work but is encouraged to consider taking lateral flow tests regularly. There were winners and losers as work patterns transformed during the pandemic - and perhaps forever - with repercussions for city centres and society as a whole. My colleague Joanna Partridge reports: The Welsh government has come to the aid of Westminster by lending England 4m lateral flow tests, as ministers scramble to secure supplies from around the world. There has been a surge in demand for Covid tests as people try to comply with advice to limit the spread of the Omicron variant by ensuring they do not have the virus before socialising. But by 9am on Thursday, home delivery slots for lateral flow tests were unavailable on the gov.uk website. Pharmacies have also complained about patchy supplies of lateral flow kits. The Welsh government has agreed to loan four million more tests to the NHS in England, bringing the total the country has given England to a total of 10 million. The first minister, Mark Drakeford, said: Wales has a significant stock of lateral flow tests, sufficient to meet our needs over the weeks ahead. In a letter to MPs, the health secretary Sajid Javid said the supply of lateral flow devices (LFDs) was being tripled in January and February from a pre-Omicron plan of 100m to 300m a month. “To respond to anticipated demand over the coming few weeks we are buying hundreds of millions more LFD tests, bringing new products on board and accelerating their deployment to the public,” he said. But “in light of the huge demand for LFDs seen over the last three weeks, we expect to need to constrain the system at certain points over the next two weeks to manage supply over the course of each day, with new tranches of supply released regularly throughout each day”. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, previously urged people in England heading out for New Year’s Eve festivities on Friday to get tested. Prof Peter Openshaw, who sits on the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), said the conditions at a New Year’s Eve gathering were “perfect” for spreading coronavirus. The UK Health Security Agency said on Wednesday that 8m lateral flow test kits would be made available to pharmacies by New Year’s Eve. Germany announced it would in early January lift strict travel rules introduced amid fears over the Omicron variant, AFP reports. All countries currently listed in the “virus variant” category, including the UK and several southern African nations, will be reclassified as “high risk” from 4 January, said government health agency, the Robert Koch Institute. The change eases a ban on entry for travellers who are not German residents or citizens, instead allowing anyone to enter as long as they observe quarantine and testing rules. Germany introduced its “virus variant” travel category in a bid to stop new variants that have not yet spread widely on its territory. Only citizens and residents of Germany are permitted to enter from a “virus variant” country and are subject to a two-week quarantine, regardless of whether they are fully vaccinated or can provide a negative Covid test. By contrast, anyone double-vaccinated can enter from a high-risk country as long as they provide a negative test on arrival. Travellers from high-risk areas are exempt from quarantine if they have been fully vaccinated. Germany has so far recorded 16,748 cases of Omicron but the real number is thought to be much higher due to delays in reporting over the Christmas period. The health minister, Karl Lauterbach, said on Wednesday that he expects a significant rise in the number of Omicron cases in Germany within “in a few weeks”. Russia has overtaken Brazil to have the world’s second-highest death toll from the coronavirus pandemic, behind the United States, data from Russia’s state statistics service and Reuters calculations showed on Thursday. The statistics service, Rosstat, said 87,527 people had died from Covid-related causes in November, making it the deadliest month in Russia since the start of the pandemic. Russia’s overall pandemic death toll reached 658,634, according to Reuters calculations based on Rosstat figures up to the end of November and data from the coronavirus task force for December, overtaking Brazil, which has recorded 618,800 deaths. The death toll in the United States is higher, at 825,663 people, according to a Reuters tally, but its population is more than twice as big as Russia’s. Reuters calculations also showed Russia recorded more than 835,000 excess deaths since the beginning of the outbreak in April 2020 to the end of November, compared to average mortality in 2015-2019. Some epidemiologists say that calculating excess deaths is the best way to assess the true impact of a pandemic. So far, Russia’s death toll has not been affected by the Omicron variant and was mostly caused by a surge of infections in October and November, which health authorities blamed on the Delta variant and a slow vaccination campaign. On Thursday, Russian authorities ordered hospitals to get prepared for a possible surge in Covid cases. The Pharmaceutical Services Negotiating Committee, which represents NHS community pharmacies in England, says some pharmacy staff are being verbally abused when stocks of lateral flow tests run out, following “exceptionally high” levels of demand. Alastair Buxton, the PSNC’s director of NHS services, said: Public demand for test kits remains exceptionally high, and despite UKHSA delivering some two million tests to pharmacy wholesalers on some days, this is still falling short of demand. Pharmacies are restricted to ordering one carton of tests per day, with not every pharmacy able to have one every day, and they say that any stock that does arrive is handed out very quickly given the constant demand. Members of the public being directed to pharmacies for tests are rightly frustrated when they cannot get them, but it’s concerning that some pharmacy teams say they are still being verbally abused when this happens. Pharmacies are getting as much stock as they can, and while we too are frustrated by this ongoing situation, we would ask people not to take their annoyance out on pharmacy teams: they are doing their best to meet demand in impossible circumstances, alongside providing other important healthcare services. Scotland’s health secretary has admitted the country is likely to miss its target of getting 80% of the eligible population boosted by the end of December, despite a concerted effort to promote the booster programme. Humza Yousaf told BBC Scotland an “exceptionally high” number of people would need to come forward for their booster or third vaccinations in the final hours before New Year’s Day to hit the 80% target. He estimated that on Thursday morning the government was 120,000 people short of that target despite repeated calls on Scots to get “boosted by the bells” – a reference to the bells that traditionally ring out at midnight on 31 December to welcome in the new year. He said: Our target was always to get to as close to 80% as we possibly could, we could get to 80% because the capacity is absolutely there, it will really be dependent on how many people come forward today and tomorrow. NHS Scotland data published at 2pm on Thursday showed that 2,944,977 booster or third vaccinations had been administered in Scotland, and the daily figures suggest the rate has slowed down during the Christmas holidays. Yousaf urged those who had not yet been boosted to book appointments in January, to continue the programme. He said there was plenty of capacity. Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, told MSPs on Wednesday some people had missed appointments because they had either caught Covid or were self-isolating as close contacts. When the target of boosting nearly all UK adults by the end of December was first set by Boris Johnson, the prime minister, on 12 December, Yousaf had been quite sceptical it could be achieved. He said it would prove “extremely challenging” and would require diverting NHS staff to vaccination clinics, calling in military support and using trainee doctors and private firms to achieve it. Several days later Sturgeon said the revised target was to give 80% of eligible adults a booster by New Year’s Day. Nicola Sturgeon has again warned people to avoid mixing with other households after Covid cases in Scotland hit another record high of nearly 17,000 new cases, and hospitalisations increased by nearly 20% in one day. The first minister urged Scots to behave very cautiously in a series of tweets after 16,857 new cases were reported – equivalent to 27% of all tests taken yesterday. The NHS data showed 810 people were in hospital with Covid, an increase of 19.3% on yesterday’s figures, and the highest daily total since early November. Warning people about the risks of social mixing on Hogmanay, Sturgeon tweeted: Another nine deaths were reported of people with confirmed Covid, taking the total under that measure to 9,845, but the number in intensive care fell slightly by two to 49. Hospitalisations peaked in Scotland in late January 2021, at 2,053 cases. Scotland’s rolling seven-day average is now 11,838, compared with a recent low of 2,532 in late November. Humza Yousaf, the Scottish health secretary, confirmed in a BBC Scotland interview on Wednesday night it was unclear how many of those patients had been hospitalised because they had Covid, or were found to be positive after being admitted for another reason. Interviewed on The Nine, Yousaf was pressed on whether evidence from English hospitals which suggested only about 50% of patients with Covid had been admitted because of the virus was true for Scottish hospitalisations. The minister said the Scottish government was waiting for corroborated data from Public Health Scotland before disclosing those figures. Yousaf was unable to say how many patients in intensive care had the Omicron variant, but said statisticians were working on releasing that data. Portugal has cut the mandatory isolation period for people who test positive for Covid but are asymptomatic from 10 days to seven, even as new infections hit record highs. The move, which also applies to high-risk contacts, came after health experts urged the government to rethink its policy amid concerns that the spread of the highly contagious Omicron variant and lengthy quarantines could paralyse the country. “This decision is aligned with guidelines from other countries and is a result of a technical and weighted consideration, given the incubation period of the now predominant variant, Omicron,” the DGS health authority said in a statement. Portugal’s decision follows similar moves in other countries like Spain and the UK, where several industries reported disruption as staff had to isolate even if they weren’t showing symptoms. The Portuguese island of Madeira on Wednesday also decided to cut mandatory isolation for asymptomatic people who test positive to five days, as well as for people who have close contact with confirmed cases. Daily coronavirus cases have risen in Portugal this week, peaking at a record 28,659 on Thursday, due to the fast-spreading Omicron and amplified by an increase in mass testing. Although the number of infections has skyrocketed, deaths and patients in intensive care units are not growing exponentially. Portugal has one of the world’s highest Covid vaccination rates, with around 87% of its 10-million population fully inoculated. DGS registered 16 deaths on Thursday, up from Wednesday’s 12, while the number of patients in intensive care units fell to 144 from 151. In late January, the number of daily deaths exceeded 300 and there were more than 900 patients in intensive care. The number of people with Covid in hospitals in Wales has increased to 446 - 49% higher than last week, the Welsh government has said. It has also announced that from Friday, people who have tested positive for Covid will have to isolate for seven rather than 10 days to help get people in critical jobs back to work. In a written statement, the first minister, Mark Drakeford, said the public health situation in Wales had deteriorated with the seven-day case rate at more than 1,000 cases per 100,000 people across Wales. Cases are highest among 20- to 39-year-olds. The first minister said hospitalisations remained lower than in previous waves, but these too are starting to increase. However, Wales is not seeing a rise in the number of patients with Covid-19 needing critical care. Drakeford said Wales had a “significant stock of lateral flow tests, sufficient to meet our needs over the weeks ahead” and was loaning millions of tests to England. On the isolation rules, Drakeford said: People who have tested positive for Covid-19 must self-isolate for seven days. On days six and seven of their self-isolation period they should take lateral flow tests and if these tests – taken 24 hours apart – are positive, they should continue to self-isolate. We are bringing the change forward because the balance of harms has changed and the rising number of cases has begun to have an impact on the number of people, in critical jobs, who are excluded from the workplace because of self-isolation. Southern has cancelled trains to and from London Victoria for two weeks as a result of pandemic-related staff shortages. Disruption to rail services has been worsening over the Christmas period while industrial action continues. Southern has now announced that none of its trains will run to or from London Victoria until 10 January owing to “coronavirus isolation and sickness”. London Victoria is one of the UK’s busiest stations, and is normally connected by Southern to locations such as Brighton, Eastbourne and Portsmouth. Many other operators in addition to Southern have cancelled trains owing to the pandemic. They include Avanti West Coast, CrossCountry, Greater Anglia, London North Eastern Railway, Northern, ScotRail, TransPennine Express and Transport for Wales. The suspension of Southern’s London Victoria services means it will not serve Clapham Junction, Wandsworth Common or Battersea Park. More on this story here: Southern cancels London Victoria trains for two weeks over Covid The Tories in Wales are trying to ratchet up the pressure on the Labour-led Welsh government to publish the scientific evidence behind its post-Christmas Covid restrictions. They point out that little has been seen of Welsh ministers and are calling for them to also publish the latest figures of people with Omicron in hospital and NHS staff absence rates The Welsh Conservative Senedd leader, Andrew RT Davies, said: Over the past week, I’ve heard more from the prime minister, Sajid Javid and even Nicola Sturgeon but Labour ministers in Cardiff Bay have been nowhere to be seen. The fact we are still waiting on the government to publish the scientific advice behind the recent restrictions is quite frankly appalling. Pope Francis has cancelled his traditional New Year’s Eve visit to the Nativity scene in St Peter’s Square over concerns of spreading coronavirus among the gathered crowds, AFP reports. The pontiff is normally met by wellwishers when he visits the crib on 31 December, after presiding over the end-of-year Vespers and chanting of the Te Deum prayer. But the Vatican said in a diary note on Thursday that “the event will not be held, to avoid gatherings and the subsequent risks of Covid-19 infection”. Francis, 85, on Wednesday held his weekly general audience as usual in the Paul VI hall in the Vatican, with masks and social distancing. But as elsewhere in Europe, Italy - and by extension the Vatican City State - is facing a surge in coronavirus cases fuelled by the Omicron variant. Earlier I posted an entry about seven European countries barring Turkish travellers. Reuters said that story was based on a travel guidance table from Turkey’s civil aviation authority (SHGM), which has been updated to remove references to such bans. The story has now been withdrawn by Reuters and has been removed here too. You may have to refresh the page. Indian authorities started to impose stringent rules on Thursday to prevent mass gatherings at new year parties and public venues to combat a surge in Covid infections, even as top leaders led large political rallies, Reuters reports. Night curfews have been imposed in all major cities and restaurants ordered to limit customers. However, the prime minister, Narendra Modi, and the home minister, Amit Shah, presided over public rallies in northern states with footage from the events showing thousands of people gathered in open grounds to hear their speeches. Last week an Indian court urged Modi’s government to suspend political rallies and election campaigns in poll-bound states amid the rising number of Omicron cases. Elections to the state assembly in Uttar Pradesh, home to over 220 million people, is a key battleground for Modi and opposition parties because of its size and because the performance of political parties there will be a barometer for the 2024 national elections. Final dates for polls are yet to declared but all political parties have launched their campaigns, disregarding social distancing. The country reported 13,154 new Covid cases and 268 deaths in the last 24 hours, the federal health ministry said, with urban centres reporting a big rise. Cases of Omicron infections rose to 961. Police in the financial capital Mumbai prohibited public gatherings of five or more residents until 7 January as it recorded a sharp rise in cases with 2,510 infections, the highest daily increase since May, local authorities said. “It is being seen that social gatherings are going on in an unrestricted manner with people flouting all social distancing norms... we are trying our best to control the spread of the virus,” said Rajesh Tope, the health minister of the western state of Maharashtra of which Mumbai is the capital. Tope said the next 48 hours were critical for authorities to prevent an escalation of fresh Covid cases. While the government in the capital, New Delhi, closed cinemas, schools and gyms, state leader Arvind Kejriwal on Thursday held a public rally to celebrate victory in local polls in neighbouring Chandigarh city. An Indian newspaper, Mint, quoted Paul Kattuman, professor at the Judge Business School at the University of Cambridge which has developed a Covid-19 India tracker stating that new infections will begin to rise in a few days, possibly this week. “It is likely that India will see a period of explosive growth in daily cases and that the intense growth phase will be relatively short,” said Kattuman. Now Christmas is over, the key to understanding the next part of the pandemic will be the number, and length, of hospitalisations, writes Paul Hunter, professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia, in the Guardian today. An extract reads: How the next few weeks – never mind the next few months – play out in the UK is still far from clear. Even though the Omicron variant appears to be less severe than Delta, and for many the infection is just a mild, cold-like illness, that is clearly not the case for all. Ultimately the amount of pressure on the NHS will depend on how many people become ill enough to be admitted to hospital and that will depend on how high infection rates go, especially in the older age groups. If, as was the case in South Africa, cases increase very rapidly, peak and fall rapidly then the pressure on the NHS may be short-lived and manageable. But the epidemic in the UK may not follow what happened in South Africa. So where does this leave us with knowing how to best manage as we move beyond new year? It all depends on how much pressure Omicron will place on the health service at its peak and how long that period of high demand lasts. We probably won’t know until a week or so after the holiday period what is likely to happen in January and beyond. You can read the full piece here: Now Christmas is over, how bad is the Omicron situation in England? The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, has warned MPs he may need to “constrain” the Covid testing system over the next fortnight, as demand for lateral flow kits surges. Ministers have repeatedly encouraged members of the public to test themselves using a lateral flow device (LFD) before attending gatherings or meeting vulnerable relatives. However, test kits have repeatedly been unavailable online in recent days, and many pharmacies have complained of being unable to secure them. Labour has accused the government of presiding over a “shambles”, with many members of the public struggling to obtain tests despite ministers putting testing at the centre of efforts to control the spread of Omicron. Demand for the tests has also been boosted by a change in quarantine rules that allows people to emerge from self-isolation after seven days instead of 10, as long as they carry out two negative lateral flow tests. In a letter sent to MPs on Wednesday evening, Javid acknowledged the intense strain being put on the system as cases of the Omicron variant continue to increase, with 183,037 new infections recorded on Wednesday. He wrote: In light of the huge demand for LFDs seen over the last three weeks, we expect to need to constrain the system at certain points over the next two weeks to manage supply over the course of each day, with new tranches of supply released regularly throughout each day. Javid reiterated the advice that the public should take a test “when engaging in activities that carry the greatest risk, and before coming into contact with people at risk of serious illness”. He said MPs should suggest that constituents unable to source testing kits online or find any at their local pharmacist, should, “see whether their local authority is distributing tests” or seek them out at local community facilities, such as libraries. Read the full story here: Lateral flow tests to be ‘constrained’ over next two weeks, warns Sajid Javid Martti Ahtisaari, Finland’s former president and Nobel peace prize winner, is in hospital after testing positive for Covid for a second time, AFP reports. The 84-year-old former mediator of international conflicts first contracted the illness in March 2020. “President Ahtisaari is doing well under the circumstances, but is being treated in hospital,” his foundation said on Thursday. The president of Finland from 1994 until 2000, Ahtisaari was awarded the Nobel prize in 2008 for his work to end conflicts in Indonesia, Namibia, Northern Ireland and the Balkans. Suffering from Alzheimer’s disease, he announced his withdrawal from public life in September. The former UN diplomat oversaw negotiations for reconciliation in 2005 between the Indonesian government and GAM rebels as well as Kosovo’s path toward independence. Three-quarters of people across the UK with new cold-like symptoms are likely to have Covid but exponential case growth seems to have stopped, scientists have said. According to new analysis, the Zoe Covid study estimates that 75% of people experiencing new cold-like symptoms are likely to have symptomatic Covid-19, PA reports. That is up from about 50% last week, with the study reporting that the data was showing a fall in the number of non-Covid “colds” and a rise in symptomatic Covid infections. It also said the incidence figures show there are currently 192,290 new daily symptomatic cases of Covid in the UK on average, based on test data from up to three days ago. That is up 33% from the 144,284 reported last week. The study also found that while the rise in cases appeared to be slowing in the 0 to 55 age groups it was “rising sharply” in the 55- to 75-year-old groups. It said this was “worrying” because this older age group was more at risk of needing hospital treatment. Dr Claire Steves, a scientist on the Zoe study app, said that while the number of daily new symptomatic Covid cases was more than double what it was this time last year, exponential growth appeared to have stopped. But symptoms such as a sore throat, headache, and runny nose needed to be added to the government list of Covid symptoms as soon as possible, she added. The number of daily new symptomatic Covid cases are more than double what they were this time last year and we are just a day or two away from hitting over 200,000. However, the exponential growth in cases appears to have stopped, and the rise is more steady. Hospitalisation rates are thankfully much lower than this time last year, but they are still high, especially in London. It’s good news to see that fewer people are newly sick than a few weeks ago. However, the fact that 75% of new cold-like symptoms are Covid, and the classic symptoms are much less common, means the government advice needs to be urgently updated. We want to see symptoms like sore throat, headache and runny nose added to the list as soon as possible. The new figures, published on Thursday, come after a new record was set for the daily number of Covid cases on Wednesday, as all four UK nations reported their figures for the first time since Christmas Eve. The Zoe study also found there were 78,748 new daily symptomatic cases in the vaccinated population – those with at least two doses – across the UK, up 40% from 56,346 last week. It estimates that on average one in 32 people in the UK currently have symptomatic Covid, rising to one in 30 in England. In Wales it is one in 41, in Scotland it is one in 51, and in London one in 16 have symptomatic Covid, it added. The Zoe study incidence figures are based on reports from around 840,000 weekly contributors. Seven European nations have barred Turkish passengers from entering their countries as the Omicron variant spreads, according to travel guidance by Turkey’s civil aviation authority (SHGM). Daily Covid cases in Turkey have reached their highest level since April this week, surging to nearly 37,000, but the number is still significantly below figures reported in parts of Europe. The SHGM’s Covid-19 travel guidance, last updated on 28 December, said the Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Luxembourg, Croatia, Iceland and Switzerland would no longer accept Turkish passengers. It said Turkish passengers would need to show proof of vaccination when entering Portugal or Sweden. “Entry cannot be made from our country,” the SHGM list said for the seven European countries, without elaborating. The SHGM also updated travel restrictions for Iraq and Iran, saying passengers travelling to the two countries may be subject to 14-day quarantine upon entry, while other travellers would need a negative PCR test. It was not immediately clear when the new restrictions were put in place or how long they would be in effect. The Netherlands announced a snap Christmas lockdown earlier this month, which will be reviewed on 14 January. Other countries have seen record number of coronavirus cases in recent weeks, working to balance restrictions while keeping economies running. Turkey has said it was not considering new restrictions for the moment, instead urging citizens to ramp up personal measures and get vaccinated. Ankara launched a nationwide rollout of its domestic Covid vaccine, Turkovac, on Thursday [see 11.26am.]. Three in 10 local authority areas in the UK are recording their highest rate of new Covid cases since mass testing began in summer 2020, new analysis shows. The areas include around three-quarters of authorities in north-west England, nearly two-thirds in the West Midlands and almost half in the East Midlands. But no London boroughs are on the list, while only a tiny number of areas in the south-east and eastern England are at record levels, suggesting the latest surge in cases may have peaked in these parts of the country. In a similar survey in the week before Christmas, two-thirds of local authorities in London were reporting record case rates. The new figures, which have been compiled by PA Media, show that: 29 of the 39 local authorities in north-west England now have record Covid-19 case rates, led by Barrow-in-Furness (1,554.1 cases per 100,000 people), Bury (1,489.7) and Warrington (1,471.4). Other areas at record levels include Blackpool, Bolton, Liverpool and Wigan. In the West Midlands, 18 of the 30 local authorities are seeing record rates, led by Stafford (1,178.7), Lichfield (1,119.9) and Cannock Chase (1,085.9). 17 of the 40 local authorities in the East Midlands have record case rates, including Chesterfield (1,189.4), Leicester (1,036.3) and Lincoln (1,087.5). London still has the highest local rates in the UK, accounting for nine of the top 10 and 17 of the top 20. Lambeth has the highest rate of all, 2,415.4, though this is down week-on-week from 3,029.1. Only one of the 11 local authorities in Northern Ireland is currently not at a record high: Armagh City, Banbridge &amp; Craigavon. Northern Ireland also has the highest rate of the four UK nations (1,310.2), followed by England (1,226.0), Wales (1,150.4) and Scotland (1,068.2) - all of which are record highs. Figures are for the seven days to 25 December, as data for more recent days is still incomplete. In total, 112 of the 377 local authority areas in the UK (30%) are recording their highest Covid case rates since mass testing was rolled out across the country in May and June 2020. Figures for case rates in the early months of the pandemic are not directly comparable, as only a small number of people were being tested, mostly in hospitals and care homes. The contrast between the south and east corner of the UK, and the rest of the country, reflects the way the Omicron variant of Covid-19 has spread in recent weeks – in particular how London was the first area of the UK where Omicron became the dominant variant. Of the 112 local authority areas with record case rates, only two are in south-east England (Cherwell and Worthing) and four are in eastern England (Bedford, King’s Lynn &amp; West Norfolk, Mid Suffolk and South Norfolk). In Scotland, 11 of the 32 local authorities are seeing record rates, along with eight of the 22 authorities in Wales. In addition, 11 of the 21 local authorities in Yorkshire and Humber are at record levels, plus two of the 12 authorities in north-east England. The number of deaths involving Covid registered each week in England and Wales dropped slightly ahead of Christmas, though it is too soon to see any impact in the figures of the current surge in Covid-19 cases, PA Media reports. A total of 755 deaths registered in the week ending 17 December mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). That is down 1% on the previous week and is the lowest number of deaths since the week to 15 October, when the total was 713. Deaths have remained at a low level throughout the latest wave of cases, with the weekly total between roughly 700 and 1,000 for the past few months. By contrast, 8,433 deaths involving Covid were registered in England and Wales in the week to 29 January, at the peak of the second wave of the virus. The rollout of vaccines has played a major role in keeping the number of deaths across the UK at a relatively low level since the second wave. It is too early to tell if the surge in cases caused by the Omicron variant is affecting the number of Covid deaths, however. Due to the typical length of time between infection, hospital admission and death – two to three weeks – the impact of the current record levels of cases will not be evident until January at the earliest. The latest ONS figures also show that 60 care home resident deaths involving Covid in England and Wales were registered in the week to 17 December, down slightly from 65 the previous week. In total, 44,466 care home residents in England and Wales have had Covid-19 recorded on their death certificate since the pandemic began. The figures cover deaths of care home residents in all settings, not just in care homes. Overall, 174,392 deaths have now occurred in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate, the ONS said. The highest number on a single day was 1,485 on 19 January 2021. During the first wave of the virus, the daily toll peaked at 1,461 on 8 April 2020. Within weeks, the Omicron variant has fuelled thousands of new Covid hospitalisations among US children, raising new concerns about how the many unvaccinated Americans under the age of 18 will fare in the new surge, Reuters reports. The seven-day average number of daily hospitalisations for children between 21 and 27 December is up more than 58% nationwide in the past week to 334, compared with about 19% for all age groups, data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention show. Fewer than 25% of the 74 million Americans under 18 are vaccinated, according to the CDC. Omicron cases are expected to surge even faster across the US as schools reopen next week after the winter holiday, experts cautioned. Doctors say it is too early to determine whether Omicron causes more severe illness in children than other coronavirus variants, but that its extremely high transmissibility is one key factor that is driving up hospitalisations. “It is going to infect more people and it is infecting more people. We’ve seen numbers go up, we’ve seen hospitalisations in kids go up,” said Dr Jennifer Nayak, an infectious disease expert and paediatrician at the University of Rochester Medical Center. What we are seeing is that children under five remain unvaccinated so there’s still a relatively large population of children who are naive, so they have no pre-existing immunity to this virus. Even in New York City, which has some of the highest vaccination rates in the country, only around 40% of 5- to-17-year-olds are fully vaccinated compared with more than 80% of adults, city health data shows. There is no authorised vaccine for US children under the age of five. Hospitalisations in NYC of people aged 18 and younger increased from 22 the week starting 5 December to 109 between 19 and 23 December. Children under five represented almost half of the total cases. Hospitalisations of people 18 and under in the entire state were at 184 from 19 and 23 December, up from 70 from 5 to 11 December. Other parts of the country are also seeing a surge in cases among children. Ohio has seen a 125% increase in hospitalisations among children 17 and under in the past four weeks, according to data from the Ohio Hospital Association. Florida, New Jersey and Illinois have witnessed an increase of at least double in the seven-day average daily hospitalisation of underage patients with the coronavirus over the past week, CDC data shows. Young children have far lower vaccination rates than other age groups, with some families hesitating to introduce a new vaccine to their youngest members. Fewer than 15% of US children aged 5-11 have been fully vaccinated since the Pfizer/BioNTech jab was authorised for that age group in late October, federal data shows. Doctors said the more severe Covid symptoms they are seeing in hospitalised children this month include difficulty breathing, high fever, and dehydration. “They need help breathing, they need help getting oxygen, they need extra hydration. They are sick enough to end up in the hospital, and that’s scary for doctors, and it’s scary for parents,” said Rebecca Madan, a paediatric infectious disease specialist at New York University’s Langone Health hospital system. The surge in cases occurred as schools closed for the winter holidays. Before the vacation, more than a thousand classrooms have been either fully or partially quarantined due to outbreaks, according to New York City data. The city said it will open schools for about a million children as planned on 3 January, following the district’s winter recess. Research has shown that a substantial amount of transmission among children tends to happen outside of schools. But Madan and others expect a new rise in cases among children from holiday gatherings, which could disrupt classroom attendance. Good morning from New Orleans. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Prof Peter Openshaw, who sits on the UK’s New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag) has warned the conditions at a New Year’s Eve gathering were “perfect” for spreading coronavirus, and said a lack of availability of testing in the UK was “very worrying indeed”. At the time of writing, there were no lateral flow tests available for delivery from the UK government website. Scotland and Wales still had bookable PCR tests, but Northern Ireland had “very few available” and no region of England had any available. NHS England confirmed that it was creating new small-scale “Nightingale” facilities with up to 100 beds each at eight hospitals across the country. The health service said it had asked trusts to identify empty spaces to accommodate beds in places such as gyms or teaching areas. NHS managers are aiming to create up to 4,000 beds as surge capacity if needed. Prof Andrew Pollard, head of the Oxford Vaccine Group, said he feels “most worried” about unvaccinated people. “Those who are unvaccinated remain at risk here in the UK and in other countries around the world, so that perhaps needs to be our focus.” Chris Hopson, the head of NHS Providers, which represents health trusts has said staff absences due to Covid-19 were “clearly now having a significant impact” across the whole economy and parts of the health service. Labour’s shadow culture secretary, Lucy Powell, has repeated calls for action over viral disinformation about vaccines being spread online. She said “It’s becoming an issue for the whole of society, who might now be facing further restrictions or huge pressure on the NHS because there are people who are choosing not to have the vaccine because of myths and misinformation that they are being fed online.” Coronavirus infections set new one-day highs in six of Canada’s provinces, prompting several provinces to impose more restrictions in hopes of containing the spread of the omicron variant. In Australia, fewer people will be told to get tested for Covid, with most states backing a much narrower definition of a close contact, as a record 21,000 new daily cases were recorded nationwide. Americans are again facing a stay-at-home New Year’s Eve as US political leaders and senior health advisers have urged people to scrap party plans and avoid larger public events as daily cases of Covid-19 break all previous records. India is on the threshold of a potential new wave of coronavirus – probably fuelled by the Omicron variant. Cases have surged by 86% in the Indian capital New Delhi in 24 hours, and doubled in Mumbai in the same period. Health leaders in eastern European countries with low vaccination rates like Romania are warning of a January wave of infections after the holiday period. The World Health Organization said on Wednesday that reducing mandatory isolation periods for people with Covid-19 was a trade-off between controlling transmission and keeping economies up and running. Michael Ryan told a news conference “If people shorten the quarantine period, there will be a small number of cases that will develop disease and potentially go on to transmit, because they have been let out of quarantine earlier. But that will be a relatively small number, and a lot of people who won’t transmit will also be released from that quarantine.” Armed police in Jingxi, in southern China, have paraded four alleged violators of Covid rules through the streets, state media reported, a practice that was banned but which has resurfaced in the struggle to enforce a zero-Covid policy. That is it from me, Martin Belam. I am off to host our silly Thursday quiz. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to bring you the rest of the days news on Covid from the UK and around the world. US airline JetBlue has said it is reducing its schedule through to 13 January by about 1,280 flights due to a surge in crew members falling sick from the Omicron coronavirus variant. Carriers have been canceling hundreds of flights every day in the United States since Christmas Eve as they grapple with staff shortages due to Covid infections and bad weather in parts of the country. “We expect the number of Covid cases in the north-east, where most of our crew members are based, to continue to surge for the next week or two,” JetBlue’s spokesperson said in an emailed statement to Reuters. “This means there is a high likelihood of additional cancellations until case counts start to come down.” The chairman of the Royal College of GPs has criticised “mixed messages” over the supply of Covid tests in the UK after the health secretary was quoted as saying there was a global shortage. Prof Martin Marshall said the demand for tests had gone up “dramatically” as people seek to check their Covid status before socialising or coming out of isolation. PA Media quote him telling Times Radio: It does seem to be that there’s some mixed messages here because the secretary of state said yesterday that there was a global shortage because demand globally in most countries for testing has gone up massively. But we’re also, as you say, told by the UK Health Security Agency that there’s a local logistics problem of delivering to pharmacies and delivering to the warehouses that supply the online suppliers of the testing. The government advice is reasonably clear about what people need to do before they’re allowed to socialise, before they’re allowed to release after self-isolation, but there’s no point in having that advice if as GPs we know we’re no longer able to help patients to actually act on that advice, and that’s a big issue for us. The Spectator has firmly nailed its colours to the mast that Omicron is going to be milder and lead to fewer and shorter hospital admissions than previous coronavirus variants. One of its data journalists, Michael Simmons, has extracted this chart from numbers included in recent Sage documents, which paints an optimistic picture of shorter hospital stays since December for patients who survive a Covid hospitalisation. As with the numbers from the UK dashboard earlier, I suspect this chart will either confirm you in your beliefs that the UK government and the devolved authorities have been over-reacting to a mild new Covid strain, or will do little to persuade you that the health service isn’t already under pressure with a potentially huge wave of hospitalisations still coming as the UK continues to rack up record daily case numbers. This will be a familiar sight to anybody who has been trying to book a rapid lateral flow test from the government website in the UK, and it is the state of play again at the moment. Officials and experts in low-vaccinated eastern European countries are anticipating a post-holiday explosion of Omicron-fuelled Covid-19 cases in much of the region. Adriana Pistol, the director of Romania’s National Center for Surveillance and Control of Communicable Diseases, warned on Wednesday that the country could see a peak of 25,000 new daily cases during the expected next wave. Romania is the European Union’s second-least vaccinated member nation. Noting that roughly 60% of Romania’s people over the age of 65 or living with chronic diseases remain unvaccinated, Pistol said: “Even if the Omicron strain does not have the same level of severity ... the health system will be overloaded anyway and reach levels recorded this year in October.” Stephen McGrath reports from Sibiu in Romania for Associated Press that Romania saw huge lines at borders before Christmas as hundreds of thousands of citizens flocked home, many from the west. The government started requiring travellers to complete passenger locator forms as of 20 December to help track infections, but Pistol said many had failed to fill them out. Only 40% of Romania’s population of around 19 million have been fully inoculated. “It’s very clear that the fifth wave will probably hit us in January,” Dragos Zaharia, a primary care doctor at the Marius Nasta Institute of Pneumology in Bucharest, said. “We just hope that there will be fewer deaths, fewer severe cases, and fewer hospital admissions.” Our community team are interested to hear from people living in the UK who were against getting the Covid vaccine but subsequently decided to get inoculated. They’d like to hear why you did not want to get the vaccine initially, and which factors ultimately changed your mind. You can find more details here: Tell us – have you changed your mind on getting vaccinated against Covid? PA Media is also carrying some quotes this morning from Chris Hopson, the head of NHS Providers, which represents health trusts. He said staff absences due to Covid-19 were “clearly now having a significant impact” across the whole economy and parts of the health service. NHS experience suggests that the impact varies considerably depending on how many staff are isolating, driven by local community infection rates; ability to rapidly source temporary replacement staff; and ability to flex existing staff to cover work of those who are absent. For example, some NHS ambulance trust CEOs are saying their current staff absence rates mean significant numbers of ambulances off the road, given the need to have appropriately trained staff in each ambulance. It was “obviously a particular issue for NHS trusts if they can’t provide right quality of care due to Covid absences” and he added that if the pressures continued to rise then so would calls to reduce the self-isolation period to five days. The head of the Oxford Vaccine Group has said he feels “most worried” about unvaccinated people amid the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. Prof Andrew Pollard said developers had begun “first steps” towards preparing for modifying vaccines to combat future strains of coronavirus but that the “focus” should be on those who have still not received a first dose. “I actually feel most worried today about the unvaccinated people, whether they’re here in the UK or elsewhere in the world, because we do have now a variant which spreads remarkably effectively so it’s going to be finding many of those unvaccinated people in the weeks ahead,” PA Media quote him telling BBC Breakfast. “Those who are unvaccinated remain at risk here in the UK and in other countries around the world, so that perhaps needs to be our focus.” “One thing we have to do is to continue monitoring what happens as new variants emerge,” he added. “There is still a lot of work to do. There are people in many countries who are still not vaccinated. We have some countries where that is still due to supply constraints because there’s more doses to be distributed; in other countries it’s around addressing vaccine hesitancy.” There are concerns over the availability of tests in the UK this morning from Prof Peter Openshaw, who sits on the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag). He said the conditions at a New Year’s Eve gathering were “perfect” for spreading coronavirus. Asked about the prospect of untested people mixing due to a shortage of lateral flow devices, PA Media quoted him telling BBC Radio 4’s Today: I think it’s very worrying indeed. We know the situations in which transmission happens and fortunately I don’t think we are facing the sort of lockdown that was necessary in order to cope in the very earliest part of this year. But we do know that crowding together in poorly ventilated spaces, particularly if you are shouting over loud music and so on, is absolutely perfect in terms of transmitting this very, very highly transmissible virus. Just a quick one from Associated Press here, that French Open finalist Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova has tested positive for Covid-19, casting doubt on her place in the Australian Open beginning on 17 January. The 30-year-old Russian confirmed she has the coronavirus and is isolating after arriving in Australia on Tuesday. “I was fully vaccinated and was preparing for the start of the season in Dubai,” Pavlyuchenkova said on social media. “But we live in a very difficult and unpredictable time. Right now I am in complete isolation, in a special hotel and following all the protocols under the supervision of doctors. Now it’s important to take care of yourself and the health of others. I’ll be back on court when it’s safe for everyone.” In the UK, Labour’s shadow culture secretary, Lucy Powell, has appeared on Sky News, repeating calls for action over viral disinformation about vaccines being spread online. She said: As we are seeing huge differences now in terms of hospitalisation rates and deaths between the vaccinated and the unvaccinated, it’s absolutely critical that we really do now clamp down on some of this misinformation that’s been spread so widely and virally online, as it can do online in a way that it can’t do on broadcast or in the print media. We’ve got to do more to tackle this urgently now, so that we can get to those hard to reach people to get those vaccinations. It’s becoming an issue for the whole of society, who might now be facing further restrictions or huge pressure on the NHS because there are people who are choosing not to have the vaccine because of myths and misinformation that they are being fed online. In response to the scenes in Milton Keynes yesterday where anti-vaccine activists stormed a Covid testing centre, Powell said: Well, I would like to see the police being very tough for those that … I wouldn’t even call them protesters. I think they were people who were very aggressively getting in the way of those doing their duty, working incredibly hard, our NHS staff who spent Christmas not taking holiday, not being with friends and families, in order to vaccinate others, and they’re being very aggressively disrupted by these individuals and by these so called anti-vaxxers. I was just having a look at the government website to book a PCR test in the UK, and already it seems stocks are low again across all regions of England, with none available in the north east of England. Tests are currently available in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Overnight Andrew Madden has reported for the Belfast Telegraph on the latest situation in Northern Ireland. He writes: On Wednesday the Department of Health reported a further 14 Covid-related deaths and 22,972 new cases of the virus in the five days from midnight on December 23 to midnight on December 28. This is an average of around 4,600 cases each day, well above the previous daily record of 3,286. In Belfast alone, 4,195 cases were confirmed over the five-day period. Hospitals across the region are at 94% capacity, with the South West Acute Hospital operating over capacity. It came as the PHA published new arrangements regarding PCR testing to “protect the testing system in Northern Ireland and ensure availability of testing for those who need it”. Fully-vaccinated close contacts will no longer have to take a PCR test. Instead, they will be advised to take a lateral flow test as soon as possible. Read more here: Belfast Telegraph – New Northern Ireland rules for PCR testing as demand outstrips supply due to rise of Omicron Fewer Australians will be told to get tested for Covid, with most states backing a much narrower definition of a close contact, as a record 21,000 new daily cases were recorded nationwide. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, cited “some very practical problems” caused by the more infectious Omicron variant – including the huge strain on the PCR testing scheme that had been at the centre of Australia’s response for two years. Speaking after a snap national cabinet meeting on Thursday, Morrison called for a “reset” because it was unfeasible to “have hundreds of thousands of Australians or more taken out of circulation based on rules that were set for the Delta variant”. The changes come on the same day the OzSage group of scientists and economists warned that a “let it rip” and “defeatist” approach to Covid would disrupt the health system and be felt most by vulnerable groups. Read our full report: Fewer Australians to have Covid tests as national cabinet agrees to new definition of close contact Here’s a reminder of the news overnight that NHS England is looking to set up new “pop-up” Covid facilities. My colleagues Rowena Mason and Aubrey Allegretti report: NHS England confirmed that it was creating new small-scale “Nightingale” facilities with up to 100 beds each at eight hospitals across the country. The health service said it had asked trusts to identify empty spaces to accommodate beds in places such as gyms or teaching areas. NHS managers are aiming to create up to 4,000 beds as surge capacity if needed, with work on the first tranche, in temporary structures, starting this week. A number of huge temporary hospitals, called the “Nightingales”, were built in exhibition halls in the first wave of the pandemic but were dismantled without being used to capacity. The new approach will ask for surge capacity to be built in the grounds of hospitals to make it easier for staff to move between new and old sites and keep patients closer to diagnostics and emergency care. The first sites will be at Preston, Leeds, Birmingham, Leicester, Stevenage, St George’s in London, Ashford and Bristol. Read more here: Hospitals in England asked to look for up to 4,000 emergency Covid beds Coronavirus infections set new one-day highs in six Canadian provinces Wednesday, prompting several provinces to impose more restrictions in hopes of containing the spread of the omicron variant. Associated Press report that the biggest jumps were in Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia, which are the country’s most populous provinces. Quebec reported more than 13,000 new cases in the previous 24 hours, Ontario had 10,436 and British Columbia listed 2,944. Manitoba, Alberta, and Newfoundland and Labrador also set new records. British Columbia announced it is delaying the full return to classrooms after the Christmas break to give school staff time to implement enhanced health measures. Staff and students whose parents are health workers will return to schools 3 January or 4 January as planned. All other students return 10 January. In the UK, the Royal College of Nursing (RCN) has issued a report based on its latest survey of nurses, which suggests that 57% of respondents were either thinking about leaving their job or actively planning to leave. The general secretary of the RCN, Pat Cullen, has just been on Sky News. She was asked about NHS England plans for pop-up centres to deal with Covid cases, and said: You can set up all the hubs that you wish to set up. But if you don’t have the nursing staff to actually care for the patients that are going to be placed in those hubs, that places more challenges on the nursing workforce. The nurses that are already providing the critical care in hospitals will be spread even more thinly across those areas, unless there’s another plan to staff those beds and care for those patients. On the current morale in the nursing profession in the NHS, Cullen said: Each and every nurse has paid a massive price over the last number of years. Ahead of the pandemic there were 50,000 nursing vacancies in the NHS in England. And then on top of that, we now have a situation where thousands of nurses are off isolating. So you can imagine what it’s like for those nurses that are still getting up, as we speak this morning, to start a thirteen-fourteen hour shift, caring for patients with a depleted workforce, and knowing that there’s no end to it. It’s just relentless, and the words that they say to me on a daily basis are it has become intolerable. And, you know, throughout my 37-year nursing career, I never thought that I would see a report issued today that shows 57% of our workforce wishing to leave the profession. That certainly was never something that I thought I would see in my time. Americans are again facing a stay-at-home New Year’s Eve as US political leaders and senior health advisers have urged people to scrap party plans and avoid larger public events as daily cases of Covid-19 break all previous records. In New York, attendance at the Times Square celebration known as the Ball Drop – in essence, tens of thousands of people watching a 12-foot geodesic sphere inlaid with Waterford crystals descend a long pole – has been capped at 15,000, down from pre-pandemic 60,000, with organizers encouraging revelers to watch it on TV or online. Attendees must be fully vaccinated and wear masks. The changes are meant to “keep the fully vaccinated crowd safe and healthy as we ring in the New Year”, outgoing mayor Bill de Blasio said in a statement. In Chicago, the Illinois governor, Jay Pritzker, has not yet imposed restrictions or shut down the city’s traditional fireworks show. But he warned Chicagoan this week that “Omicron and Delta are coming to your party”. “You need to think twice about how many people will be gathered together, keeping social distancing if you’re at a party. And if you can’t, leave,” he added. San Francisco has canceled its fireworks show over the Bay for the second year in a row. Mayor London Breed told residents that “we must remain vigilant in doing all we can to stop the spread of the Covid-19 Omicron variant”. Read more of Edward Helmore’s report here: US cities scale back New Year’s Eve events and urge people to scrap parties India is on the threshold of a potential new wave of coronavirus – probably fuelled by the Omicron variant. Cases have surged by 86% in the Indian capital New Delhi in 24 hours, and doubled in Mumbai in the same period. Although the absolute numbers remain low in both cities, the sharp rise is striking and is alarming officials. By late November, India’s capital was recording about 40 fresh infections a day. On Wednesday, it recorded 923. The last time it had recorded such a figure was in May. The surge has prompted fresh restrictions in all public places yet huge rallies for elections in February continue to be held by all parties. The rise has injected more urgency into the efforts to vaccinate the 108 million adult Indians who have yet to receive even one jab. So far, though, doctors have seen very few serious cases. The vast majority are asymptomatic or with very mild symptoms from which they are recovering fast. Nor is there any pressure yet on hospitals. Around 97 per cent of the 21,518 beds in Delhi earmarked for covid patients remain vacant, anecdotally suggesting the variant is more transmissible but less virulent. Doctors say that protection through natural infection during India’s second wave, when the Delta variant raged across the country, is probably another reason for the low impact. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. I often start my live blogging shift with a recap of the latest numbers in the UK from the government’s Covid dashboard. There are some heavy caveats around them this morning, however, with widespread reports of a lack of availability of testing kits. Over the last seven days there have been 914,723 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 41% week-on-week. There have been 516 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have decreased by 34% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have increased by 13% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 8,246 people in hospital in total, of whom 842 are in ventilation beds. I suspect you will look at those numbers and they will confirm what you already thought – either that cases are running very high and there should be more restrictions immediately, especially in England, or, that the level of deaths and hospitalisations remain low enough that people should be free to go about their business as they see fit. Armed police in Jingxi, in southern China, have paraded four alleged violators of Covid rules through the streets, state media reported, a practice that was banned but which has resurfaced in the struggle to enforce a zero-Covid policy. The four men were accused of smuggling people across China’s closed borders, and on Tuesday they were led through the streets wearing hazmat suits and bearing placards showing their name and photos. The state-run Guangxi daily reported the action was designed to deter “border-related crimes”. A common practice during the Cultural Revolution, public shaming has long since been banned in China, and the Communist party-affiliated Beijing News said the Jingxi incident “seriously violates the spirit of the rule of law and cannot be allowed to happen again”. Read the full story here. The World Health Organization said on Wednesday that slashing the mandatory isolation period for people with Covid-19 was a trade-off between controlling transmission and keeping economies up and running. WHO emergencies director Michael Ryan told a news conference: If people shorten the quarantine period, there will be a small number of cases that will develop disease and potentially go on to transmit, because they have been let out of quarantine earlier. But that will be a relatively small number, and a lot of people who won’t transmit will also be released from that quarantine. So it is a trade-off between the science and being absolutely perfect in what you try to do, but then having the minimal disruption that you can possibly have to your economy and society - and governments are struggling to find that balance.” The WHO’s guidelines on quarantine are, for symptomatic patients, 10 days after symptom onset, plus at least three additional days without symptoms; and for asymptomatic cases, 10 days after a positive test. Ryan said the average incubation period so far has been around five or six days - but there was a range. The likelihood of someone developing symptoms after five, six or seven days goes down exponentially, he explained, adding that it was then for governments to make the judgement call on when to allow people out of isolation. “There is some data to suggest that the incubation period for Omicron may be shorter, but there will still be a very wide range,” he said, stressing that this was based on very limited studies. “It would be advisable at this point if we don’t see huge shifts, huge moves in reducing control measures for Covid-19 purely on the basis of initial or preliminary studies.” Fearful of the economic impact of keeping so many people at home and a lack of staff due to long isolation times, some governments are looking at shortening the period that people have to isolate if they are Covid positive or have been exposed to someone who is positive. Spain announced it will reduce the quarantine period for people who have tested positive for Covid-19 to seven days from 10, even as new infections hit record highs. Italy said will scrap self-isolation rules for those coming into contact with someone testing positive for coronavirus providing they have had a booster shot, have recently recovered or been vaccinated. The move comes after health experts urged the government to rethink its policies amid worries that the spread of the highly contagious Omicron variant could paralyse the country by forcing millions to stay at home. Earlier this week US health authorities also released new guidance shortening the isolation period for people with a confirmed infection to five days from 10, so long as they are asymptomatic. In England, people who receive negative lateral flow results on day six and day seven of their self-isolation period – with tests taken 24 hours apart – no longer have to stay indoors for a full 10 days. Australia on Thursday narrowed its definition of close contacts of coronavirus cases and relaxed requirements for Covid-19 tests, as daily cases topped 20,000 for the first time in the pandemic, in a bid to relieve pressure on testing sites. The rules are being relaxed to stop asymptomatic people being forced into isolation, especially in healthcare, hospitality and airlines, and cut long lines of people forced to get PCR tests for interstate travel or because they have been at a public site with a confirmed case. Prime minister Scott Morrison told reporters: With Omicron, we cannot have hundreds of thousands of Australians and more taken out of circulation based on rules that were set for the Delta variant” From Friday, Morrison said “close contacts” will be redefined as people who live in the same household with an infected person. They would have to isolate for seven days and would only have to get a PCR test if they have Covid-19 symptoms. Hello and welcome back to our live Covid blog. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest coronavirus developments as they happen. Countries across Europe are reporting a record high number of infections as authorities scramble to stem the surge. The UK, Italy, France, Spain, Portugal, Denmark, Ireland and Greece all reported new case records this week, while cases in the US also hit a new high. Despite the surge in cases, countries across the world are easing isolation and testing rules. Spain reduced its Covid self-isolation period to seven days from 10 after businesses expressed fears the Omicron surge would leave them with mounting staff shortages. Italy scrapped the isolation period for people who have received three shots of a Covid vaccine and are subsequently exposed to someone who has tested positive. In England, people who receive negative lateral flow results on day six and day seven of their self-isolation period – with tests taken 24 hours apart – no longer have to stay indoors for a full 10 days. In light of these decisions, the World Health Organization cautioned that slashing the mandatory isolation period for people with Covid-19 was a trade-off between controlling transmission and keeping economies up and running. Dr Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO’s Health Emergencies Programme, said it is not “advisable” to reduce Covid controls and warned that governments need to be “careful” about reducing restrictions. Speaking at a WHO press conference on Wednesday, Dr Ryan said: Even with the previous variants, most people will incubate and show symptoms or be positive within that first six days or so, and the chances then of being positive or transmitting the disease after that are lower – but it is then for governments to make that judgment call of when to allow people out of a quarantine situation with extra tests. The most important thing at this moment is we need to be careful about changing tactics and strategies immediately on the basis of what we’re seeing in early Omicron data.” The UK reported another record rise with more than 183,000 daily Covid cases on Wednesday. More than 90% of community Covid cases in England are the now Omicron variant, according to the latest data from the UK Health Security Agency. Paris, France, is set to reimpose wearing face masks outdoors again in this week in a bid to slow the spread of the Omicron variant, police said on Wednesday. Anti-vaxxers stormed a Covid testing centre during a ‘freedom’ rally in Milton Keynes, appearing to believe it was a coronavirus vaccine centre. Argentina reported a daily record of 42,032 new cases on Wednesday. France registered a national and European record for new infections reporting 208,000 coronavirus cases in the previous 24 hours, up from its previous record of almost 180,000 set the day before. The German health minister, Karl Lauterbach, said on Wednesday that the number of new Covid cases has been under-reported and the actual incidence rate of infections is about two or three times higher than the officially reported figure. More than 44,000 people in the US could die of Covid-19 in the next four weeks, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Portugal reported a new record of 26,867 Covid cases over the last 24 hours on Wednesday, up from 17,172 the previous day, although daily deaths dropped to a fraction of early 2021 peaks. Cuba will give booster shots to its entire population in January, according to a report in state-run media.Josh Frydenberg has spoken to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission chair Rod Sims about concerns some suppliers are charging sky-high prices for Covid-19 rapid antigen tests. However, ACCC staff, including Sims, are currently on holiday and do not return to work until Tuesday. The regulator is also limited in action it can take because it does not have the power to set prices and the treasurer has decided not to order it to conduct a formal inquiry. It comes amid reports of soaring prices for RATs, which Scott Morrison this week said should be used by people concerned about whether they had Covid in order to take pressure off the public testing system, which delivers the more reliable but much slower polymerase chain reaction tests. There are reports overwhelmed pathology labs are taking as long as six days to return PCR results. On Thursday, the prime minister ruled out making RATs free to all, despite pledges by the New South Wales and Victorian governments to hand them out. Morrison said this was a result of “concerns” raised by industry that they would be undercut by free tests, but industry groups denied lobbying for the change. “The treasurer has spoken to the ACCC chair and he is aware of the government’s concerns regarding rapid antigen test pricing,” a spokesperson for Frydenberg said. Frydenberg has not instructed Sims to use his power to hold a formal inquiry into RAT prices. These inquiries have in the past looked at medium and long-term pricing problems and take “months or in some cases, years” to run, the spokesperson said. Morrison on Wednesday said Frydenberg would pursue the issue with the ACCC and on Thursday the health minister, Greg Hunt, said the government would take “strong, clear, swift action” if it uncovered evidence of price gouging. The ACCC does not have the power to fix prices and can only take legal action over high prices if suppliers are colluding, misleading the public or prices are so high as to be unconscionable. Allan Fels, a former ACCC chair, said that the regulator could “expose and shame” price gougers. “They can do what are called market studies, where they identify high prices and their cause, and then they recommend things to the government,” he said. “The main powers of the ACCC are probably exposure or recommending direct government action.” The president of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia, Trent Twomey, said chemists were not responsible for soaring RAT prices. “So I was making $4 on a test three weeks ago, and I’m still making $4 on a test even though they’ve gone up $10 to the consumer,” he said. “That’s because my cost price has gone up $10.” An ACCC spokesperson said the regulator would “investigate any evidence of price collusion and take appropriate action”. “The ACCC can publicly call out any suppliers which seem to be exploiting the shortage of rapid antigen tests,” the spokesperson said. “Under the Competition and Consumer Act excessive pricing may, in certain circumstances, constitute unconscionable conduct. Any such case would need to be ultimately decided by a court.”Sophie Mak, a recent graduate of law and literature, had walked past the fiery orange monument between classes for five years. A month after her graduation ceremony at the University of Hong Kong (HKU), two nights before Christmas, workers erected barricades around the statue. Under the cover of darkness, they cut it down. “It’s an absolute disgrace that HKU removed the Pillar of Shame so callously and so furtively,” Mak says. The pillar, a statue of bodies twisting towards the sky commemorating the victims of Beijing’s bloody 1989 crackdown on protesters in Tiananmen Square, had been a part of the campus for over two decades. Many saw it as a symbol of Hong Kong’s wider political freedoms – in contrast with mainland China, where the killings have been erased from public memory and remain taboo. Students were seen crying at the empty site on Christmas Eve. “Now that it’s gone, it’s incredibly hard to distinguish HKU from other universities in the mainland,” a third-year student who wished to remain anonymous said. “As a student it’s heartbreaking. A key piece of what made HKU so iconic is gone.” The same erasure happened within days at other campuses across the city. By Christmas, the Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) had removed a Goddess of Democracy statue from the entrance of its train station, and Lingnan University had stripped a Tiananmen massacre wall relief from its campus. A fourth university has requested its student union remove a statue. The universities cited safety and unspecified legal risks in response to press inquiries. HKU and CUHK maintained that the statues had never been authorised. Both had nonetheless stood on the campuses for over a decade. The universities’ swift removal of the Tiananmen massacre memorials, done in the dead of night without consulting students, now symbolises the freedoms the city has lost, observers say. “That an educational institution should remove a statue in the dead of night under such conditions … [underlines] the dramatic deterioration in the freedom of academic thought and expression in today’s Hong Kong,” Louisa Lim, author of the The People’s Republic of Amnesia, tells the Guardian following the removal. Silence on campus The erasure of symbols of the massacre is the latest manifestation of a climate of uncertainty and self-censorship that has been growing on the city’s campuses in the past 18 months, academics and students say. There have been few public signs of protest against the removals from either students or staff, who are on semester break. The silence is also telling of the state of debate on campus. “You can feel that there is no longer serious academic discussion about the situation. It’s pure bureaucracy,” Harry Wu, a former professor of medical humanities at HKU, says. Beijing imposed a national security law on Hong Kong last year in response to months of pro-democracy protests, which were widely supported by university students. Authorities largely blamed the unrest on student-aged protesters and unverified claims of foreign interference. Some universities have moved to distance themselves from their student representative bodies. In the past year, HKU and CUHK, the city’s two oldest universities, have both cut ties with their student unions, while four student leaders have been arrested under the national security law for “advocating terrorism”. “The general atmosphere is one of fear. People have been very worried about what they can say,” says one HKU professor, speaking to the Guardian on the condition of anonymity due to safety concerns. Classrooms, both virtual and in person, are no longer safe spaces for debate, some say. Current students described uneasy exchanges in class discussions. “Everyone is taking a precautionary approach, both the students and professors. So while we may be speaking our mind for now, it always ends with a nervous laughter because you never know who is going to take it personally,” a third-year student at HKU says. ‘All of us … become cautious'’ A month after the security law’s enactment, prominent pro-democracy activist and scholar Benny Tai was fired from his role at HKU. The move set off alarm bells among his peers. Wu, a medical humanities professor who taught at the university from 2015 to May 2021, said he had moved to Hong Kong because he believed the city’s systems were robust. Last year, he realised that was no longer true. “At the moment when Professor Benny Tai was sacked at HKU, I realised the system was not there any more.” Tai’s dismissal wasn’t an isolated incident. In October, two adjunct professors with pro-democracy affiliations at Lingnan University were also sacked. Authorities maintain that the city has lost none of its promised freedoms, which they say are enshrined in both the national security law and the Basic Law, the city’s mini-constitution. A HKU spokesperson said the university was committed to protecting academic freedoms. “HKU always respects academic freedom and upholds it as one of our core values,” it said. “The university also expects that our staff and students, as of other members in the community, discharge their civil responsibility to abide by the law.” The CUHK media office did not reply to requests for comment. Wu has since moved to Taiwan’s National Cheng Kung University, where he said he can enjoy “free inquiry”. While he was still teaching at HKU, he says he has removed Powerpoint slides from his teaching materials that may be more politically sensitive before uploading them to the school’s computer system. “All of us, not only students but also teachers, became cautious,” Wu says of the general unease on campus. “And you don’t feel that the university is a community … it was gradual, you can feel that the university functions more like a corporation. “You could see more and more frequently the term ‘senior management team’, as if there were people behind it but you didn’t know who these people were.” There were also rumours that some students had reported teachers to a dedicated police hotline for national security offences, Lokman Tsui, a former assistant professor of journalism at CUHK, says. Although unverified, they were enough to foster a sense of uneasiness in classrooms. “Everyone is aware that everyone else is watching. And nobody knows who will say what. You have the sense that people are watching,” he says. “It’s not like everyone is paranoid and super scared. But after the national security law, it has definitely increased.” The shrinking space for academic inquiry may mean the type of research at the universities will be reduced to those that do not cross Beijing’s red lines. Before his contract ended with CUHK, Tsui published a paper on press freedom and reporting on Tibet. “I don’t know what would happen if I were to start that research today,” he says. “It’s not like there are clear instructions from higher up, it’s not quite what’s happening on the mainland yet, but you do get your cues. If you were researching Tiananmen before, you may want to think twice now. If you were researching social movements before, you may want to think twice now.”The Colorado governor has intervened to reduce the 110-year sentence handed down to a trucker for his role in a fatal 2019 collision after widespread outcry and calls for leniency. Jared Polis announced Thursday he would commute the sentence for Rogel Aguilera-Mederos, reducing his sentence from 110 years to 10 years. Under the new sentence, the 26-year-old would be eligible for parole in five years. “I am writing to inform you that I am granting your application for a commutation,” Polis wrote. “I believe you deserve clemency for several reasons. You were sentenced to 110 years in prison, effectively more than a life sentence, for a tragic but unintentional act.” Polis said that the sentence was “simply not commensurate” with Aguilera-Mederos’ “actions, nor with penalties handed down to others for similar crimes”. In October, a jury convicted Aguilera-Mederos of vehicular homicide and other charges related to a deadly collision that occurred while he was hauling lumber in the Rocky Mountain foothills. He has said that the brakes on his semi-trailer failed as he was descending a steep section of the highway, leading to four deaths and a multi-vehicle pileup. The lengthy sentence, which the judge said he was obligated to give Aguilera-Mederos due to minimum sentencing laws in the state, was widely condemned and fueled criticism of the US justice system. More than 5 million people signed a petition calling for Polis to grant clemency to Aguilera-Mederos or commute his sentence, an effort truckers, civil rights groups and celebrities such as Kim Kardashian West voiced support for. “It is a stark miscarriage of justice,” said Domingo Garcia, the president of the League of United Latin American Citizens (Lulac), of the sentence. Lulac sent a letter to Polis on behalf of Aguilera-Mederos, a Cuban immigrant, requesting a pardon or a reduction of his sentence, and Garcia traveled to Colorado to meet with the governor. Kardashian West, a criminal justice reform advocate, was among those who praised the governor’s decision. “This case was a clear example of why mandatory minimums don’t work and need to be abolished. I’m grateful to Governor Polis for his empathy and leadership on this case,” Kardashian West said on Twitter. The decision was among several end-of-the-year commutations and pardons issued by Polis. The governor’s announcement comes after a judge scheduled a hearing next month to reconsider the sentence at the request of the district attorney, who had planned to ask that it be reduced to 20 to 30 years. The ACLU of Colorado has expressed hope that the case might prompt reform of mandatory minimum sentencing laws in the state. “The extraordinary nature of this particular case has prompted comments from some lawmakers that they may be interested in doing that,” said Mark Silverstein, the legal director of the ACLU of Colorado. “Sometimes unfortunately it takes an extraordinary case like this that put something that ought to be on the legislative agenda to the top of the legislative agenda.” The Associated Press contributed to this reportThe Australia batter Travis Head has tested positive for Covid-19, throwing a cloud over the fourth Ashes Test due to take place in Sydney. Cricket Australia said Head was asymptomatic and would remain in Melbourne and isolate with his partner for seven days, in line with Victorian health requirements. Players, their families and support staff were being PCR tested daily as part of routine testing procedures. No other teammates had returned a positive result. “Unfortunately, Travis returned a positive Covid-19 result earlier today,” a spokesperson said on Friday. “Thankfully, he is asymptomatic at this stage. We anticipate that he will be available to play in the fifth Vodafone men’s Ashes Test in Hobart. “We are grateful to our exceptional medical staff for all the work they have done throughout this series and we will continue to work with and support the players, their families and staff from both teams.” The rest of the Australian squad took PCR and rapid antigen tests on Friday morning and were awaiting results. Head was due to travel to Sydney for the Test, scheduled to begin at the Sydney Cricket Ground on 5 January, but he has been ruled out of the match. Mitchell Marsh, Nic Maddinson and Josh Inglis have been added to the Australian squad as cover. The buildup to the fourth Test has already been overshadowed by rapidly rising Covid cases in New South Wales, with some calling for it to be cancelled out of fear of future outbreaks among the sides. The former England captain Michael Vaughan this week pushed for the Test to stay in Melbourne. “Do we want to risk taking two teams over and broadcast crews and production staff?” Vaughan told Fox Sports. “Then you get to the SCG and there’s one case in the team on day one and the Test match is off. “Surely Cricket Australia have to be proactive ... there’s the possibility that the Covid positive could spread around the side.” The English camp has had several family members and coaches test positive during the tour. England’s head coach, Chris Silverwood, is remaining in Melbourne because he is isolating as a close contact. Head has topped Australia’s batting averages in the series’ first three Tests, having scored 248 runs at an average of 62, including a starring 152 in Brisbane’s first Test. The Australian’s Peter Lalor said batter Usman Khawaja “looks set to play” in Head’s absence. Khawaja has been in superb Sheffield Shield form, scoring 460 runs at an average of 65.7 for Queensland this season, including two centuries.US senator Ted Cruz has been ridiculed for posting a tweet in which he mixed up the American state of Washington with Western Australia while criticising Covid restrictions. The Republican politician – who tried to win the party’s presidential nomination in 2016 – retweeted a post by the government of Western Australia, whose handle is WA Government – that appeared to advise a woman that dancing would not be permitted at a New Year’s Eve party at her home. Cruz, who has campaigned against pandemic restrictions, took it as cue to attack the Democrat-led state of Washington, whose widely used abbreviation is also WA, saying that those in leadership were “power-drunk authoritarian kill-joys”. This was despite the fact that the original tweet did not mention Washington. Cruz tweeted: “Blue-state Dems are power-drunk authoritarian kill-joys. Washington State: NO DANCING ALLOWED!!! Any rational &amp; free citizen: Piss off.” Cruz deleted the tweet but not before it was picked up by opponents who mocked him gleefully for his error. Illinois Republican congressman Adam Kinzinger retweeted Cruz’s post and said that the Texas senator should “do your research before posting misinformation”. US Democratic congressman Eric Swalwell also picked up on the error and tweeted: “Hey Ted, WA is Western Australia. But cool tweet.” After Cruz had deleted the post, Swalwell returned fire by posting: “Jackpot. @tedcruz deleted his faux outrage tweet. Please stay on this phony”. Western Australia has imposed strict border controls since the pandemic began and is still closed to almost all Australians in other states. Its Facebook message to the woman came after she had asked if she was allowed to hold a party for New Year’s Eve. The reply read “masks are not required at private residences. Dancing is strictly not permitted”.In the past few weeks, Allison Rossiter, the managing director of Roche Diagnostics, one of the first companies to have an approved rapid antigen test in Australia, has witnessed a flurry of interest from state governments. South Australia, which until a week ago had banned the use of the tests, is among their new clients. So too is Western Australia, which placed an order with the company this week despite the tests still being banned in the state. “We have massive orders in for rapid antigen tests for Western Australia,” the WA premier, Mark McGowan, said on Wednesday. “We expect to have 8 million by 5 February and we expect to get more after that.” It hasn’t always been this way. Interviews with manufacturers and suppliers of rapid antigen testing reveal a frustration at the amount of resistance to their products in Australia until very recently. “The response from government has generally been ‘yeah we’ll look at it’ or ‘maybe in the new year’, but until now there hasn’t been any critical impetus,” Dean Whiting, the chief executive of Pathology Technology Australia, a group representing rapid antigen testing suppliers, told Guardian Australia. “There has been some confused market messaging at times and I think there is a level of frustration.” Since the beginning of the pandemic, Australia has bet heavily on PCR testing as a key plank of the country’s Covid testing and tracing system. More reliable than rapid testing and cheaper for the states to operate because it is subsidised by the commonwealth, it has meant suppliers of the faster turnaround tests were de-prioritised in the Australian market, while demand in Asia, Europe and the US soared. “At the beginning we had no idea whether rapid testing was going to fly in Australia at all,” Rossiter said. “There was a lot of, I don’t want to say misinformation, but a lack of information about the tests or how they differed from PCR tests, and so it was hard to know. “I don’t know if it was necessarily from government per se but I think in the medical profession the experts were certainly dubious.” The pathology industry, which has been a huge financial beneficiary of PCR testing, lobbied hard against the use of the tests. During the pandemic the Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia, the body that represented pathologists, has issued numerous statements warning against their use. In October last year it point-blank advised “against the widespread use” of the tests, a position it reaffirmed as recently as July. While Roche has been well-placed to fill most orders, reports of market shortages in pharmacies and shopping centres, as well as accusations of price gouging, point to a wider view in the industry that the Australia market was not worth investing in until very recently. Some companies, such as Brisbane-based Ellume, have not even bothered registering their products with the Therapeutic Goods Administration in Australia and instead ship their kits – which they produce about 100,000 of each day – straight to the US. “Part of the challenge for manufacturers is how much Australian product do you bring in and hold when you’ve had state governments up until very, very recently being unsupportive of rapid testing and at times even dismissing it,” John Kelly, the managing director of testing company, Atomo, said. “I suspect stock in Australia at the moment is probably less than is required to do the job and in large part that’s due to a lack of engagement, planning and preparation to get ready for this. “I’m always wary of judging a pandemic with hindsight because things are unpredictable, but certainly governments here have been resistant to point-of-care testing from the very start and there has been resistance in public health because of the diagnostic advice coming from the pathology sector.” It was only in August, when the outbreak in New South Wales saw the government pivot to rapid tests to keep some industries in operation, that the college conceded “governments and public health authorities fighting localised outbreaks may need to use RATs for surveillance testing in defined circumstances”. Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It was in that period that Rossiter’s company, Roche, began circulating a white paper to state health departments in an effort to push back on the theory that the tests were not safe for use in Australia and encourage departments to think about a future that would require more wide-spread testing than PCR allowed. “It was a gamble, but I didn’t want us to be on the back foot,” Rossiter said. “Australia is obviously a million miles from anywhere and I didn’t want to be caught out if the situation did change. “As it happened, the sudden uptick in cases due to Omicron and that coinciding with the Christmas period all snowballed at once and now you do have a situation where there is a bit of a scramble from governments.” Part of the issue has been the slow pace of approvals with the TGA. In September the TGA boss, John Skerritt, admitted that had been deliberate, as the regulator waited for a “signal” from the federal government. “We’re saying to companies, submit your data, show us, but we can’t formally make an approval decision until we get a signal from the government,” Skerritt said at the time. “It’s a decision for the government. Firstly, when they feel an appropriate time is to commit such tests. But then secondly, we’ve got to have the tests that are actually ready to go and designed so they can be used by non-professional people.” That signal eventually came when federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said he wanted rapid tests to be made available from November. But other suppliers express frustration that the approvals process has continued to be slow-going, and a lack of foresight from governments about the eventual need for rapid tests as case numbers rose after the economy opened up. During the early stages of the extended lockdown caused by the Delta variant, the NSW government issued a tender for suppliers of the tests. Released at the end of July, the tender was limited only to procurement for the state’s healthcare networks, meaning wider distribution was not considered. The Guardian understands the government eventually chose four suppliers as part of the tender, but multiple companies that bid during the tender were never contacted after submitting their bids. “It was a waste of time,” the head of one company that did not bid as part of the tender said. “They obviously weren’t looking beyond the end of their noses.” NSW Health did not respond directly to questions about the tender, but said the government had “made a commitment to make rapid antigen tests available to NSW residents early next year to boost the Covid-19 health response across the state”.New Zealand has eased rules on public gatherings in time for New Year’s Eve after a scare over community cases of the new Omicron variant. The country is set to lead the world’s celebrations of the new year at midnight on Friday and crowds will be allowed to gather in Auckland for the first time since August to join in the party after the city’s Covid traffic-light settings were moved from red to orange. New Zealand is traditionally one of the first countries to bring in the new year before time differences usher in midnight elsewhere but the festivities had been threatened by tight coronavirus restrictions in place for months. Under orange settings, the bars, restaurants and cafes that enforce vaccine pass requirements can remove crowd size limits and the requirement to sit down, allowing people to dance the night away. Many other districts, including Taupō, Rotorua lakes districts, Kawerau, Whakatāne, Ōpōtiki, Gisborne, Wairoa, Rangitīkei, Whanganui and Ruapehu also moved to orange at midnight on Thursday. Only Northland has been left on red. The move comes despite cases of Omicron, which is ripping through many countries including Australia, the US and the UK, emerging in New Zealand this week. The first came when a traveller from the UK arrived in Auckland and reportedly returned a positive result on day nine of their self-isolation period – 27 December. But they had previously returned three negative tests for Covid-19 while completing seven days of managed isolation at a facility in Auckland, the ministry of health said. The person had been active in the community and visited a restaurant, a festival and shops. However, on Friday the health ministry said that “regarding the Omicron border case announced on Wednesday, microbiologists have advised that the risk of transmission from this case is low”. “We can now confirm that the six close contacts who attended the Hidden Lakes festival have all tested negative for Covid-19. This means there was no public health risk associated with this event. “Contact tracing has now identified 88 close contacts for this case. This includes close contacts identified via case interviews and from locations of interest. Eighty of these contacts have been reached, all are isolating and have been tested. All results received to date have been negative. Contact tracers are working urgently to contact the eight close contacts who are yet to be reached.” An Air New Zealand crew member also tested positive for Omicron on 27 December and eight close contacts were isolating. The health ministry said on Friday that all eight had returned negative tests. “There are no locations of interest associated with this case and therefore the risk to the public has been determined to be low,” it said. On Friday, New Zealand reported 49 cases, a drop of 11 on the day before. There were 10 more Omicron cases at the border, taking the total to 88. There were no new Omicron cases.A US woman has told how she confined herself to an aeroplane toilet cubicle after testing positive for Covid halfway through a flight from Chicago to Iceland. Marisa Fotieo, a teacher from Michigan, said her throat began to hurt halfway through the trip so she went to the bathroom to perform a rapid Covid test which confirmed she was infected. “I just took my rapid test and I brought it into the bathroom, and within what felt like two seconds there were two lines [indicating a positive test],” Fotieo told NBC News. “There’s 150 people on the flight, and my biggest fear was giving it to them,” she said. Sharing the news over TikTok, Fotieo posted a short video from inside the cramped quarters, writing: “POV you test positive for Covid while over the Atlantic Ocean.” “Shout out to Icelandair for my VIP quarantine quarters,” she added. Fotieo said she remained in the bathroom for the remainder of the flight, relying on flight attendant Ragnhildur “Rocky” Eiríksdóttir to provide food and drinks. Fotieo’s TikTok video has been viewed more than 4m times since it was first uploaded on 21 December, with viewers curious to know how she had been able to board the flight. Fotieo addressed the concerns in the platform’s comments section, explaining that she received two negative PCR tests before boarding. “I never made it to my destination,” she updated fans over TikTok. “Quarantined in Iceland now.” In an apparent attempt to keep entertained during the mandatory 10-day isolation, Fotieo has since posted a series of videos from inside her hotel quarantine in Reykjavik. In an interview with CNN, Fotieo said she was fully vaccinated with a booster shot and had been en route to her final destination of Switzerland with her brother and father when she tested positive mid-flight. “I opted to stay in the bathroom because I did not want to be around others on the flight,” the early childhood teacher said.Work colleagues of confirmed cases, not just people who live together, may be classed as close contacts if a significant transmission event occurs, according to expert health advice cited by Scott Morrison to overhaul Covid-19 rules in Australia. Newly published advice from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee also went beyond health factors to justify the “pragmatic” changes to testing and isolation rules. It said it was a response to fast-increasing case numbers and “the living with Covid policy approach”. The expert advisory panel – which brings together all state and territory chief health officers and is chaired by Australia’s chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly – said the changes would support “public health sustainability, social cohesion and economic recovery”. The AHPPC warned that previous testing rules were “placing considerable pressure on available laboratory resources”. On Friday New South Wales reported a record high 21,151 confirmed Covid cases, while Victoria reported 5,919, Queensland 3,118 and South Australia 2,093. The prime minister called for a “reset” to Australia’s pandemic response, describing the more infectious Omicron variant as a “game changer”. He said after a national cabinet meeting on Thursday that most states and territories would adopt a newly agreed definition of a close contact – with relatively Covid-free Western Australia a notable exception. But South Australia announced it would stick with a broader definition of close contacts. Morrison had said a close contact “is a household contact or household-like of a confirmed case only” – except in exceptional circumstances. “A household contact is someone who lives with a case or has spent more than four hours with them in a house, accommodation or care facility setting,” Morrison told reporters. However, the AHPPC statement appears to be more nuanced and does not mention the four-hour timeframe. The advisory group said in its statement: “Household or household-like contacts are the key group who should be required to quarantine as these individuals are the most likely to develop disease. “In addition, where a significant transmission event has been documented, those who were at this site or venue may be determined to be close contacts,” it added. “This may include worksites. Worksites and businesses are strongly encouraged to have business continuity plans in place to ensure workplace health and safety is achieved and outbreaks can be contained as quickly as possible.” The AHPPC said there was “still risk of transmission based on the nature of exposure for other contacts (such as in social, educational or workplace settings) who have had less extensive exposure to a case than household-like contacts”. “This group will not be required to quarantine, except in exceptional circumstances, and may be required to undertake other behaviours to decrease their risk of transmission to others,” it said. Morrison told reporters that the change to close contact definitions “and the complete abolition of the casual contact notion” would have a positive impact on staff shortages, particularly in the health system. But the AHPPC statement said other contacts who had potentially been exposed to a case but who were at lower risk of infection should monitor for symptoms and have a rapid antigen or PCR test if these occur. “All contacts should wear a mask when outside home, monitor symptoms and avoid visiting high-risk settings for 14 days following exposure to reduce their risk of transmission to others.” The AHPPC also warned that for the effective control of outbreaks, “different management approaches will be needed for contacts in closed, high-transmission settings, particularly when there are a large number of individuals at risk of developing severe disease”. This would include outbreaks in residential aged care facilities and remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. The South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, said his state would continue to define close contacts as not merely “household and household-like contacts and intimate partners”. The definition would also cover “those who have been in a setting where there has been significant transmission of Covid-19 (and there has been greater than 15 minutes face-to-face contact)”. The SA announcement was interpreted as a departure from the nationally agreed definition. But it does not appear to clash with the AHPPC advice published overnight. Marshall told reporters on Friday he did not believe national cabinet had agreed on the four-hour cutoff. He said people needed to be aware “that you can still catch this disease if you’re not living with somebody, or in an intimate relationship” – and should monitor for symptoms. “That’s just a fact and people need to be aware of the risks associated with Omicron.” Dr Chris Moy, the vice-president of the Australian Medical Association, said on Friday the national cabinet announcement was a “party trick” that meant fewer potentially infectious people would be identified as a close contact. Moy said on Twitter the move “defies the reality of who will actually become infectious, and unknowingly accelerate the propagation of Covid through the community”. But Prof Peter Collignon, an infectious diseases physician at the Australian National University, said the changes were a “reasonable” response to the current situation. “We don’t need zero Covid rules – what we need is practical rules that get the vast majority of people who are high risk [and] keep them away from others, but not expect that we’ll have zero risk,” Collignon told the Seven Network. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “This disease is actually in the society, it’s going to be here for years to come. We need to adapt the rules so that we don’t, in fact, lose huge amounts of the workforce for little extra benefit.” Kelly said Omicron was “very transmissible” and there was “no doubt” case numbers would continue to rise. But he said data from South Africa – which had “the longest and most extensive experience” of the new variant – indicated a 73% decrease in severity of disease compared with Delta.The lights are on late – and that means moths. Tonight, one is just resting on our kitchen window, looking somewhat forlorn, on the outside looking in, incidental and uninvited. These visitors this time of year are usually winter moths (Operophtera brumata). Tonight, when lights will be on in many places till the small hours, it would be easy to think that the moths are the ones missing the party, dressed in the dullest of grey-brown and having little to do but flutter about on gossamer-thin wings. But that would be quite wrong. Theirs is the best and wildest party of all. The air of winter dusk reeks of pheromones. The females are flightless, and on mild nights they climb trees and send out chemical messages that charge the atmosphere with possibility. It’s a lust-fest out there. The males hasten to the treetops to copulate. Sometimes in their zeal they fly off with their mate still attached. The flightless take a flight – what a way to start the year! Assuming they return to the trees, the females lay their eggs in the bark and in spring the caterpillars hatch, with the intention of meeting the leaf-burst. In oak woods there is an arms race between tree and caterpillar. If the caterpillars hatch at just the right time, when the leaves are fresh and delicious, they might completely defoliate and damage the tree; if the oak brings leaves late, the larvae might all starve. But the caterpillars have an emergency plan for the latter; they let themselves down on silk threads and hope the breeze wafts them to better fare. There is another player in this drama, the blue tit. Blue tits in woods may rely on an abundance of winter moth caterpillars to feed their brood. For them, a good caterpillar crop is essential, so they need the larvae to prosper. A blue tit might meet a winter moth tomorrow. Blue tits are winter vegetarians; their guts are adapted so. They won’t eat the moth and won’t have any idea that this flying neighbour is the key to their breeding success in a few months’ time. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryOn 14 December I took my last shopping trip, stocked up, and went home. Apart from a few necessary work events and trips to (vaccinated and tested) friends’ houses, I’ve stayed at home ever since. Coming from a huge New Zealand family, Christmas for me is all about people. I love summer and swimming, and my partner is always surprised by just how much energy I have for socialising in our extrovert v introvert relationship. But when the New South Wales government opened up on the 15th, my world closed down. I have rheumatoid arthritis and a few other autoimmune diseases, so I am on medications that leave me immunocompromised. And the science was clear: with my vaccines completed in early August, I had considerably reduced protection from Omicron. The last two years have been tough. At the start of 2020, I was living in a sharehouse in Sydney’s Newtown, working in theatre and film, and spending as much time as possible in the US with my partner. When Covid first broke, I wrote an opinion piece about my anger at society’s complacency around the deaths of those in the disability community. It still stings when Covid-related deaths are prefaced with a caveat about “underlying health conditions” – because that is what I have, and I love my life. Just after that article was written I moved out of my beloved share-home, put all my belongings, bar two suitcases, into storage, and moved back to Aotearoa for five months. I never did get to direct that show in Canada, my Sydney Film Festival debut was online, and I didn’t see my partner for more than a year. Lockdown sucks. I get it. But I’m alive. And that’s no small thing. Around 60% of the 148,000 people who died in the UK were part of the disability community. In the United States, where 1 in every 500 people have died, those with underlying health conditions were four times more likely to lose their lives. Living with an underlying health condition during the pandemic has been incredibly difficult. Despite government claims that people at risk would be prioritised for vaccination, my health providers didn’t know when or how I could get vaccinated, leaving me and many others to roam government websites searching for an appointment. I was eventually allocated to an inner-city hospital with a very low vaccine supply, and I wasn’t able to change this allocation. While I spent hours in vain calling the vaccine hotline begging for a new and earlier appointment anywhere in Sydney, friends my age without health conditions were able to book and get vaccinated before me. I am educated, articulate, mobile and can advocate for myself; it’s troubling to consider how others in the disability community navigated the system without these privileges. Eventually I travelled to Aotearoa again where common sense seemed to prevail: I was finally able to get vaccinated within a few weeks and stayed out of Sydney, my home, for another four months. Despite government promises, Australia moved out of lockdown before vaccine rates for many at-risk communities reached the levels set for the broader community, in what I think is a careless and avoidable decision. The way the Perrottet government has managed the transition from lockdown has been nothing short of bizarre. Ending mask mandates, capacity limits and QR registrations just as a new strain of Covid was hitting, vaccine immunity was waning, and boosters were yet to be rolled out was always going to be the disaster we are currently facing. At the same time, I’m so disappointed by the rhetoric of our state and federal leaders of “personal responsibility”. Wearing a mask is more than an individual protection. It is an act of solidarity and community care. It acknowledges that you have no idea who might be vulnerable around you and that you value the health of others. To not wear a mask is not an act of freedom; it is callous. Focusing on “personal responsibility” during a pandemic is an elitist and ableist luxury. It also doesn’t work. Beyond personal protection, vaccination availability and acceptance is about community protection. Vaccinations only work when they are available to everyone, creating herd immunity across the community. Furthermore, without financial support, most of us, including people with underlying conditions, need to leave our homes to work and live, even as it becomes increasingly difficult to get any Covid test, let alone one without out-of-pocket costs. Again, our politicians have let us down. More than 18 months after my previous article, I was asked as a woman with disability about how I am feeling about Covid and the end of lockdowns. But my lockdown has not ended; it will continue until there is a coherent plan from our leaders that doesn’t leave people with disability behind. I feel undervalued and forgotten. I feel that my life is seen as less important that those without disability. Ironically, we may well be creating a new generation of people with disability and illness – a new generation with underlying health conditions – through the impacts of long Covid. I hope we treat these people better in the future than we are treating people with disability today. • Anthea Williams is a theatre and film directorFor the past two years, Australia has fought off waves of Covid using strict lockdowns and closed borders. The payoff has been counted in the fatality rate – Australia has had one of the lowest rates of death anywhere in the world. Over the past week, that story has started to change. Now, cases of Omicron are exploding around the country with the national tally hitting over 21,000 cases on Thursday and New South Wales recording that alone on Friday. Here are four charts that show the extraordinary turnaround in case numbers: New Covid cases per 1,000 population Within about a couple of weeks, Australia has gone from having one of the lowest rates of new Covid cases per population anywhere in the world to being in the top 20 of countries with a population over 500,000. By the same measure if NSW were a country it would be sitting in the top 10. While Australia’s cases have been climbing, so too have those of other countries. On Wednesday, the US set a global record with 488,000 cases according to the New York Times database. It’s important to note that countries with better testing systems are inherently likely to produce higher figures – and even in Australia’s case, it is clear that many positive cases are going unrecorded. Nevertheless, its position has changed extremely rapidly. NSW numbers have exploded Sydney has gone very quickly from containment to explosion. On 3 December Australia’s biggest city recorded its first known case of Omicron community transmission – a school student. Regional cities and rural areas have also experienced a sharp rise in cases. The NSW government initially held steady on the plan to lift its mask mandate and abandon QR codes just as the wave of cases broke – which quickly forced it to backtrack. This chart shows how quickly cases grew – with the seven-day rolling average now spiking vertically. Australia daily cases Although NSW has led the nation’s outbreak, case numbers have grown in every state and territory, resulting in a huge rise in the national number. Cautious optimism on hospital admissions On Thursday the nation’s chief medical officer Prof Paul Kelly sought to dampen Omicorn panic by pointing to the “positive” news – while cases are skyrocketing, hospitalisations have not seen a surge. “Hospitalisations, ICU and ventilation rates in Australia, they’re extremely low compared with what we were seeing with Delta and in the pre-vaccination era, with other variants of the virus,” Kelly said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning This data can be hard to track across the different jurisdictions, because of the lag in reporting times, but it is important to note there is a gap of 10 to 14 days between cases being recorded and hospitalisations. It is certainly true that the hospital numbers have not followed the skyrocketing case numbers. As the NSW chief health officer, Kerry Chant, pointed out on Friday, some of those in hospital with Covid will have been admitted for other reasons, and it is hard to disentangle the data – but those cases nevertheless still add to complications for treatment and the burden on the health service.“I remember thinking as a kid: I can’t wait till I grow up,” says Paul Thomas Anderson. “I can’t wait till I get older and I can shed all this stuff, and all the answers will be there for me.” America’s best director is now 51: salt-and-pepper hair, still as loose-limbed as a student. Those answers are yet to materialise, he says, grinning. “No one sets you up for that. My dad never said: ‘Oh, by the way, it’s going to get a lot more complicated and a lot harder.’ Or: ‘Being in love and having a relationship is going to be the most difficult challenge of your life.’ I don’t know why. Maybe it was just my dad.” Dissent from down the sofa: Alana Haim, the rock musician who stars in Anderson’s new movie. “Ignorance is bliss!” she cries. Nobody told her that stuff either – of course not. “Parents just want a happy kid.” They laugh: not quite father-daughter, but close. It’s a freezing morning in November, back before Omicron, when film stars still flew to London for screenings and even took off their masks to speak. Outside the window, a neon fawn is strung between lampposts in Covent Garden. The promise of a proper Christmas glints in the air. Licorice Pizza, too, is a nostalgia trip: romantic, relaxed, exhilaratingly cinematic, stuffed with big skies and unvarnished closeups that seem even more amazing after two years starved of the faces of strangers. Better than Boogie Nights – Anderson’s other film set in the 70s San Fernando Valley of his youth. Less epic than There Will Be Blood. But light years from the heaviness of The Master, the mad tangle of Inherent Vice, the couture austerity of Phantom Thread. Shooting that movie in London five years ago prompted its star, Daniel Day Lewis, to quit not just method acting but the profession for ever, and left its director depressed. Small wonder he made his next movie at home, with friends who had never acted before. Haim and Anderson met nearly a decade back when he emailed her and her sisters to see if they might like him to direct any of their music videos (yes, they replied, and did he realise their mother was his old high-school art teacher?). Her co-star, Cooper Hoffman, is the eldest child of Philip Seymour Hoffman, who died aged 46 in 2014, the year after he was Oscar-nominated for The Master, his fifth Anderson movie. “I’ve known Cooper since he was a baby.” Now 18, Hoffman plays Gary Valentine, a 15-year-old former child actor and budding entrepreneur: positive, charismatic, irrepressible. Haim is Alana Kane: 25, abrasive, immature, directionless. They meet. Gary makes a move and, loathing herself for it, she shows up to supper with him. The film charts their friendship over a year: him smitten and her, mostly, resisting. She chaperones him on a trip to New York. They set up a business selling water beds. There are tiffs and splits. Disaster is a frequent tease – false arrest, terrorist scare, some very hairy driving. But cliches are always dodged, right down to the visible acne and the DIY makeup. The leads look outlandish because they look real. Splattered through the story are fabulously hammy big-name cameos. Bradley Cooper as a coked-up Jon Peters, the hairdresser and then-boyfriend of Barbra Streisand. Sean Penn as an egomaniacal A-lister modelled on William Holden, who hits on Haim by intoning random dialogue from his old war movies. Tom Waits as a wild, delusional director. Harriet Sansom Harris as a quivering theatrical agent. John Michael Higgins as a restaurateur who addresses his Japanese wife in a thick east Asian accent, as he himself doesn’t speak the language. This mix – Bresson meets Ferrell – was intentional, says Anderson. “It works because it comes about at the right time. The relationship reaches a certain type of peak and the needle needs to move. They have a fight and then a movie star emerges playing a movie star. It’s not a sharp turn that takes you out of the story. Hopefully it feels quite natural.” “Paul is attracted to actors and trusts them,” says Higgins down the phone a few weeks later. “Real technicians with long résumés, but also people who have no experience. He has an innate feeling there will be emotional information as a result of that contradiction.” Emotional information? “The audience can say: ’That’s me. I see me. This is right, this is real, this is what people are like.’ They’re not easy to explain.” “It feels very much like you’ve been invited over to play,” adds Harris, also down the line. “That’s the best feeling an actor can have and not everybody who has power understands that.” She had barely met Anderson before turning up on The Phantom Thread, yet “he acted as if I was an old college friend and he was so glad I was there and now we can do this. His leadership is implicit. The ideas are him. He never has to swagger around and act like he’s the boss.” I blather on about how I’ve always found him surprisingly approachable. Yes, she says, isn’t he fun? And sets are full of love and momentum. Then comes the kicker, a dry flash of Bebe Glazer: “But he could behave any way he wanted. I don’t think his repertoire is limited. I think he knows how to get the best out of people.” Be it opportunism or diplomacy, Anderson – the great auteur – seems increasingly eager to evolve into the ether. On set, he says, he wants to disappear as completely as possible (not beforehand, mind: for all its pinball plotting, the script for Licorice Pizza is the most exact he says he has written). Today, he loves reeling off examples of his own redundancy. When Haim binned an “over-wordy” scene in favour of just demanding someone tell her whether he’s circumcised. Anderson cackles. “That moment of joy when you’re not a writer any more, when you’ve set a table for someone and they are devouring the meal and running with it. There’s not a moment where I would say: Cooper, stop, you’re improvising too much. You hope to get to a place where anything you’ve written isn’t needed any more.” Another time, he wanted Alana to lose an argument for the sake of the narrative arc. “She was incapable of doing that. Take after take, I said: ‘I know it feels strange, but please, I really need you to do this.’ I’m the director, who’s in charge! She’d never done this before! I’m demanding she loses the fight. “She refused! And eventually I realised – you’re trying to impose this thing which is never going to happen. Clearly, I’m steering in the wrong direction. Whatever dream you had for your movie is gone. I was so proud. Don’t listen to my horseshit. It was kind of magical.” Carefully orchestrated passivity is Anderson’s genius, thinks Higgins. “Paul is really interested in observing things and reporting them back to us. For all his brilliance, there’s a matter-of-fact quality to his films: look at this and this, and now this. It’s kinda simple. There’s not a lot of ideas flying around. It’s what he sees. The audience is the one who is burdened by ideas.” Anderson has made instant stars of Hoffman and Haim. But – he’d presumably protest – only insofar as he simply noticed them. “I’ve cast actors to come on and say, ‘Would you like more coffee’ and they freeze up. There’s absolutely nothing that I can say to help them. Saying lines like you made them up is a skill that you either have or you don’t. “If you don’t believe me, try it one day. It’s really, really, really, really hard to say the simplest things in a natural way, particularly when there’s a camera and people around, and to do it time after time. It’s a very rare skill few people have. It would be incorrect to think I’m responsible beyond just creating a nice situation.” (Haim’s nice situation turns out to have been a two-month course in driving massive old lorries, in aid of one scene – and to stop her sitting at home and getting cold feet. “Stop worrying about the acting! Worry about guiding a 10-tonne truck backwards down a hill.”) Both Haim and Hoffman have been Golden Globe nominated, Anderson too. Oscars will follow. The gamble has paid off. But what if it hadn’t? Given the family ties, the personal history, their youth: how did Anderson handle such high stakes? “Delicately, compassionately, with an enormous amount of thought and protection. Just don’t treat it lightly.” He pauses. But also, do treat it lightly. “We take the work seriously, but we don’t take ourselves seriously and we want it to be simple and we want it to be fun.” Still, Anderson and Haim are the ones doing all the press, with Hoffman carefully protected. Haim – once his babysitter – proves as tough a bodyguard as her boss. “Me and Cooper are two peas in a pod,” she warns with a smile. “Us against the world. With Paul.” In the film, Harris’s character, finally getting the measure of this potential new client, tells Alana: “You remind me of a dog. Of an English pitbull dog, with sex appeal and a very Jewish nose.” Not brutal, just helpful, thinks Harris. “I know people who talk like that. One agent said to me: ‘How do you feel about my wrinkles?’ It’s somebody giving you a chance – are you aware? Have you thought of this?” Haim likes the idea that she is a beast to be unleashed. “I’m very territorial when it comes to the people that I love. I love very hard and if you’re in my family, I will do anything to protect you. Cooper is basically my family now. I would do anything for him. I can be very sweet, but you don’t want to mess with anyone that I love.” “That line is how I would describe Alana,” says Anderson. “And that is a compliment. I love pitbulls. I have had many of them. They are fantastic dogs and they have this reputation as being these killers but it’s not true at all. They are the most intelligent, loving, generous companions. And if they decide to kill you, they will kill you and they will not stop.” He has watched his own dog kill a smaller dog (“too tragic to talk about”); less fun, he says, than watching Haim “protect and snap”. “I want that person on my side because they are moving through this world and very generous and very alive and very welcoming, but with a very strong point of what is OK and what is not OK.” Punchy, ballsy, broad-shouldered despite her slightness, Haim seems a fitting woman to be Anderson’s first female lead (Licorice Pizza shares some DNA with Punch-Drunk Love, not least having Hoffman Senior as a mattress salesman, but Emily Watson was still second fiddle to Adam Sandler). What is strange is that Anderson himself, for a father of four who has specialised in movies about masculinity, seems so feminine. “That’s nice of you to say,” he says, gently. “I will tell that to my sisters. They will love that.” Yet his film is less simple when it comes to gender. The three sisters, for instance, are shown as fractious, needling, difficult. The boys, meanwhile – Gary, his nine-year-old brother and the troupe of friends they hang out with – are collaborative, loving and can-do. Is that generally the case? “Sometimes you love each other,” says Haim. “Sometimes you don’t. I grew up in a household with three girls sharing one bathroom.” In the film, all three are still living with their parents, “well past when they should be”, says Anderson (three sisters his age, four older brothers). “The boys are running free, free of supervision to roam the streets.” So perhaps it’s less about a gender divide than two types of parenting: one top-heavy, the other over-light (Gary’s father is unseen, his mother overworked and often absent). It’s not hard to decipher which product of these approaches is presented as better-adjusted. Is Gary a child of the 70s, Alana someone who could have been raised today? Yes, says Anderson. “Kids today have far less independence. Even if they have the illusion of independence, their parents are still tracking their movements on their telephone. There’s no mystery any more for these kids about where another person is or where their friends are.” “I think it’s a very accurate representation of that very romantic time. You could just go! Go ride your bike, go to the movies, go do something, get out of the house, go away! “I don’t think we’re doing kids any favours. I’m desperate to give my kids even more independence, but it’s not just up to me. I’m only 50% of that vote. I think most parents feel more comfortable to know just where their kids are at all times. It makes me feel a little bit uncomfortable, like big brother. I don’t need to know, especially if they are doing well and I trust them or they have to venture out and find trouble or find mischief. I want to encourage them …” To find mischief? “Of course. Sure. Hopefully the good kind.” Licorice Pizza luxuriates in a time of freedom and chaos and danger, even if that threat never quite materialises. “Paul’s movies are like that too,” says Higgins. “They don’t quite follow the screenplay rules. They are totally individual and parentless in themselves.” Yet some have accused the director of using that period setting to smuggle through stories that would be unacceptable today. Some feel the Japanese restaurant scenes leave a sour taste; plain anti-Asian, not smart satire. “It’s a period piece,” protests Higgins. “It’s nice to see how far we’ve come. I play a lot of characters who are less enlightened than I am. It’s a work of art, not of politics. When we start cherrypicking behaviours that were unacceptable then we’re starting to get into trouble.” Others have criticised the central romance as predatory, paedophilic even, on account of the age gap. So, did he set it 50 years ago to set some distance? Anderson hmms. Actually, he tried to talk himself out of setting another movie back then. The transfer of other elements jarred. Gary’s ambition, mostly. “He wouldn’t be selling water beds; would he be in advertising? Doing YouTube or reviews on TikTok? These things seemed unappealing to me and not very cinematic.” He pauses, question unanswered. “I’d have to think longer and harder. Does the 70s setting soften the blow? For sure, if you look back at something, it’s another time. Perhaps it places it just out of reach. But it would still be exactly the same dynamic, which is a classic device of any screwball comedy: two people bound to each other with an impossible obstacle.” Has he ever thought about what it would be like gender-flipped? “I don’t want to spend too much time thinking about that. What would the point be in that exercise? What would it look like? I wonder.” Less funny? “Probably. It’s nice to know what the parameters are in a relationship because then you can get on with the business of the story. You can get on with all the stuff that concerns you. All the sticky stuff.” Haim adds backup. No, it didn’t concern her. “We were very delicate with everything.” It’s hard to argue. The lust is all Gary’s; eyeing up Alana as she sleeps, livid she won’t show him her breasts. It’s a film of subtle leg brushes, fingers touching, sweetness and running. Sure, it’s the 70s, but it’s miles more Love Story than Deep Throat. “You see all these sort of pre-Hays Code films from the 30s,” says Anderson, “and they are meant to be so naughty. And they are touching a little bit closer to something, but they are still well-mannered because they know what’s right and what’s not.” Maybe one day he’ll work it out too. Maybe one day he’ll be old enough. So far, though, he sighs, not unhappily, ageing is “just swimming out to sea. You think you’re going to get to this other shore that will magically have all the answers. It turns out you’re just swimming further away from the shoreline and seeing it disappear behind you. And you wonder, wow! Pretty far out here. I’m pretty far out on life’s limb.” So how do you stay afloat? “Keep treading water! Look for somebody else to hold on to.” When did he last think he was drowning? “This morning! No. No, I’m not one who thinks he’s drowning. I’m more someone who thinks: enough with the water already.” • Licorice Pizza will be in UK cinemas on 1 January 2022Since Brexit, saying you represent the people against the establishment has been one of the most effective moves in British politics. In a country with little respect for politicians but still some reverence for voters, however erratic or flimsily based their opinions, invoking the people is one of the few reliable ways to achieve political momentum. Despite the fact that in parliament, the press and much of business the Conservatives and their allies are the establishment – and have been since at least 2010 – this populist rhetoric has mostly been used by the right. However out of touch and contemptuous of democracy his government is in practice, Boris Johnson claims to speak for the people at every opportunity. In recent years Labour has rarely dared to do likewise, except during the most energised moments of Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership, such as his campaigning “for the many” in the 2017 election. The party has been too lacking in confidence, too inward-looking – and simply too unpopular – to argue that its views and those of the country are in harmony. Unlike the Conservatives, Labour rarely assumes that its periods of success represent British politics in its natural state. So the fact that this month Keir Starmer has started talking about “the national interest” and “the British people”, and trying to associate his party with them, feels significant. It suggests that after more than 18 months of cautious and defensive leadership – much of it taken up with sidelining colleagues and policies supposedly too radical for the public – Starmer finally believes that Labour can speak for the nation without being ridiculed. “We are a patriotic party,” he declared in a TV broadcast supporting the Covid booster campaign, sitting behind a large, would-be prime ministerial desk with a union flag beside him. “The Labour party that I lead will always act in Britain’s best interests.” The clear implication – left unspoken because this was a broadcast officially about public health – was that the Conservatives have much less honourable, more partisan motives. With Boris Johnson in Downing Street, this has become a pretty easy argument to make. So blatantly have his policies been designed to reward friends and punish enemies that even some voters who once tolerated, or even admired, his shameless brand of Conservatism have become repelled. Unlike previous slumps in support for his government, which mainly benefited the Liberal Democrats, many of these Tory voters now appear to be switching to Labour. For the first time under Starmer, this month Labour has achieved large enough leads over the Tories in the polls for a narrow win at the next election – or a hung parliament leading to a Labour-led coalition – to be more than a remote possibility. In the past, a Labour leader adopting expansive patriotic language has sometimes been a sign of an imminent electoral breakthrough. During a campaign broadcast before the party’s great victory at the 1945 election, Clement Attlee argued that, unlike the Tories, Labour represented “a good cross-section of the nation”: both rural and urban Britons, employers and employees. Labour’s share of the vote at that general election and the next two was not far short of 50%: huge by today’s standards, and large enough to justify Attlee’s claim. During the early years of Tony Blair’s leadership, Labour was almost as popular, and he often talked about “the people” reverently but also a little proprietorially – as if only he and his party understood or could carry out their wishes. Like Attlee, Blair led a government whose initial breadth of support right across England, Scotland and Wales was on a scale that makes Johnson’s supposedly decisive electoral mandate in 2019 look narrow. One way to interpret Starmer’s still rather opaque leadership is as an attempt to apply the methods of the Blair and Attlee eras to today’s world. Starmer’s stern, rather formal manner, austere suits and haircut, and talk of a “shared national duty” all suggest a Labour politician from the 1940s. Meanwhile his recruitment of New Labour veterans such as Yvette Cooper and Deborah Mattinson and his bash-the-left approach to party management imply that Starmer still has faith in the controlling centrist politics of the 00s. Given that these are the only two periods when Labour has achieved lasting dominance (Harold Wilson’s election wins in the 1960s and 1970s were much less decisive), taking Blair and Attlee as role models seems reasonable, on the face of it. The fact that both led relatively competent governments with substantial domestic achievements – at least until they got involved in too many foreign wars – is also likely to appeal to Starmer. If he becomes prime minister, in what will probably be tough circumstances, he will be desperate to prove to voters that chaotic 21st-century government is a purely Conservative phenomenon. But there is also a danger for Starmer in trying to sound and act like Blair and Attlee. It risks drawing attention to the great difference in strength between their political positions as Labour leaders and his. Only a few months ago, much of the talk at the Labour conference was about who was going to replace Starmer, after months of bad election results and personal ratings, bodged Labour reorganisations and barely noticed policy launches. Inside as well as outside the party, Starmer was widely written off as a wooden and uncharismatic figure, unsuited to top-level politics: “a plodder”, as someone who has had decades of dealings with Labour put it to me. Starmer’s performance has improved a little since. He is more aggressive in his attacks on the Conservatives, using franker words such as “corruption” and allowing flashes of anger to enliven his usually too controlled courtroom manner. And he seems more confident, as if relieved that his painstakingly assembled case against the government is finally being heard. Yet most of his limitations as a politician have not gone away. The improvement in Labour’s position is not because he is doing his job much better, but because the government is doing its even worse. And when he declares that only his party can serve “the people” and “the national interest”, he echoes not only Blair and Attlee but also other, less successful Labour leaders, such as Neil Kinnock, who often seemed to assert their patriotism not from a position of strength but of weakness: in a vain attempt to convince the Tory press and sceptical voters that Labour was respectable and not an alien threat. A more assured and rooted party – which was able to explain why Britain would benefit from regular rather than occasional left-of-centre governments – would not have to perpetually prove its right to exist. Will Starmer end up as one of Labour’s patriotic failures? The jury is still out. Andy Beckett is a Guardian columnistMeeting legal limits for air pollution can seem impossibly difficult but understanding the links between our environmental problems, and tackling them together, can simplify attempts to find solutions. For example, our polluted roads and rivers are connected by runoff from street drains, and the road traffic that pollutes our air also produces noise that disturbs our peace. Tyre fragments and the plastic litter ground up by traffic on our streets ends up in our air and oceans. Investing in local shops and services can help us swap motorised traffic for walking and cycling, improve neighbourhoods, help the climate crisis and air pollution, as well as improve our health through daily exercise. As for net zero, diesel cars and wood burning have been serious mistakes for air pollution and are not helping our climate. Speaking to the Conservative Environment Network in December, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs minister Jo Churchill called for cross-government and cross-society action to tackle air pollution. While initiatives such as the UK Clean Air Programme try to bridge research boundaries, it is difficult for researchers, civil servants and local government to join together our environmental problems without a strategic framework. It is 10 years since the abolition of the independent royal commission on environmental pollution. Set up in 1970, it had a wide remit to investigate national and international pollution issues and to warn of future dangers. Its reports were heavily solutions-based and had direct impact on government policy. The commission’s 1983 report on lead in petrol was immediately followed by changes in UK law, as was its 1989 report on genetically modified organisms. The commission’s recommendation for a long-term CO2 reduction target was accepted by government in 2000 and the EU-wide environmental regulation of polluting industries and waste stems from its recommendations. Noel Nelson, part of the civil service team that worked with the commission, said: “Although members were all experts in their own fields, the best solutions were seldom found in any one discipline.” Today, the absence of an independent, strategic view of environmental evidence leaves us vulnerable to missed opportunities. Do we need a new royal commission? Prof Sir Stephen Holgate, a former commission member, said: “Since the dissolution of the commission in 2011, the number and complexity of environmental challenges in our changing world has greatly increased. Examples include: the transition to zero carbon, changing environment and zoonotic infectious disease, addressing water pollution, citizen science to monitor and improve the environment and how to harness and work with the environment to improve health and wellbeing. These require imaginative analysis leading to multiple solutions-based outcomes.”Consumers splashed out on online shopping, takeaways, home improvements and streaming subscriptions in 2021, as ongoing Covid restrictions limited where people could spend their money. Households were more willing to splash their cash in 2021, and spending during the year was almost 6% higher than in 2019, according to a review of transactions by Barclaycard. While non-essential shops remained closed at the start of the year, consumers spent their money online instead. Online retail spending surged by almost 88% in March 2021, compared with 2019, when it accounted for over half (52%) of all retail spend. Spending on essential items rose by 11% over the 12 months, largely driven by supermarket shopping, which grew by more than 17%, as restaurants, cafes, pubs and other hospitality venues remained closed for several months of the year. Spending on takeaways and fast food climbed by 62%. Consumers also spent considerably more on home entertainment, including on digital content and subscriptions, which rose by 47%, and electronics, which saw a 10% uplift in spending. Online grocery shopping, a trend which looks set to continue beyond the pandemic, surged by over 97% during the year. The highest increase of the year in online grocery spending came in March, when it climbed by almost 120%, as many consumers relied on deliveries from food retailers. While many locked-down households turned their attention to home improvements during 2021, some also added an extra member in the form of a pet, boosting spending at vets and pet retailers, which was almost a third (29%) higher than in 2019. When Covid restrictions were eased during the spring, many cooped-up consumers chose to go on holiday, although many of those remained in the UK, amid continued restrictions on international travel. Barclaycard, which reports seeing around half of the nation’s debit and credit card transactions, said spending on hotels, resorts and accommodation grew for the first time since the start of the pandemic in June 2021, reaching a peak of a nearly 16% increase in spending in August. The outlook for consumer spending over the coming year remains uncertain amid rising Covid cases, according to Jose Carvalho, head of consumer products at Barclaycard. “As we look ahead to 2022, the economy will face fresh challenges from rising household bills, inflation, and uncertainty about the new Covid variant,” Carvalho said. “Yet, as we’ve seen over the last two years, consumers and businesses are capable of adapting to and overcoming immense hardship and adversity”. As the UK enters the third year of the pandemic, spending on holidays is forecast to be a top priority for 2022, according to new research from Goldman Sachs’ online bank Marcus. It found over a third (34%) of consumers were planning to spend more on trips in the coming year, up from 22% in 2021, while 30% of those surveyed said they expected to spend less on takeaways.“I said: wouldn’t it be a good idea to get people from all round the world to crochet or knit some Roman-themed bunting,” says Lynne Barber, recalling her pitch to organisers of a year-long festival celebrating Hadrian’s Wall. “They said: ‘That’s fantastic! Will you organise it?’” Barber, an undertaker, is smiling as she talks about the rather daunting challenge ahead of her. The bunting may not end up stretching all the 73 miles (118km) of the wall, but she is hopeful of managing to get a flag for every year that it has existed. Hers is one of a blizzard of newly announced projects planned for the Hadrian’s Wall 1900 festival, a year-long jamboree marking the anniversary of the Roman empire’s north-west frontier, built from what is now Wallsend on the Tyne to Bowness-on-Solway in Cumbria. Because there are so many aspects to the wall – history, archaeology, nature, walking – the planned exhibitions, arts events, concerts and more are strikingly diverse. Bill Griffiths, who is chair of the 1900 festival, says an early decision was made: “Let’s not do what we’ve done before. Let’s not make it about museums. Let’s make it about people and the communities on Hadrian’s Wall. It is their wall, it is not the preserve of curators.” Griffiths says there is a romance and magic to the wall, and while it may be 1,900 years old, there is still much to learn. “There are new discoveries all of the time. Every time you think it’s fixed, something shifts. We only realised it was Hadrian’s Wall just under 200 years ago.” Before that, Griffiths says, it was thought that Severus, the African emperor of Rome, built the wall. Another, as yet unresolved, debate is whether the wall had a walkway on top of it. “There is no proof,” says Griffiths. “I’m a believer in it having a wall walk, but I have to say ‘believer’ … there is no hard evidence.” If the wall isn’t interesting enough then you have Hadrian himself. Tactically astute, he is seen as a consolidating emperor, with one of his first acts being to withdraw troops from Iraq. He is also widely acknowledged as a gay emperor; a man devastated by the death of a beautiful Greek boy called Antinous. Griffiths, who fell in love with Roman history thanks to the Asterix comics, says his passion is learning how the Roman army operated, how it had garrison units on the wall whose soldiers came from as far as Africa, Syria, Romania and Belgium. “The wall is endlessly fascinating; the trick is to make it appealing to the public,” he says. “I find it fascinating, I can’t imagine others won’t, but some don’t. That’s not because it’s boring, it’s because we haven’t found the right stories to engross people with.” The festival team put out an open call for people and organisations to submit ideas and have so far received 170 proposals. The idea is that the festival will be able to help with fundraising, marketing and sustainability, “but you’re responsible for your events,” says Griffiths. It has to be that way because the core festival team is a small one, each of them with day jobs. In Griffiths’ case he remains head of programmes and collections at Tyne and Wear museums. The events announced include a Hadrian’s Wall manga novel, an exhibition at Segedunum Roman fort and museum exploring who built the wall and how, and a new play in village halls by On the Move theatre set in AD121. And then there is the bunting challenge conceived by Barber, who lives in South Shields, home to the Arbeia Roman fort, which guarded the entrance to the Tyne and served as a supply centre for the thousands of troops stationed on the wall. Barber took up crochet 18 years ago after stopping smoking and has never looked back. “Hadrian’s Wall is famous around the world so I’m hoping people from lots of countries will send flags in,” she says. “I think people do get inspired by the wall. It will be nice to see where they all come from.” Barber has made simple, free Roman numeral and Roman shield patterns that people will be able to download, and is being helped with the project by the Vindolanda Charitable Trust. It’s early days, but the confirmed crochet fan Tom Daley is on the list of dream contributors. The festival will begin on Hadrian’s birthday, 24 January, and run until the end of the Roman festival of Saturnalia on 23 December.Licorice Pizza Two newcomers become glorious movie stars in this comedy from Paul Thomas Anderson, set in 1970s Los Angeles. Cooper Hoffman (son of the late Philip Seymour Hoffman) is a fast-talking high-school kid with the nerve to start hitting on a 25-year-old woman – played by Alana Haim (of the pop band Haim), who has Barbra Streisand’s charisma and beauty. Their strange semi-platonic love affair plays out against this kid’s floundering dual careers as a child actor and waterbed salesman. Gorgeously made, with wonderful cameos from Bradley Cooper and Sean Penn. • Released in the UK on 1 January A Hero The title couldn’t be more ironic. This subtle film from Iranian auteur Asghar Farhadi is about slippery Rahim (Amir Jadidi), imprisoned for debt and allowed out of prison on a weekend pass. His girlfriend has found some apparently valuable gold coins in the street: Rahim plans to sell them and give the money to his creditor to cancel his sentence. But when they turn out to be worth much less than he thought, Rahim cooks up an alternative scam to impress a charitable foundation: pretend he was always going to hand the coins back to their owner. • 7 January Cow Audiences will experience a kind of agribusiness pastoral in this immersive documentary from Andrea Arnold, who takes us up close and personal with cows on a farm as they moo and trot around and give birth and stare with profoundly mysterious placidity into the camera. Arnold gets alongside her bovine stars as they give birth, and we don’t see any humans until right at the very end, when we must confront the cows’ awful destiny at the hands of the human carnivores. There is great poignancy and intimacy here. • 14 January Memoria The artist and Palme d’Or-winning film-maker Apichatpong Weerasethakul gives us his first movie from outside Thailand: a strange, exalted, visionary work. Tilda Swinton stars as a British expat in Colombia plagued by hallucinatory sounds. Her search for their meaning leads her to an unearthly epiphany. Weerasethakul is a director concerned with the unsolved and unspoken mysteries of existence. Memoria is a beautiful and enigmatic picture – cinema that decelerates your pulse. • 14 January Belfast There’s such terrific warmth and tenderness to Kenneth Branagh’s movie about the Belfast of his childhood: spryly written, beautifully acted, and shot in a lustrous monochrome. This is a film consciously without the anger and despair generally considered indispensable for movies about the Troubles. Instead, we get generosity and wit. Jamie Dornan plays a Protestant carpenter who lives with his old mum and dad (Ciarán Hinds and Judi Dench), his wife (Caitriona Balfe) and sons (Jude Hill and Lewis McAskie). As the political situation gets worse, he must figure out how and when to leave Belfast. • 21 January Nightmare Alley Guillermo Del Toro gives his rich and exotic imagination full rein in this supercharged noir, a new version of the pulp shocker by William Lindsay Gresham, first filmed by Edmund Goulding in 1947 with Tyrone Power in the sleazy lead role. Now it’s Bradley Cooper playing Stan, a criminal who needs to vanish into the underground and gets a job with a travelling troupe of carnies and con-men. The film shows us how his whole life is a fascinatingly tacky illusion heading for disaster. • 21 January Parallel Mothers The energy and creativity of Pedro Almodóvar continues to be a marvel. This new film is a baby-swap melodrama – at least on the surface. Penélope Cruz plays Janis, pregnant and determined to go it alone as a single mum; she befriends teen Ana (Milena Smit) who has the same idea, though without Janis’s resources. Their babies get accidentally mixed up; their lives are intertwined; nature, nurture and ancestral burdens combine as a subplot tackles Spanish trauma over the civil war. • 28 January The Eyes of Tammy Faye Jessica Chastain gives it her very considerable all in this biopic of televangelist Tammy Faye Bakker, the devoted wife of notorious fellow preacher, huckster and fraudster Jim Bakker. She learned her commercial vocation in the Lord from him and was utterly committed to their dual lifestyles of righteousness and wealth. But Tammy was also sincere and thoughtful in her own way, and was committed to LGBTQ+ rights in a style that the Christian right did not espouse. • 4 February The Souvenir: Part II One of Britain’s pre-eminent new film-makers has elevated her reputation still further with the second part of her luminous autobiographical movie: a self-portrait of the artist as a young woman. Writer-director Joanna Hogg fictionalises herself as the insouciantly well-off film student Julie, played by Honor Swinton Byrne, now recovering from her destructive amour fou with the complicated man called Anthony we saw in the first film. Now she is planning to alchemise that pain into a movie. • 4 February Lingui, the Sacred Bonds African cinema is represented this year by the great Chadian director Mahamat-Saleh Haroun, part of his continent’s great quietist, walking-pace tradition of film-making. Lingui is Chadian for “sacred bonds” – between man and woman, mother and child. These are tested when Amina, a woman who has to pretend her husband is dead to avoid scandal, finds that her teen daughter is pregnant and in the same situation that she was in not so very long ago. • 4 February Death on the Nile When Kenneth Branagh had an enormous hit with his 2017 version of Murder on the Orient Express, starring himself as the Belgian sleuth Poirot, British cinema re-learned a great truth: Agatha Christie is gigantic box-office. So now Branagh has done the same thing with Death on the Nile (which, like MOTOE, was a 70s movie hit), returning as Poirot and leading an all-star cast including Gal Gadot, Annette Bening, Sophie Okonedo and Armie Hammer. • 11 February The Real Charlie Chaplin Festival audiences have been thrilled by this in-depth documentary, which returns to the eternally fascinating subject of Charlie Chaplin, the movie legend and former workhouse inmate whom Dickens would have loved and understood. He was the cinema genius who became the world’s first and arguably most pervasive global celebrity in an era when silent cinema was understood by everyone. But during the second world war, he was punished by the US government for his outspoken leftist politics, and became an exile in Europe. • 18 February The Duke Here is the last movie from the late Roger Michell, the director who died in September – and it could be his masterpiece: a true-crime comedy of British manners about a politically motivated art theft in 1960s Britain, which tweaked the nose of the pompous establishment. Jim Broadbent plays plain-speaking northern socialist and chancer Kempton Bunton and Helen Mirren is his wife, Dorothy. Kempton is outraged when public money is spent on saving Goya’s Duke of Wellington portrait for the nation when it could have been spent on needy working people. So he steals it from the National Gallery, a chaotic caper which electrified the country. • 25 February The Batman The definite article was first appended to Batman’s name in the Christopher Nolan era as an indicator of something thrillingly primitive and elemental. Now it’s actually going in the title. Robert Pattinson wears the pointy-eared mask. Has he been bulking up in the gym to match Christian Bale’s presence? Or will this be a slighter, wirier Batman? At all events, he faces the giggling conundrum-creator of Gotham City, the Riddler, played by Paul Dano. Meanwhile, the Penguin is an unrecognisable Colin Farrell. • 4 March Paris, 13th District Jacques Audiard’s freewheeling ensemble picture about Parisians in love – and set in the treizième – deserved more awards in Cannes than it actually got. It’s adapted from American stories by the graphic artist Adrian Tomine, transplanted to France. A young woman living rent-free in her dementia-stricken grandma’s flat has a tricky relationship with her roommate-with-benefits, who in turn has a tumultuous row with his kid sister over her plan to be a standup comic. Another young woman is mistaken for an online sex worker, and turns to the real thing for help. The zinging energy of this film is a marvel. • 4 March Ali &amp; Ava Here’s a social-realist love story from director Clio Barnard, set in Bradford, which is being compared to Ken Loach’s Ae Fond Kiss. Adeel Akhtar plays a likable, happy-go-lucky South Asian guy called Ali, who is secretly depressed at the end of his marriage. Then he runs into Ava, a white woman from an Irish background, recently widowed, whose late husband was an abusive bully. She’s a sweet-natured soul looking for human warmth, and she and Ali fall for each other. The film is an essay in acceptance and love. • 4 March The Worst Person in the World The year’s best romantic comedy comes from the most unexpected source. Norwegian director Joachim Trier is known for his shocking and challenging dramas; now he has created a lovely relationship comedy in the tradition of Nora Ephron and David Nicholls. Renate Reinsve plays the heroine, Julie, and the movie breaks down her troubled romantic history. She hooks up with a rebellious graphic artist, played by Anders Danielsen Lie, and then cheats on him with a humble shop assistant. It’s a sweet and funny film that insists on the importance of the romcom questions: who should you fall in love with? Who is the one? • 25 March Compartment No 6 There’s a great tradition of train journeys on film and this is a gem. Finnish director Juho Kuosmanen has created a charming 90s-set love story from unpromising elements. Laura is a sweet-natured young Finnish student of archaeology, in retreat from a stagnant affair with her professor, who embarks on an epic rail journey from Moscow to freezing Murmansk to view some mysterious rock drawings, thousands of years old. And in compartment No 6, she meets boorish, drunken, obnoxious Vadim, who starts out looking like a tough guy and ends up being the sensitive soul that she needs. • 1 April Everything Went Fine François Ozon brings us a beautifully crafted example of French cinema: an affecting but unsentimental film about assisted dying. Veteran character actor André Dussollier plays André, a wealthy and well-connected industrialist who is suddenly reduced to a shadow of himself after suffering a stroke. His daughter Manue, excellently played by Sophie Marceau, has difficult memories of his cruelty during her childhood and even fantasised about killing him. So it is with mixed feelings that she receives the news he wants her to organise his euthanasia in Switzerland. • 22 April Operation Mincemeat One of the most extraordinary stories of the second world war is retold, adapted from the bestseller by Ben Macintyre. To conceal the Allied plan to invade Sicily in 1943, British intelligence officers took the body of a dead homeless man, dressed him up in a captain’s uniform and placed on him bogus documents detailing non-existent plans to invade via Greece and Sardinia. Then they allowed the body to wash up on the Spanish coast, confident it would be passed on to the Nazis, who would assume pure chance had given them their enemies’ secret plans. Colin Firth and Matthew Macfadyen star. • 22 April Benedetta Paul Verhoeven is a director whose wildly over-the-top creations have long been subject to revisionist cinephile praise, but there has been a division of opinion over this new nunsploitation romp – based on the true story of a 17th-century French abbess, Benedetta (played by the estimable Virginie Efira), who was stripped of her authority because of her relationship with a fellow nun. There is much raunchiness here. Is it Showgirls in wimples? Kinda. For Verhoeven partisans, who insist the mockers and the nay-sayers just don’t get it, this is the whole point. • 22 April Top Gun: Maverick Still speedy, still needy, still eerily boyish, Captain Pete “Maverick” Mitchell returns in this present-day sequel to Top Gun. The US navy airman played by Tom Cruise could be piloting a desk by now, but he prefers to be a badass warrior of the skies. Jennifer Connelly plays Maverick’s love interest, a mere nine years Cruise’s junior. Miles Teller plays Rooster Bradshaw, the son of Goose Bradshaw from the first film, who was played by Anthony Edwards. Could it be that this film will include the homoeroticism famously imagined by Top Gun superfans Roger Avary and Quentin Tarantino? Probably not. • 27 May Elvis Tom Hanks plays Colonel Tom Parker, the notoriously super-controlling manager of Elvis Presley, in this new biopic of Elvis directed and co-written by Baz Luhrmann – and we can expect some storytelling fireworks from this high-energy film-maker. Austin Butler (who was the creepy Manson follower Tex in Quentin Tarantino’s Once Upon a Time in Hollywood) plays Elvis – though it is not yet clear if he will be doing his own singing. • 24 June Nitram The chilling Port Arthur massacre of 1996 was one of the worst examples of mass murder in Australian history, and now director Justin Kurzel has made this movie about the stranger-than-fiction life-story of the killer, Martin Bryant, starting with the nasty nickname he acquired at school: “Nitram” – “Martin” spelled backwards. Having been let down by his parents, Bryant was bizarrely befriended and taken in by a wealthy and reclusive heiress (played by Essie Davis), who put him in her will before dying in questionable circumstances – making Bryant rich enough to indulge his passion for guns. • 15 July Mission: Impossible 7 The non-appearing No Time to Die achieved a kind of mythic status during the lockdown. Something of the sort has also happened to Mission Impossible: 7, the long-awaited latest in the action-adventure series with Tom Cruise as daredevil Ethan Hunt – chiefly because of an illicit audio recording that surfaced in December 2020, in which an extremely stressed Cruise can be heard berating the UK crew for not observing social-distancing rules. Can anything in the film be as exciting as that? We must hope so. • 30 September UK release dates may changePicks of the week Reclaimed &amp; Rewritten A century after the Tulsa massacre, gal-dem shines a spotlight on the atrocity that destroyed the thriving black community of Greenwood. Host Clarkisha Kent has many a sharp intake of breath as she hears about how the district known as Black Wall Street wasn’t the utopian community it was meant to be. As the six-part podcast unfolds, it doesn’t hold back with uneasy truths – but it is about time they were told. Hannah Verdier Strippers in the Attic In series one, this podcast hosted by two strip club workers was a thoughtful, smart exploration of sex work which bubbled over with a vivacious hilarity. In season two, nothing seems to have changed, opening with a funny and very frank interview with Skins actor Megan Prescott, who followed up her TV role by trying her hand at stripping. Alexi Duggins The Famous Sloping Pitch Is football getting “a little bit more shit”? Nick Hancock and Chris England think so, hence this banter-packed podcast which offers a comic – and considered – take on the week’s news in the beautiful game. Its interviews with celebrity football fans are also impressively starry. Think Gary Lineker, Adrian Chiles and Jo Brand. AD We Stay Looking Insecure’s spin-off podcast Looking for LaToya spoofed true crime to the max and now its star investigative reporter Rose Cranberry is back with more cases. With her quota of six Black stories per year, Cranberry had better work fast to solve those mysteries, exposing the media and justice system’s inbuilt racism as she goes. HV You’re Not My Mum Stepmums have long had a bad rep – just ask Cinderella and Sleeping Beauty. But while it’s true that navigating stepfamily life isn’t always a fairytale, the joys of it need to be celebrated, too. In this candid new series, Katie Harrison reassuringly talks from a place of experience, while also speaking with experts. Hollie Richardson Producer pick: Griefcast with Jimmy Carr Chosen by Danielle Stephens Often, when I listen to Griefcast, I’m hearing a celebrity that I know and love talk about someone close to them – who I know nothing about. But when Jimmy Carr recently spoke to Cariad Lloyd in her latest series of the podcast, the pair spent the first part of the show talking about Sean Lock, the comedian who died of cancer in August. Two comedians talking about a fellow comedian is bound to produce some laughs, but it was the compassion – and slight regret in Jimmy’s voice – that made it a lovely tribute. More so than most of Lloyd’s guests, the conversation between her and Carr simply celebrates the ability to talk about grief, making it a must-listen for those who don’t have that opportunity in their day-to-day lives. Talking points Fans of those bits in podcasts where they ask you to leave them a review: rejoice! They’re about to get slightly longer, as Spotify has announced that they’re joining Apple in letting users rate pods out of five. Why not try: Strangeland | Here Lies Me Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureIt was New Year’s Eve, and we were in an unheated stone hut. Adam and I had hit it off at a silent meditation retreat in Minneapolis, and I’d invited him to spend Christmas break with me in India. At the time, ringing in 2018 in a little village framed by the granite formations and snow-streaked peaks of the Himalayas had seemed like a fairytale. But that night the mercury dipped so low that my vital organs muttered “system failure” and powered down. I buried myself under quilts with concrete-level cotton padding. “It’s 7pm,” Adam protested. I moulded my frozen lips into a passable version of “goodnight” and passed out. I woke up feeling strangely disoriented, like I’d been asleep for a hundred years. “Adam?” I said. No answer. I felt along the bed. No Adam. For a second, I panicked. Had I really pulled a Sleeping Beauty? How long had I been out? I groped for my phone. It was 11.20pm. “Where are you?” I texted. I poked my head out of the door of the hut. “Adam?” I called out into the night. Prayer flags snapped in the wind. I rang his phone, feeling forlorn. No answer. My redheaded Prince Charming was seriously MIA. Was he taking a walk? I’d warned him about the stray dogs here – docile by day, feral at night. A week ago, I’d seen men wash blood off the road where the beasts had attacked a tourist. Last year, a friend had been bitten in the calf. Was Adam in an alley somewhere, rabid dogs feeding on his face? Did I need to go and rescue him? I really don’t want to do this, I thought, as I shoved on my coat, grabbed a stick and opened the gate. You’d better be dying. I started a slow sideways creep down the hill, my heart pounding drumbeats into my ears, my eyes darting left and right for murderous dogs. To my relief, I saw none. Maybe they were having a New Year’s Eve celebration. Or maybe they were busy feasting … on Adam. I shook the image out of my head, picked up the pace and continued walking. Just then, a low growl sounded at my back. I turned. Six yellow eyes glinted from a few feet away. I froze. Stupid, stupid, I thought. Now I’m dog chowder, too. Tentatively, I wagged the stick at them. They growled louder. If they lunge at me, I thought, I’ll just whirl my stick Crouching Tiger style and send them flying. Eh, who was I kidding? The blood they’d clean from the pavement would 100% be mine. Wasn’t the prince supposed to rescue the princess? Why was I the one facing the hounds of hell alone? The phone pinged. It was Adam. “Hey sweetie,” he wrote. “I’m at the cafe. They’re having a new year party!” “You WHAT?” I screamed. “You inconsiderate jerk!” The dogs backed away. “I thought you were dead!” The dogs turned and fled. “He’s gonna wish he’d met the dogs instead,” I muttered as I stalked down the road. I entered the cafe, which glowed with candlelight. People were laughing and chattering around a long table, decorated with boughs of juniper and plates of chocolate cake. The smells of cider and champagne warmed the room. Adam looked up, his face flushed. “Hey, baby, you came,” he said. “Don’t talk to me,” I said, flinging myself into a chair. “I hate you more than life itself.” “But why?” He laughed, spooning molten lava cake into my mouth. “I didn’t want to wake you.” “Are you familiar with the concept of leaving a note?” I glared at him. Already, though, my anger was waning. I was getting warmer. There was chocolate. I was not missing any limbs. And I had been pretty brave, all things considered. The countdown began. “Happy new year!” we yelled. Bangs filled the air as we pulled crackers, and streamers flew everywhere. The dogs outside howled. “To Prince Charming,” I toasted. As Adam’s eyes lit up, I decided not to ruin the moment by telling him I’d meant me. And, although this fairytale romance didn’t make it past spring, I was forever grateful to realise that I didn’t need a white knight to slay my dragons.The Big New Years &amp; Years Eve Party 11.25pm, BBC One It’s time to say “so long” (or “good riddance”) to 2021. Years &amp; Years singer Olly Alexander, who helped a lot of us ease into this year with It’s a Sin, takes the hosting reins for an hour. Kylie Minogue and Pet Shop Boys help out with the music, and there is a pause for the countdown to midnight. Maybe – just maybe – we’re all about to step into a better year. Hollie Richardson Top of the Pops New Year Special 4.15pm, BBC One Clara Amfo and Jordan North co-host a special TOTP, with the sounds of Sam Fender, Lola Young and Mabel, plus clips from the past 12 months from artists including Billie Eilish and Arlo Parks. Ali Catterall The Last Leg of the Year 9pm, Channel 4 Adam Hills, Alex Brooker and Josh Widdicombe host a two-hour bonanza of their usual end-of-week show to take a look back at the highs and lows of what has been a year to forget, with guests including Joe Wilkinson, Ivo Graham, Nish Kumar and Vick Hope. House band Alex Horne and the Horne Section provide the live tunes. HR Have I Got 2021 News for You 9.30pm, BBC One A New Year’s Eve special in which Ian Hislop, Paul Merton and assorted guests see off the laugh riot that was 2021 in style. But where to begin? With revolting Trumpists? Vaccine sceptics? Racist football fans? Racist politicians? With the proviso that moaning about 2021 will be like shooting fish in a barrel, this should be entertaining. Phil Harrison The Graham Norton New Year’s Eve Show 10.20pm, BBC One Chatshow host Norton never fails to impress with his guestlist on NYE. Claire Foy, Peter Dinklage, Michael Sheen, Cush Jumbo, Joe Lycett and Jessica Chastain (phew!) provide the anecdotes. The Divine Comedy provide some live music, while the Big Red Chair goes global. HR Jools’ Annual Hootenanny 11.25pm, BBC Two It’s Jools and his annual shindig, which might be the closest many of us get to a party this year. Ed Sheeran performs, while Lulu indulges in a few of her greatest hits. One of 2021’s breakout stars, Joy Crookes, also stops by. Henry Wong Film choices The Lost Daughter (Maggie Gyllenhaal, 2021), Netflix Maggie Gyllenhaal’s adaptation of Elena Ferrante’s novel is a stark exploration of motherhood – its pleasures and burdens, plus the general expectation that every woman should have parental feelings. All this comes out through the story of Leda (the peerless Olivia Colman) who is on holiday alone at a Greek seaside village. The appearance of Dakota Johnson’s unhappy young mum forces memories of Leda’s choices into the present (Jessie Buckley plays Leda in flashbacks) and reawakens her pain. Simon Wardell Coco (Lee Unkrich, 2017) 2.40pm, BBC One Mexico’s annual Day of the Dead celebrations provide fruitful subject matter for Pixar’s blend of joy and nous in this entertaining 2017 animated fantasy. Aspiring young musician Miguel is trying to find out more about his supposed great-great-grandfather (father to his beloved relative Coco) but after a magical trick he finds himself in the world of the dead. It’s a race against time to find his ancestor before he is trapped there for ever. For a story about living with death, Lee Unkrich’s film is a remarkably cheery experience, with a soundtrack of fantastic Latin tunes. SW When Harry Met Sally (Rob Reiner, 1989), 10.40pm, BBC Four Tonight’s scheduling of Rob Reiner’s 1989 romcom is no accident – its climactic scene (no spoilers) should occur around the time real-world folk are singing in the new year. Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan do full justice to Nora Ephron’s scintillating script, as two New Yorkers in their 20s who fall in and out of friendship over several years, despite being clearly meant for each other. Bruno Kirby and Carrie Fisher as their respective best mates offer their views on love, as do a series of fictional talking-head couples recalling how they met. SWFourteen of author Harlan Coben’s 31 novels, we are told, are due to be adapted for Netflix. Your mileage may vary, of course, but as I have a barely satiable appetite for bingeable thrillers, I see this as more promise than threat. Last year we had The Stranger, an adaptation of Coben’s 2015 bestseller, which leapt from cliffhanger to cliffhanger to tell the increasingly baroque-slash-demented tale of a husband (Richard Armitage) who discovers from a mysterious stranger that his wife faked her pregnancy and miscarriage before she disappeared. Dum-dum-DAH. Another is now here and Stay Close promises more of almost exactly the same – including Richard Armitage, who is now seedy photographer Ray and, by the end of the opening episode, about to become firmly tied into the main plot. This centres on Megan (Cush Jumbo), whose idyllic life, loving family and perfect kitchen are evidence that she is the keeper of a Secret Past that will soon rear its ugly head and threaten everything she holds dear. And so it proves. Carlton Flynn, a young man in a distinctive necklace, goes missing from about the same place as another man, Stewart Green, did 17 years ago to the day. The latter is the only case Detective Broome (James Nesbitt) has ever failed to solve. He assuaged the pain by sleeping with Stewart’s mum, which may or may not become relevant later (though I feel it’s only fair to point out that in Cobenworld, most things do).. Megan gets home after a night out to find a card on her doorstep addressed to “Cassie”. Her old name! But how?! “Everybody’s findable these days,” the card sender tells her when they meet, which is apparently explanation enough. But who?! It’s Lorraine (Sarah Parish), one of the people left behind when Cassie fled her old life. But why?! Lorraine wants to warn her that Stewart, apparently the reason Cassie wished to flee said old life, is back. But he can’t be, gasps our heroine – “He’s dead!” It’s possible her certainty has something to do with the flashbacks she keeps having to a slashed and bloody presumed-corpse. Before she departs, Lorraine – who, by the way, works at the Vipers club where Carlton was last seen – gives her pal the plastic engagement ring pledged by a man whose heart she broke by leaving. Who could this be? Apropos of nothing, we turn to Ray again. He is mugged for his camera. But he has already uploaded his latest pictures to the cloud. He turns out to have inadvertently captured images of what might be Carlton’s final moments in the local woods (through which, if the flashbacks are anything to go by, Cassie herself fled). While he thinks about what that might mean, he flicks through some old photo albums. They are full of pictures of him with Cassie. But wait! There is still time for one last scene – of Megan’s oldest daughter lying on her bed and toying with a pendant round her neck. You’ll never guess whose it is. Dum-dum-DAH! See you for the next episode, plus the six after that – and there’s no point pretending otherwise.Indigenous health groups have lambasted national cabinet’s move to narrow the definition of a close contact as the “wrong decision”, amid concern over the possibility of outbreaks in remote communities with comparatively low vaccination rates. With some PCR testing sites overwhelmed and a widespread shortage of rapid antigen tests, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said on Thursday leaders had agreed to a change that will see fewer people required to get tested and those who are positive released from isolation sooner. In the Northern Territory, which announced a record 60 cases on Friday, the chief minister, Michael Gunner, said he would introduce an indoor mask mandate in response to the rising infections. There are 24 people in hospital and none in intensive care, figures released on Friday showed. However, Gunner also said the NT would liberalise its definition of a close contact to focus on “household contacts” rather than possible exposures at other sites. “We know New South Wales and the east coast are in a different situation to the territory, but a lot of decisions made by [national cabinet] will work for the territory and can be applied here,” he said. John Paterson, the chief executive of the Aboriginal Medical Services Alliance of the NT, told Guardian Australia the new close contact definition adopted by national cabinet was the “wrong decision”. “We’ve got a fast-moving virus that’s spreading itself through the entire community,” he said. “It’s a matter of if not when it gets into our most vulnerable, remote, sickest population in some of those communities throughout the Northern Territory, and throughout Australia I should add.” While vaccination rates across Australia are some of the highest in the world, Indigenous leaders fear there are still pockets where rates are lagging. In some regions of Queensland, the fully vaccinated rate among Aboriginal people over 15 years old was still hovering between 55% and 70% on 21 December, according to Department of Health data. Paterson also pointed to reports that the Palm Island Aboriginal shire council this week uploaded a grim image to social media of a white shipping container that it said had been received from Queensland Health. It said it was to be used as a temporary morgue if required and was the “starkest reminder yet that locals are at serious risk of illness and death from Covid”. “That’s frightening stuff,” Paterson said. “I’ve had people texting and sending messages that it’s (the easing of Covid guidelines) causing huge anxieties in remote communities.” Outside Darwin, the vaccination rate in the Northern Territory among Aboriginal people over 15 years old was also about 70%. Paterson said communities in the Barkly local government area, which includes Tennant Creek, which was recently in lockdown, and remote communities in the Alice Springs LGA were among those he was worried about. “What’s worked for us effectively in the Northern Territory … is we were able to identify where those close contacts were: the venues, the communities, airports, wherever,” Paterson said. “If you were on a plane and sitting two rows from a positive case you were alerted and had to go and get tested. That was a very effective public health strategy of informing the broader community of close contacts.” Gunner said on Friday that since the NT changed its border rules “the vast majority of transmission has been enclosed household contacts”. “It makes sense to direct our resources into household contacts,” he said. Gunner said people who test positive would need a negative PCR test on day six to be released from isolation. No such requirement now exists in NSW. Gunner said unvaccinated close contacts would also be required to isolate for 14 days, rather than seven. He also indicated that the government might consider other measures to flatten the curve, including lockdowns. “At this stage though we think the indoor mask mandate is a proportionate response,” he said. Vaccination levels among Indigenous Australians are well in excess of 80% in almost all regions of NSW and Victoria, which have so far been hardest hit by the virus. But they are much lower in South Australia, where cases are rising significantly, and only between 45% and 60% in most regions of Western Australia, which plans to keep its borders shut until next year. Dr Jason Agostino, a medical adviser to the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation, said before the close contact definition was changed there had already been twice the rate of infection for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, a reference to figures compiled in October. “What I’m fearing is that [Indigenous communities] will be hit hardest,” he told ABC Radio on Friday morning. “We have unacceptable levels of crowded housing and people with chronic diseases that start at a younger age, along with in particular in Queensland and South Australia, lower rates of vaccinations. “That mix means more infections as well as more severe disease. As we get out into our rural and remote communities, the capacity to deal with severe disease is really limited.”New South Wales daily cases have likely exceeded 25,000 a day, a month earlier than the government was predicting a fortnight ago, an acceleration likely to bring forward the strains on the health system, experts say. The NSW government reported 21,151 new cases in the 24 hours to 8pm on Thursday, almost a 90% jump on the previous day’s tally. Kerry Chant, the state’s chief health officer, said in a video briefing it’s “likely” the increase is higher than reported. In the 17 hours to 5pm on Friday, NSW had counted more than 11,000 cases with the total expected to top 20,000 again when the daily figures are reported on Saturday, a senior health official told Guardian Australia. The share of positive rates has reached as high as 40% among those being tested in the Hunter Valley in recent days. Michael Lydeamore, an infectious disease modeller at Monash University said tests were probably catching about 80% of actual cases, meaning NSW will already be at the 25,000 cases a day rate flagged by health minister Brad Hazzard on 15 December. Lydeamore said it remains unclear how much the surge is a result of the catch-up of a testing system that itself has been under strain with people who have been symptomatic for a couple of days before Christmas only coming for checks now, or a wider spread of the infection. “If it’s the former that’s better news,” he said. On Friday the prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced a further change to the testing rules for confirmed Covid cases. “Further to national cabinet on 30 December 2021, and following further consultation with the chief medical officer and chief health officers, leaders have also agreed to remove the requirement for a day six RAT for confirmed cases in isolation,” Morrison said in a statement on Friday. “If confirmed cases remain symptomatic, they should remain in isolation. Anyone with symptoms will continue to seek a PCR test.” The change appears to pave the way for confirmed cases to leave isolation on the seventh day without a test, so long as they do not have symptoms. Queensland reported a 40% rise in new cases to 3,118, while Victoria’s increase was about 15% to 5,919. With Melbourne’s temperatures already at 35C just after noon and on track for 38C with similar conditions forecast for New Year’s Day, it is likely many people will postpone testing to avoid waiting in the heat. Still, given the highly contagious nature of the Omicron Covid strain, Lydeamore said he was “pretty sure [Victoria] will end up in exactly the same place in a few weeks time” as NSW. NSW Health corrected its hospitalisation tally to 832, or 15% higher than a day earlier, with 69 patients requiring intensive care. Six people died in NSW from Covid in the 24 hours, all aged between their 60s and 90s. Lydeamore predicted hospitals would start to toughen standards so that fewer less seriously ill patients get admitted and speed up discharges to create capacity for the coming increase of those needing care. “Certainly the NSW system is going to be quite stretched over the next period,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Those stresses are likely even with the emergence of some good news overnight from research in South Africa showing Omicron was between 50 and 80% less severe than the Delta Covid variant, Lydeamore said. “That is obviously really good news,” he said. “The question then is how much transmission we’ve got, and will it be enough to stop the system falling over? It’s going to be tight, I think.” Gerard Hayes, NSW state secretary of the Health Services Union, said the system was now operating like a “winter bed strategy” for flu. “It’s still early to tell but we’re not dealing with a fresh workforce,” Hayes said. “We’re dealing with a tired workforce and a workforce with very little redundancy attached to it.” The likely surge in patients will mean that hospital staff will need extra help, although so far there seems to be little planning for that, he said. Hayes said the ambulance service in the state had recently put on 200 university students because there was no slack in the system. “They are overwhelmed and they can’t necessarily provide service,” he said. “So I think the next six months is going to consistently see this.” “Governments of all persuasions have been cutting back on health consistently, and making it sort of virtually a just in time program,” Hayes said. Lydeamore said contact tracing is now of little use, with as many as 200,000 new contacts likely a day at current infection rates. Guardian Australia earlier this week reported on the scaling back of tracing. “The horse has probably bolted a week ago and we’ve only just looked in the stable,” he said. Even so, there are still ways to moderate the pace of spread of the infection, such as wearing a mask and limiting density of gatherings and the number of new interactions. “If I interact with the same group of 10 people every day, that’s far less risky from a transmission point of view than interacting with a different group of two for five days,” Lydeamore said. “So it’s kind of like that bubble concept that we had a long time ago.” NSW health authorities, are also working to contain the outbreak of Covid in aged care facilities. Of about 70 such centres in western Sydney alone, almost 50 have reported positive cases or have staff who have tested positive, the senior health official said. Some are easier to contain where there is no transmission. A committee convenes to decide which centres will be locked down to limit the spread. The state’s residual contact tracing operations are targeted at high-risk places such as aged and disability care and Indigenous communities, as we reported earlier this week. Daily cases could exceed 40,000 a day in NSW before peaking, the official said. The eastern suburbs of Sydney were among the biggest clusters of new cases.South Africa has lifted a nightime curfew on people’s movement with immediate effect, believing the country has passed the peak of its fourth coronavirus wave driven by the Omicron variant. As the head of the World Health Organization sounded an optimistic note about beating the pandemic in 2022, the government in Pretoria removed the midnight-to-4am curfew based on the trajectory of the pandemic, vaccination levels and available capacity in the health sector, the government said on Thursday. “All indicators suggest the country may have passed the peak of the fourth wave at a national level,” a statement from a special cabinet meeting held earlier on Thursday said. “While the Omicron variant is highly transmissible, there has been lower rates of hospitalisation than in previous waves,” the cabinet statement said. Data from South Africa’s health department showed a 29.7% weekly decrease in new cases detected in the week ending 25 December, the government said. Hospital admissions have declined in eight of South Africa’s nine provinces. South Africa, with close to 3.5 million infections and 91,000 deaths, has been the worst-hit country in Africa during the pandemic on both counts, and was where the Omicron variant of the coronavirus was first detected last month. The country is at the lowest of its five-stage Covid-19 alert levels. Besides lifting the restrictions on public movement, the government also ruled that alcohol shops with licences to operate beyond 11pm may revert back to full licence conditions, a welcome boon for traders and businesses hard hit by the pandemic and looking to recover during the festive season. However, public gatherings are restricted to no more than 1,000 people indoors, and no more than 2,000 people outdoors. Wearing of masks in public places also remains mandatory, with breaches considered a criminal offence. The more optimistic note after two years of the global pandemic was echoed by the head of the World Health Organization, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who said on Linkedin that the world had the “tools to end this calamity”. “After two years, we now know this virus well,” he wrote. “We know the proven measures to control transmission: mask use, avoiding crowds, maintaining physical distancing, practicing hand and respiratory hygiene, opening windows for ventilation, testing and contact tracing. We know how to treat the disease it causes and improve the chances of survival for people suffering serious illness. With all these learnings and capacities, the opportunity to turn this pandemic around for good is in our grasp.” In Israel a fourth vaccine shot for vulnerable people has been approved, becoming one of the first countries to do so, amid a surge in Covid in cases driven by the Omicron variant. Health ministry director general Nachman Ash said: “I did this in light of studies that show the benefit of the vaccine, including the fourth vaccine, to this population, and in light of the fear they are more vulnerable in this outbreak of Omicron.” Israeli health authorities reported more than 4,000 new cases on Thursday, a high not seen since September. Health minister Nitzan Horowitz said Israel was in “a fifth wave”, with most cases probably related to Omicron. Prime minister Naftali Bennett said Israel, which was among the first countries in the world to offer a booster shot to the public, would “lead the way” in offering a fourth jab. Booster shots have been administered to 4.2 million people out of a population of 9.4m Israelis. Last week Chile announced it would offer a fourth shot to at-risk people beginning in February. Health authorities in the United Kingdom and Germany have also said they are considering fourth doses. Also on Thursday, an Israeli El Al flight from Belgium landed in Tel Aviv carrying a shipment of Pfizer’s anti-Covid pill, Paxlovid, which Bennett hailed as an “important addition to the arsenal in the war against the pandemic”. “Thanks to our rapid action, the drugs have arrived in Israel quickly and will assist us in getting past the peak of the coming Omicron wave,” he said. Ran Balicer, chairman of Israel’s national expert panel on Covid-19, said the Pfizer drugs could “dramatically reduce risk of severe illness, potentially thus also reducing the overall hospital burden”. He said the medications were critical, “in addition to vaccines and masks”. In trials, the treatment has been shown to reduce Covid hospitalisations and deaths by 88% among at-risk people. The oral treatments block the virus’ ability to replicate and should withstand variants, experts say. The US has paid $5.3 billion for 10m courses of Pfizer’s new treatment, as well as $2.2bn for treatment from rival Merck, whose pill appears to be less effective. The European Union’s drug regulator has also allowed member states to use Pfizer’s Covid medications ahead of formal approval as an emergency measure. Ash approved the booster after Israel’s Sheba Medical Centre launched a clinical trial Monday, giving 150 staff members a fourth jab to test the benefit of a wider national rollout of additional doses. He also announced new health regulations, requiring people to wear masks at outdoor gatherings of more than 50 people. Israeli health authorities have shied away from sweeping social distancing guidelines and lockdowns seen in the earlier days of the pandemic. Meanwhile, the United States set a new global record for daily infections after reporting 488,000 cases as the Omicron variant spreads across the country, according to a New York Times database. However, even that figure is likely a serious undercount of the true numbers of positive cases, due to the rising popularity of home tests and people who are infected but asymptomatic. New Year’s Eve gatherings curtailed A New Year shorn of mass celebrations beckons for millions around the world as the number of daily new Covid cases worldwide crossed one million for the first time, according to an AFP tally on Thursday, with more than 7.3 million in the past seven days. From Greece to Mexico, from Barcelona to Bali and across swathes of Europe, authorities have cancelled or curtailed public gatherings, either closing or imposing curfews on nightclubs. Only South Africa, the first country to report the Omicron variant, was bucking the trend. In France, wearing masks outdoors will be compulsory while walking the streets of Paris from Friday for everyone over the age of 11. Nightclubs have been closed until well into January. In Spain, public festivities have been cancelled across most regions and in the biggest cities except Madrid, where a stripped-down gathering is scheduled with the crowd limited to 7,000 people compared with 18,000 in 2019. Britain’s National Health Service said it would start opening temporary field hospitals to contain a possible overspill of patients in England, where the government stopped short of mandating curbs on New Year festivities. “Given the high level of Covid-19 infections and increasing hospital admissions, the NHS is now on a war footing,” national medical director Stephen Powis said. Indonesia, which has reported more than 4.2 million cases, warned that foreign travellers may be deported from the resort island of Bali if caught violating Covid rules that bar carnivals, fireworks and gatherings of more than 50 people. “Get ready to be kicked out,” said Bali immigration office head Jamaruli Manihuruk. Mexico City has cancelled its massive New Year’s Eve celebrations as a preventative measure after a rise in cases.The death of a young woman in Sierra Leone, almost immediately after undergoing female genital mutilation, has sparked outrage and revived calls to end the practice. The body of 21-year-old Maseray Sei was found on 20 December at Nyandeni village in Bonthe district, southern Sierra Leone, a day after the FGM took place. Sei’s family said that after the procedure the mother of two boys complained of a migraine and was in pain, with complications from FGM thought to be the cause, according to activists working on the case. The family are now pressing for a postmortem. Sei’s body was found in a “Bondo bush”, the enclosure of a house belonging to the centuries-old secret women’s Bondo society, common across largely rural Sierra Leone, where FGM often takes place. Sierra Leone has one of the highest rates of FGM in the world, with nine out of 10 women and girls aged between 15 and 49 affected, according to Unicef. Despite restrictions on secret societies since the Ebola outbreak in 2014, and particularly on their initiation rites, of which FGM is often a part, the practice remains legal in Sierra Leone, with politicians accused of making statements backing FGM and of funding Bondo houses. The societies are important cultural institutions, rooted in ancient rituals believed to protect communities against evil and guide adolescent girls to womanhood. After Sei’s death, police arrested a number of soweis – senior society members who do the cutting in FGM – as well as a village chief in the Bonthe district, responsible for regulating the secret societies. Rugiatu Turay, an activist and former deputy minister for gender in Sierra Leone, said the case was another shocking example of the toll of FGM on women. “It’s a tragic case and, in a way, shows how many more people like her have died or are suffering, because the majority of cases are unreported,” she said. Turay chairs a coalition of 21 national groups fighting FGM which is now putting pressure on the authorities to carry out the postmortem. “It’s the next important step for us to get clarity in this case,” she said. Senesie Amara, an activist working with Sei’s family, said relatives reported she was in good health the day before the FGM. “She went to fetch wood and water for her aunt, she was physically fine on 18 December. That night she slept at the Bondo house, and that was when things got bad,” Amara said. “For the family, it’s very shocking. They loved her.” Sei was the mother of a four-year-old and a six-month-old baby, and was still in secondary education due to starting school late and repeating numerous years, Amara said, describing how despite her challenges she fought for a better life for herself and her sons. But community pressure to undergo FGM increased after she had her second child. “She went to her uncle on the 11th of this month, and told him she wanted to join the Bondo society. He said he didn’t have money to give her, he was working on refurbishing their family house. She then went to her boyfriend. He gave her 200,000 leone [£13],” Amara said. Bondo societies have seen many changes, Turay said, yet FGM remains a central and dangerous practice. “While in government I pushed for Sierra Leone to have a national strategy for ending FGM but this was resisted,” she said. “Over the years a lot of things have changed within the Bondo culture, and our organisation looks at how we can build on the better aspects of our culture, wherein women can be trained and empowered.” After Sei’s death, videos on social media showing political figures in Sierra Leone promising to protect FGM practices have been condemned by activists. The gender equality charity, Equality Now, said last week: “We strongly condemn the actions of politicians supporting FGM and urge the government to prosecute all offenders putting women and girls at risk.”In recent years, Michael has come to regard the United States, the nation of which he has been a citizen all his life, as an abusive parent. “I can acknowledge my past association with that person while at the same time wanting to keep future association to a minimum,” he said. Michael – the name is false as he requested anonymity to avoid being inundated with hate mail – found his disaffection with his native country reach crunch point in 2020. The chaotic end of the Donald Trump era combined with the inequities exposed by the Covid pandemic made him despair of being an American. “Coronavirus made me realize that in the US, if you’re not a member of the moneyed elite you’re left to fend for yourself with virtually no help from the federal government,” he said. “The farcical presidential campaign made me realize that I don’t want to be a member of a society in which my vote is made irrelevant by gerrymandering or the electoral college.” And so Michael decided to renounce his US citizenship. Having moved to Finland 10 years ago, he would break the ties that officially bound him to a country whose values he no longer recognised. That’s when Michael’s troubles really began. He discovered that along with thousands of other US citizens living abroad, he was caught in a Kafkaesque trap. For almost two years, since the pandemic struck in March 2020, most US consular missions around the world have suspended their expatriation services for those wishing to give up US citizenship. The US embassy in London, the largest of its sort in western Europe, announces on its website that it is “currently unable to accept appointments for loss of nationality applications” and is unable to say when services will resume. The US state department says giving up citizenship requires a face-to-face interview with a government official, and that it is too risky given coronavirus. Delays have led to a growing mountain of disgruntled citizens. By some calculations, there may be as many as 30,000 people among the estimated 5 million to 9 million US citizens living abroad who would like to begin the renunciation process but can’t. Joshua Grant is one of them. He was born and raised in Selma, Alabama, until he moved to Germany when he was 21 to learn the language. He has been there ever since. He lives in Lower Saxony and married a German citizen last year. Grant, 30, feels ready to acquire German citizenship, but under German law he must let go of his US passport. Easier said than done. He submitted a pile of paperwork to the US embassy in July 2020. Nothing has happened. He has written emails to the embassy staff, with no reply. He contacted the office of US senator from Alabama Richard Shelby. They passed him on to the state department, which in turn passed him back to the bureau of consular affairs, which mentioned the pandemic. “It’s very taxing. My whole life in Germany is on hold,” he said. “It’s funny: people in Germany tend to see the US as a liberal country where the rule of law was established, but I can’t even find anyone in the US government to talk to.” Nine US citizens abroad who have found themselves unable to give up their nationality are now suing the state department in a federal court in Washington. The suit, brought on the plaintiffs’ behalf by the French-based group Association of Accidental Americans, likens the situation to feudal times. “The US appears intent on preventing its citizens from exercising their natural and fundamental right to voluntarily renounce their citizenship,” it says. Some people want to give up US citizenship because the government has been making the burden of being an American more onerous for those abroad. In 2010 the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) was passed, requiring foreign banks and other financial institutions to report on any clients they suspect of being American to the IRS. The US is also one of only two countries (the other is Eritrea) that tax people on their citizenship rather than where they live. That forces Americans abroad to declare their global income to the IRS, with possible tax implications. The impact of these burdens is reflected in the number of people who renounce each year, though the official statistics are notoriously imprecise as the US government, by its own admission, lumps citizens applying to sever their ties together with long-term resident green card holders doing the same. Even taking into account this statistical lack of clarity, however, the figures are striking. Between 2000 and 2010 the total remained relatively steady at less than 1,000 people, but after FATCA came in, the numbers rose sharply to more than 5,000 in 2016. Some of the would-be renouncers are “accidental Americans”, having acquired citizenship because they were born in the US though they have lived elsewhere all their lives. That label could be applied to the UK prime minister Boris Johnson, who was born in New York but has not lived in the US since he was five. Johnson renounced his citizenship in 2017, having said he was outraged a few years earlier by having to pay the US tax authorities for gains on the sale of his London home. Marie Sock, the first woman to stand as a presidential candidate in the Gambia, was forced to pull out of the race recently after she failed to get any response to her request to renounce her US nationality from the US embassy. She explained in a video posted on Facebook that under Gambia election law, presidential candidates must be sole Gambian nationals. James – also not his real name – was born in Texas but has not lived in the US since he was four. He now lives in Singapore. He became disillusioned when he learned that because his son was born outside the US he would not be eligible for US citizenship, and yet because of James’s citizenship he would treated as if he were a US taxpayer. That struck him as a modern form of taxation without representation. “The double standards really annoy me,” he said. For the past year he has been trying to get through to an official who will help him renounce his citizenship, without success. “I never asked for US citizenship, and now I’m not even allowed to give it up.” • This article was amended on 20 January 2022 to note that official US statistics meld citizens applying to give up their status with long-term resident green card holders doing the same. An estimate of 5 million to 9 million US citizens living abroad has also been added, replacing a figure of 9 million.Britons’ annual spending on ethical products and investments has surpassed £100bn for the first time, as lifestyle changes linked to Covid and the climate crisis stoked demand for plant-based foods, secondhand clothes and furniture, and greener gadgets. The value of the “green” pound surged by nearly a quarter to £122bn in 2020, according to a new Co-op report covering the most recent year for which figures are available. That total was bolstered by £57bn of ethical savings and investments. Shoppers spent £61bn on ethical products and services, which was nearly 30% more than in 2019. That equates to £2,189 a household, a £489 increase. The equivalent figure for 2010 was £1,028. The retailer’s ethical consumerism report, which is a barometer of the extent to which consumers’ shopping habits reflect their concerns about the environment, animal welfare and social justice, also found more shoppers were boycotting brands on ethical or social concerns. These businesses suffered a £3.9bn loss of sales, which was £600m bigger than the previous year. Steve Murrells, the Co-op’s chief executive, said shoppers were “turning up the heat” to get companies to change. The boycotts were a “warning to brands that they must do business in a better way for workers, communities and the planet”, he said. The huge increase in ethical spending also showed that when businesses provide choice, and the government offers helpful incentives, “consumers will respond positively”, Murrells added. The area of the market that saw the biggest increase was eco-travel and transport, where sales rose by more than 70% to £12.2bn. This reflected the rise in electric car ownership as well as the impact of the pandemic, which revived cycling to levels last seen in Britain in the 1960s. Britons are also trying to make their homes greener by investing in energy-efficient boilers as well as other household appliances or switching to “green” electricity deals. Taken together this market had expanded by a third to be worth £20.5bn. However, this push fell short of what is needed to hit the government’s net zero targets, the Co-op said. For example, while households spent £5bn on energy-efficient gas boilers, just £130m went on heat pumps. The report also highlighted the growing appetite to buy secondhand goods, be it for financial or environmental reasons. Sales of secondhand clothes increased by nearly a quarter to £864m while spending on “pre-loved” furniture was up by more than £100m at £837m. In the now £14bn ethical food and drink market the sales trends reflect people making changes to their diet, with demand for vegetarian and plant-based foods up 34% at £1.5bn. Fairtrade and organic food also grew strongly, up 14% and 13% respectively, while free-range egg sales exceeded £1bn for the first time.Only a quarter of the government officials responsible for cancelling HS2 to Yorkshire and downgrading plans for Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR) actually live in the north of England and rely on the region’s sub-par trains, the Guardian has learned. Of the 24 officials in the Department for Transport (DfT) responsible for writing the Integrated Rail Plan (IRP), just six live in the north, the DfT admitted in response to a freedom of information (FoI) request. The government was accused of “betraying” the north in November, when the long-awaited IRP ignored recommendations from Transport for the North, a statutory body set up to advise the government on the region’s transport needs. That organisation, which brings together all the political and business leaders of the north, had asked for HS2 to reach Leeds and for NPR to run right across the country, including a stop in Bradford. Steve Rotheram, the mayor of the Liverpool city region, said: “With so few northern voices involved in the decision-making process, it’s no surprise that the government chose to ignore millions of people across the north in foisting their cheap and nasty rail plan on us. It’s the same old ‘Whitehall knows best’ thinking that we have seen time and time again from a government who are doing more to hold us back than level us up.” Andy Burnham, the mayor of Greater Manchester, said the admissions were proof the “cut-price” IRP was plotted from Whitehall and imposed on the rest of the country. “You don’t have to spend long travelling on the north’s fragmented, unreliable, overpriced public transport system to realise that it has been built by people who don’t live here and don’t use it,” he said. “Transport for the North was set up to correct this and give the north a strong transport voice. It’s so frustrating that its clear, united, cross-party advice on the IRP was simply ignored. The result is yet another cut-price plan imposed by Whitehall that will not solve our rail needs. We will only get the public transport that people in the north deserve when we are able to make our own decisions about it.” The rail plans caused particular anger in the north-east, with local business leaders accusing the government of “ignoring” the region of 2.7 million people. Jamie Driscoll, the North of Tyne mayor, said the FoI admissions proved the north of England needed to be able to make its own decisions. “If anyone in the north ever believed this government was serious about investing in northern transport, they don’t now. The only way we’ll ever see a decent northern transport network is to give the north the power to raise the finance ourselves. That means devolving the transport budget. We’re nearly a quarter of the country’s population – give us a quarter of the budget, and let us decide how to spend it. And give us tools like land value capture, so we can create the wealth to pay for vital infrastructure,” he said. The DfT said that one of the two ministers in the “core” IRP team lived in the north. It did not name them, but it is very likely to have been Andrew Stephenson, the minister for HS2 and MP for Pendle in Lancashire. The department refused to reveal how many of the DfT’s three special advisers involved in the IRP lived in the north because it “would be unfair and would contravene current data protection legislation”. In March 2021 the government announced the DfT was to create a “second headquarters” in Birmingham and a northern hub in Leeds, with 650 job roles created in the two cities by 2025.Pick of the week The Hook Up Plan The third and final season of this charming French romcom stars Zita Hanrot as goofy but likable Elsa, with Sabrina Ouazani and Joséphine Draï as her well-intentioned but interfering friends. As we left the trio, the show decided to weave Covid-19 into its plotline and the women were trying to maintain their connection through lockdown despite a romantic upset threatening their friendship. Will we see a reconciliation and freedom? Expect a wider focus on the nature of friendship, some new love interests and a pregnancy test. Glossy and soapy but nicely performed and the backdrops – alternating Parisian glamour with bucolic rural France – are seductively escapist. PH Netflix, available now *** Banksy: Most Wanted For the last couple of decades, it has felt as if graffiti artist Banksy has been simultaneously everywhere and nowhere: a constant ambient presence in British life, but also an absence where detail should be. Wisely, Aurélia Rouvier and Seamus Haley’s documentary largely steers clear of the endless speculation about Banksy’s actual identity and instead asks what Banksy is, how Banksy works and why anyone should care. It’s probably the only realistic approach to an artist who continues to both loom large and elude categorisation. PH BritBox, available now *** Eating With My Ex There is something undeniably odd about the idea of a former couple deciding to go on television to openly discuss the reasons their relationship ended. But this show has now reached season four so it is clearly an itch people are wanting to scratch. This new series begins with three former couples: Flame and Alex, Jade and Higor, and Jack and Indigo. What will their televised therapy sessions over meals reveal? Issues discussed include text dumpings, emotional inarticulacy and, of course, the corrupting effects of social media. PH BBC Three, from Sunday 2 January *** Rebelde Textbook telenovela cheese from Netflix, which begins the year with this trashy, soapy melodrama set in a high school in Mexico – although it’s a remake of an Argentinian show from the early 00s. The story follows a new group of students who are bonding, hooking up and preparing for a Battle of the Bands contest while contending with various elaborate hazing rituals from a shady group known as The Lodge. No cliche goes unexploited and no heartstring goes untugged, but it’s undemanding and potentially addictive – especially at a time of year when guiltily bingeing is all too easy to fall into. PH Netflix, from Wednesday 5 January *** El Deafo Based on Cece Bell’s New York Times bestseller and Newbery Honour-winning graphic novel memoir, here is a charming three-part animation about a girl who loses her hearing and finds her inner superhero – El Deafo. Conscious about wearing a hearing aid on her chest at school, Cece (voiced by newcomer Lexi Finigan) quickly embraces her “super powers” – such as being able to use her aid to detect when the teacher is on her way back from the loo (she picks up the flush). Sweet, funny, poignant and definitely not just for kids. HR Apple TV+, from Friday 7 January *** The Hype House For anyone who is not on TikTok (basically, if you are over the age of 25) you’re going to first need an education on what the Hype House is: a gen Z collective of the social media platform’s creators established in 2019 and based in a bizarre, collaborative LA mansion. Netflix has now given the group the documentary treatment, promising to show the gory details of life as an influencer and their relationships with each other. Considering every moment of their lives is already shared with millions, is it even possible to get any closer? If you can bear it, tune in to find out. HR Netflix, from Friday 7 January *** The Defence A gritty Polish legal drama selected by the Walter Presents arm, with Magdalena Cielecka starring as lawyer Joanna Chylka in the second season. As we rejoin Chylka, the nation is scandalised by the arrest of the son of Piotr Langer Sr, a successful businessman. Langer Jr is the heir to a massive fortune but also stands accused of a brutal double murder. Chylka finds herself defending the younger man, which is unfortunate as his dad has decided to publicly cut ties. Chylka smells a rat but Langer Jr seems oddly unwilling to try to defend himself. PH All 4, from Friday 7 JanuaryWe moved house a month ago and have yet to set up a phone and broadband connection with our chosen provider because the previous owners haven’t cancelled their Sky service. Sky says it can’t take instructions from anyone other than the account holder. I am working from home and my wife, an NHS doctor, needs the internet for work, so this has bigger implications than the Netflix and Amazon we’re paying for, but can’t use. BF, St Austell, Cornwall Unlike other utilities, telecoms lines cannot be taken over by a new tenant or homeowner until the previous occupant has closed or transferred their account. In your case, your predecessor did not yet have a permanent address, so had not done so. You could have installed a new line, but at a needless cost. Or continued using the phone line and wifi which was still live, and the previous owners would have been liable for bills. Sky told me that the old account has finally been cancelled, so you should now be able to go ahead. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsAt 42, I believed that my food and alcohol dependencies defined me. In my mirror, I would always be as I saw myself then: fat and drunk. I was over the hill and past the point of any meaningful change. Who, at my age, truly starts over? I had clearly missed the opportunity to be one of those healthy, mindful people I mocked on Instagram. I was who I was: destined to remain in those cycles of dependency and to be unhappy, discontent and stuck. Then disaster struck. The pandemic began as a drunken month of worsening depression, but I have since quit booze, taken up running and lost 7st (44kg). I am in the best mental shape of my life. It turns out booze – and a million social and work engagements – was covering up how unhappy I had become with myself and my life. I was hiding from spending time alone or thinking about who I had become: someone who regularly drank two bottles of wine a day, was medically obese and had done no exercise in four years. From the outside, the life I had built as a writer and events manager in London looked glamorous and cosmopolitan. But it was all tits and teeth. Inside, I was grieving and trying to drink and eat myself numb. My mother had died in 2018 after a six-year illness with cancer, and I had spent three years pursuing rock bottom and experiencing very little joy. The numbness almost killed me. Lockdown, however, imposed the solitude from which I had been running. Of course, I tried to avoid it using 10-litre boxes (yes, plural) of rosé. Then I got sick with shingles. I was terrified it was Covid and that I was going to die in this state. So, I used the opportunity of the pubs being shut to end my lifelong relationship with booze. This led to huge changes. Five months later, I tackled the Couch to 5K programme. Then, on 15 October 2020, I took the plunge and joined an app for cognitive behavioural therapy and calorie-controlled weight loss. My original goal was to lose enough to place me in a normal BMI for the first time in my adult life. I had been size extra‑large since I was 18. I didn’t know anything else, so I wasn’t trying to regain some perfect figure from my youth. But I ended up losing enough to put me in the middle of the healthy weight band. None of it was easy; in fact, it was a daily battle. I had to make decisions every single day. To get outside. To eschew Deliveroo. To sit with my grief, rather than wallow in it. To sit with myself. To do 20,000 steps. To make soup. To dance. To cry. To feel. To get therapy. During the course of the year of my transformation, I ended my eight-year relationship with a man I loved, and still love, but from whom I had grown apart. I went on a solo honeymoon to the Maldives and came back to London with a new outlook. Then, within a month of returning to London, Sarah Everard went missing. I, along with the rest of the country, was watching and hoping that she would be found. As a single woman, living alone during Covid restrictions, I was furious when I heard that the police were telling women the only way to stay safe while alone was to remain in their own homes. Was I not meant to get groceries in case the delivery man was dangerous? Was I supposed to avoid taxis? I had tweeted about being devastated for Sarah’s family and that, as urban women, we deserved the right to walk home. The tweet blew up. So I tweeted that I would organise a vigil and I was put in touch with a group of women who were doing the same. Reclaim These Streets was born. Many readers will know what happened next. We planned a vigil in Sarah’s honour, but the police banned us from gathering, even though a serving police officer was suspected – and later convicted – of murdering her. We raised a legal fund and sued the Metropolitan police for our human right to protest. We went to the high court the day before the vigil and were told that we were permitted to protest within the parameters the police set, but the police refused to set parameters. They threatened us, as organisers, with £10,000 each in fines and prosecution under the Serious Crimes Act. We decided that, instead of wasting our money on such penalties, we would raise funds to serve the people who needed it. Many people attended the vigil anyway – and the police manhandled attenders and arrested four. The days that followed were some of the most intense, emotional and rewarding of my life. The women I worked with were, and are, incredible. On 19 March, we donated the £526,000 we had raised to Rosa, a funding group for women and girls, and created the Stand With Us fund. I would not have had the emotional capacity or stamina to have done the work if I had still been drinking. I would not have had the headspace or courage to put myself forward if I had not been in the best mental and physical place in my life. Raising my hand to be counted, and standing up for the safety of all of us, was only possible because I felt strong and confident and had a clear head. I did more than 70 radio and television interviews over the course of that week. It was exhausting, but, along with my amazing cohorts in Reclaim, we changed the conversations about women’s safety in the UK and the world. The work continues. In January, we will be back in the high court to try to have our human right to protest, regardless of lockdown restrictions, argued into law. We have become a women’s safety campaign group and are offering consent workshops with the social enterprise Shout Out UK. We are working on legislation and education reforms for women’s safety. In June, I went home to Philadelphia for the first time in three years. But I went back a changed woman; I had discovered who I was. I don’t believe everyone needs to burn their life to the ground to start again. But making little changes and addressing dependency issues can unleash happiness that you no longer thought was possible. It isn’t only about avoiding snacks or a second glass of wine. What really changed my relationship with food and my body was cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). A daily stack of decisions, starting with a sports bra on a door knob every day, has made my old lifestyle unrecognisable. But the most revolutionary change is that I now want to spend time in my own company (well, with my dog, McNulty). After a full MOT on my body recently, I learned that I had added a decade to my life expectancy. My metabolic age was 49 in October 2020. It is now 39. I am Benjamin Buttoning my life. I still miss my mom daily – the grief is still there – but it is counterbalanced by so much more. I still have work to do, but the results of the work I have done make getting up so much easier than I ever believed possible. The mental health charity Mind can be contacted on 0300 123 3393 or by visiting mind.org.ukQueensland is due to change travel restrictions into the state despite a surge in fresh Covid cases and criticisms the new requirements are “pointless” in states with large outbreaks. From 11.59pm on Friday 31 December, travellers entering Queensland will be required to return a negative rapid antigen test (RAT) result within 72 hours before travel, rather than a negative PCR test. The change in rules comes as the state recorded 3,118 new cases overnight, with the number of active infections rising to 11,697. Evidence of a negative test result has to be uploaded to the Queensland Health website when applying for a border pass, with applicants making a declaration the information is correct. However the change raises questions about the accuracy and reliability of test results, as unlike PCR tests, the tests are not performed by trained professionals or analysed by and reported to a central authority. Police commissioner Katarina Carroll said on Wednesday that from January those caught lying about a RAT result on their border declaration would face a heavy fine. “If you are intercepted at the airport, questions will be – when did you have the test, where was it, at what time? I ask everyone to abide by the requirements of the declaration, and if they’re found to be obviously making a false declaration, they will be heavily fined,” commissioner Carroll said. A spokesperson for the Queensland police said officers will be performing random compliance checks on travellers, though not all will be stopped as they enter the state by road or plane. “Officers may ask questions about your test – such as when it was conducted and see evidence of the test,” they said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A similar system was in operation in other jurisdictions such as South Australia until Friday when the premier Steven Marshall announced all border requirements for interstate travel to the state had been scrapped “effective immediately”. “There will no longer be a requirement for people coming across the border to do a rapid antigen test prior to coming into South Australia,” Marshall said. “This was discussed this morning at the Covid Ready committee. It was not a good use of our resources at the moment, and so the Entry Check requirement has been removed. The rapid antigen test requirement has been removed.” Australian Medical Association vice-president Dr Chris Moy said at this stage of the pandemic travel requirements like those within Queensland “didn’t make sense in a situation where there’s such a scarcity of RAT tests which could be better used”. “It’s pointless except if you’re going to somewhere where there’s very low or no Covid like WA or NT, where you’ve got a higher at risk population and relatively low numbers,” Moy said. “In an ideal world everyone coming from New South Wales would get tested before they travel.” In those situations where the tests were still useful, Moy said governments had no choice but to rely on the “honour system” though a “small minority” may lie about their results, there was no system in place to verify RAT results. “We don’t have either a strategy to introduce RAT tests or clear instructions about when to use it,” Moy said. “The problem is that you need a strategy that considers access, equity and clear instructions about when to [use a rapid antigen test] and when they’re the most benefit in terms of reducing a person’s risk of passing it to other people.” “These things are not set up. But at the end of the day you’re still trying to get people to do the right thing.”The Victorian and New South Wales governments are scrambling to organise the distribution of rapid antigen tests to vulnerable people amid short supply, confusion over who should use them and skyrocketing Covid case numbers. Amid a national shortage of the tests, both governments said they were working out how best to distribute tens of millions of kits they have ordered, most of which will not arrive until the end of January. NSW and Victoria have watered down previous commitments to provide free tests after a national cabinet meeting with the federal government on Thursday. Adding to the confusion, on Friday morning the prime minister, Scott Morrison, issued a statement removing a requirement that confirmed Covid cases who are in isolation but don’t have symptoms take a test on the sixth day. This directly contradicted statements, also made on Friday, by the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, and Victoria’s health minister, Martin Foley, that a day-six rapid test was required. The confusion unfolded as prominent Sydney charity worker the Rev Bill Crews warned that lessons from two years of the pandemic had not been learned, and the poorest and most vulnerable members of the community were being left behind. Crews, whose eponymous foundation distributes meals and runs a healthcare clinic, said the people his charity worked with were “like Petri dishes who’ll spread it”. “Our people are the most vulnerable and we have to look after them, and I would have expected them to be on some sort of priority list, at least equal to aged care, but they seem to be the forgotten people,” he said. Authorities in NSW and Victoria were not able to explain how their test stockpiles would be allocated and distributed. In NSW, where cases almost doubled on Friday for the third day running, jumping from 12,226 to 21,151, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, said he expected the “main set” of 50m of rapid antigen tests his government had ordered to arrive in mid-January. “There is a place I would say, definitely, for the state to be providing rapid antigen tests, for returning travellers into Sydney,” Perrottet said. “In addition to that, we want to make sure vulnerable people – vulnerable and disadvantaged communities – have access to rapid antigen tests. “We’re working through, currently, the distribution and the cohorts which we believe that those rapid antigen tests will be provided [to].” In Victoria, where Covid cases increased from 5,137 to 5,919 on Friday, the health minister, Martin Foley, said there was “a national shortage of rapid antigen tests”. “I acknowledge that, whether it’s in the government procurement or in the private market.” Foley said Victoria had taken “urgent measures” to buy 34m kits, which are to be delivered “in coming days and weeks”. “Victorians have come to, I think rightly, see testing as a key part of the ongoing public health response,” he said. “Free testing is a critical part of that. But at the moment we are really facing some challenges right across the country.” Covid commander Jeroen Weimar said distribution details for the government’s rapid antigen testing kits would be announced soon. “In the coming days we’ll be making more announcements around how we allocate those and shoot those through our testing centres,” he said. Crews said his charity needed 500 tests a week to keep his workers safe. “We’re frontline, all of our volunteers are on the frontline, everything,” he said. “We’ve spent so far nearly $20,000 on rapid antigen tests, which could have gone into meals. “We’re getting no help at all. I’m saying: what do you want us to spend the money on – rapid testing or feeding the homeless? “The rich have been able to stockpile these, because they’re able to pay any price for them, but the people we work with can’t – and we can’t stockpile them either. “Nobody seems to have learned anything – the poor, the homeless and the most vulnerable are still at the bottom of the heap.”Leaders of a group of protesters who set fire to the facade of Old Parliament House in Canberra are closely linked to a complex network of anti-vaccination and conspiracy groups which have been accused of spreading misinformation in Indigenous communities during the Covid-19 pandemic. The fire, which broke out during a protest at the entrance to the building on Thursday, caused extensive damage to the doors and portico. There have been a series of demonstrations by Indigenous groups as well as elements of the anti-vaccination movement and sovereign citizen groups at Old Parliament House over the past days. On 22 December another fire was lit at the entrance by the same group of protesters. A protester posted video of that fire on Instagram with the caption: “These Doors are Coming Down Either Way”. Among the protesters are Indigenous land rights activists, anti-vaccine groups and so-called sovereign citizens. The latter is a fringe conspiracy group rooted in antisemitism and organised around a haphazard collection of pseudo-legal beliefs broadly grouped around the notion that modern government is an illegitimate corporation. Like many other threads of conspiratorial thinking, sovereign citizens have enjoyed a confused renaissance during the pandemic. When footage began emerging during the early stages of Covid-19 of people asking police bizarre questions at border stops or describing themselves as a “a living woman” to Bunnings employees, it was largely as a result of sovereign citizen-inflected beliefs. Before the fire on Friday, a piece of paper was taped to a door at Old Parliament House labelled a “notice of acquiescence by default”. It was addressed to, among others, “The Australian Commonwealth de facto Corporate Administration” and contained a garbled set of legalese mirroring sovereign citizen beliefs. Intertwined with the protesters were various fringe anti-vaccination groups as well as members of the “freedom movement” which has pushed anti-lockdown protests during the Covid-19 pandemic before morphing into a catch-all conspiracy movement. Attempts by elements of the conspiracy movement to influence Indigenous groups have been well documented. As the Age has previously reported, some of those movements have been active in promoting misinformation in remote Indigenous communities. In September the Guardian revealed a group had attempted to push ivermectin into the remote regional town of Wilcannia during a Covid outbreak there. There is no evidence that ivermectin has any beneficial effect as a Covid treatment, and it may be harmful in some circumstances. Leaders of the Aboriginal Tent Embassy, established in 1972, condemned the actions that led to Thursday’s fire. “The actions of such protestors conducting a ‘smoking ceremony’ was done so without the knowledge, consent or mandate of the embassy council and traditional owners responsible for the regulation of the Aboriginal Tent Embassy,” it said in a statement. There were claims following the fire that it may have been the result of a smoking ceremony that got out of hand, or as a result of police using pepper spray to disperse the crowd. However, footage on social media showed that the fire was well lit before police arrived at the scene, and ACT police told the Age the pepper spray used was water-based and did not contain an accelerant. Footage taken by protesters themselves shows many of them celebrating after the fire began to engulf the front of the building. The protests were widely condemned by political leaders. Scott Morrison said it was “disgraceful”. “I’m disgusted and appalled by the behaviour that would see Australians come and set fire to such a symbol of democracy in this country,” the prime minister said on Thursday. But the Greens senator Lidia Thorpe, the party’s first Indigenous representative, wrote on Twitter: “Seems like the colonial system is burning down. Happy New Year everyone.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She later deleted the tweet, and the party’s leader, Adam Bandt said: “Greens don’t want to see the planet burning or Old Parliament.” However, he did not publicly criticise Thorpe nor has she apologised for the comment. Old Parliament House now houses the Museum of Australian Democracy. Its director, Daryl Karp, called the fire “tragic” and said damage to the building was potentially irreparable. “To actually be closed, and to be closed because of violent protests is really tragic,” she told the ABC on Friday.Motherhood has always been central to some strands of feminism, while being wilfully left out of others. From the campaigners fighting for children’s rights to their mothers after parental separation in the 19th century, to literary figures – such as Adrienne Rich in the 1970s and Rachel Cusk in the 1990s – who have made space for maternal ambivalence, women have battled to claim maternity without becoming trapped within it. Now, as issues of surrogacy and trans motherhood pose fresh challenges, feminism’s confrontation with the issue feels newly urgent. Siri Hustvedt joins the fray with a mixture of directness and obliqueness. She takes on motherhood from every direction, combining memoir with ethnography, the history of science and psychoanalysis, literary and art criticism. The book begins with lovingly detailed portraits of Hustvedt’s mother and grandmother, and moves through essays on Wuthering Heights, the art of Louise Bourgeois, the nature of viruses and misogyny to end with a long tour de force exploration of the horrific death of Sylvia Marie Likens in 1965. The essays are disparate, and span a 10-year period, but the voice is consistent, combining assured erudition with more playful questioning, always thoughtful and capable of surprising shifts of register and even genre (the odd fairytale and poem are interpolated along the way). Cumulatively, an argument develops. We all emerge from mothers, yet key aspects of motherhood are left out of our culture, and mothers often become the scapegoat for society’s ills (as in Jacqueline Rose’s account, where mothers are “the objects of licensed cruelty”). Hustvedt gently interrogates her own father’s lack of interest in his mother, the grandmother whose story Hustvedt now excavates. She sees this as indicative of “the forgotten land of the mother and mothers, the speechless realm of the womb”. She thinks that we need to make more of our origins in the womb partly because pregnancy and birth are processes of bodily entanglement that remind us of our general interconnectedness. She worries that scientists’ fantasies of genetic determinism leave out the role of the female body: “Pregnancy is a chimeric state, and the chimera is still a terrifying animal because it involves mixing.” This general, terrifying mixedness has also been revealed by Covid. Hustvedt takes the line that if we acknowledge the constant interplay within and between bodies and between bodies and viruses, we will gain access to a larger vision of our interconnected, borderless culture. She gives these ideas zest and exactness by focusing, for instance, on the placenta as a forgotten organ. The essay on Likens isn’t explicitly framed as being about motherhood but mothers are everywhere here. Sylvia was left with her informal foster mother, Gertrude Baniszewski, and her seven children, because her mother had just been jailed for shoplifting. Baniszewski abused Sylvia from early on, co-opting her children and neighbours into the ever-escalating process, which ended with Sylvia being branded with the words “I am a prostitute and proud of it” on her abdomen, and tortured to semi-accidental death. The story has long fascinated feminists; Kate Millett wrote an engrossing, obsessive book about it, where she imagines her way into the heads of the central figures. Now Hustvedt combines a novelistic sense of the passions and complexities of real lives with an incisive feel for political polemic and theoretical astuteness. She thinks that the story has been treated as too aberrant and insufficiently political. She reads it as an efflorescence of mimetic desire as defined by René Girard, in which violence became a contagion and required a scapegoat, Sylvia, who was transformed from obedient virgin into malevolent whore. “The crowd gathers at a rally or it forms online,” Hustvedt writes, reminding us that it is those of whom society has asked too much who have most need of scapegoats. Baniszewski was invested in her role as a mother, and seems to have felt so ashamed of her failures (her own unmarried daughter was pregnant) that she needed to shift the blame under the guise of maternal correction. This is an unexpected place to end the collection, but fittingly so. With collective violence, mob feeling and mass shaming on the rise, Hustvedt urges vigilance as we parse the stories of motherhood the world presents. • Lara Feigel is the author of Free Woman: Life, Liberation and Doris Lessing. Mothers, Fathers and Others by Siri Hustvedt is published by Hodder &amp; Stoughton (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Let’s kick off with Euro 2020’s goal of the tournament, scored at Hampden Park by Patrik Schick. The Czech forward lobbed David Marshall from the halfway line for one of the year’s most memorable goals: Patrick Schick (Scotland v CZECH REPUBLIC, June) Schick was the inevitable pick, but there were plenty of other tidy finishes at the Euros. Paul Pogba found the top corner before France went out, Mikkel Damsgaard silenced Wembley with this free-kick and Lorenzo Insigne proved unstoppable against Belgium. Not forgetting Andreas Christensen, Luka Modric, Kevin De Bruyne, Andriy Yarmalenko, Aleksei Miranchuk, Kasper Dolberg or even Luke Shaw. Another Puskás award contender, and one of the most eye-catching goals of the year, came in March’s north London derby: Érik Lamela (Arsenal v TOTTENHAM, March) Here are three more Puskás nominees from the women’s game, from a precise lob in the WSL to memorable goals in Mexico and Ghana: Caroline Weir (MANCHESTER CITY v Manchester United, February) Daniela Sánchez (QUERÉTARO v San Luís, January) Sandra Owusu-Ansah (SUPREME LADIES v Kumasi, November) Other nominees include an outrageous piece of skill in Ligue 2, a blood-twisting solo run from the Eredivisie and two moments of acrobatic brilliance: Gauthier Hein (Niort v AUXERRE, November) Vangelis Pavlidis (WILLEM II v Fortuna Sittard, May) Luis Díaz (Brazil v COLOMBIA, June) Mehdi Taremi (Chelsea v PORTO, April) Over to the Premier League and a classy early winner that feels like it can’t possibly have happened in 2021: Danny Ings (SOUTHAMPTON v Liverpool, January) A couple more under-the-radar efforts from the English men’s top flight. Mohamed Salah’s goal against Manchester City, on the other hand, has certainly not been forgotten – although it’s even better than we remembered. Phil Foden (Brighton v MANCHESTER CITY, May) Dwight McNeil (Everton v BURNLEY, March) Mohamed Salah (LIVERPOOL v Manchester City, October) Long-range howitzers are not confined to international tournaments. The Football League has been packed with them this year. First up, a decent hit on the turn … Nathan Ferguson (Forest Green v SOUTHEND, February) … and not one but two long-distance screamers from Morecambe’s finest. Extra points for the away-end limbs in the second clip: Cole Stockton (MORECAMBE v Wimbledon, September) Cole Stockton (Fleetwood v MORECAMBE, November) … and further afield in Romania, Ronaldo Deaconu lives up to his forename by adding his own entry to the year’s screamer collection – before following it up with an outrageous lob for good measure: Ronaldo Deaconu (GAZ METAN MEDIAS v Dinamo Bucharest, Oct) A couple of quick reminders that the world’s best players do occasionally score the best goals … Robert Lewandowski (Dinamo Kyiv v BAYERN MUNICH) Lionel Messi (PSG v Manchester City, September) But of course, from the Champions League to Sunday League, a great goal can be scored absolutely anywhere: Alexander Sami (LEATHERHEAD v Bowers &amp; Pitsea, October) Dovydas Kavaliauskas (ROSE &amp; CROWN MOSQUITO FC v Welwyn Warriors Reserves, October) Haruki Hayashi (TAKAGAWA GAKUEN HIGH SCHOOL v Ridge Star of Ishikawa) From the Olympics and the Indian Super League – and curled home in opposite directions – here are two of the year’s most immaculately placed free-kicks: Dominique Janssen (NETHERLANDS v Brazil, July) Greg Stewart (JAMSHEDPUR v Kerala Blasters, December) It’s not always the finish that matters – sometimes the first touch can be just as important … Ben Worman (Morecambe v CAMBRIDGE, November) Robbie Muirhead (MORTON v Airdrie, May) … and sometimes it can be just as brilliant: Bersant Celina (IPSWICH v Crewe, November) Danny Welbeck (BRIGHTON v Leeds, May) You’ve cleared the corner – the danger is over, right? Wrong: Yahia Nader (AL-AIN v Sharjah, February) Liberato Cacace (NEW ZEALAND v Honduras, July) Sarah Zadrazil (Chelsea v BAYERN MUNICH, May) Junior Onana (Montpellier v BORDEAUX, September) What’s better than a delicate chip? A delicate chip from a million miles out, of course: Edinson Cavani (MANCHESTER UNITED v Fulham, May) Youcef Belaïli (QATAR SC v Al-Gharafa, October) Glen McAuley (ATHLONE v Waterford, July) And four more outrageous goals, from increasingly binocular-tastic distances: Rory Donnelly (GLENTORAN v Dungannon Swifts, April) Lee Geum-min (Reading v BRIGHTON, May) Liam Burt (Drogheda v BOHEMIANS, September) Michele Castagnetti (CREMONESE v Virtus Entella, March) A couple of entries from Ghana now. What were you doing when you were 15? Mizak Asante (GOLDEN KICK v Mobile Phone People, September) James Bissue (ELMINA SHARKS v Legon Cities, July) In Japan, the rarely-seen quadruple nutmeg (or is it?) Takefusa Kubo (JAPAN U24 v Jamaica, June) How about some end-to-end stuff – here we have two team breakaways, a solo breakaway, and a really solo breakaway: Bernardo Silva (MANCHESTER CITY v Aston Villa, December) Mohamed Salah (West Ham v LIVERPOOL, January) Jesse Lingard (WEST HAM v Wolves, April) Pernille Harder (Manchester United v CHELSEA, September) We all know that nothing beats a goal that goes in off the bar: Jimmy Medranda (Portland v SEATTLE SOUNDERS, August) Jakob Glesnes (PHILADELPHIA UNION v Atlanta, June) Superbly struck goals both. But when they go high, Liverpool’s playmaker goes low: Thiago Alcântara (Porto v LIVERPOOL, November) Sometimes, a great goal is all about the assist: Aitana Bonmatí (Chelsea v BARCELONA, May) Raheem Sterling (MANCHESTER CITY v Everton, November) Lynden Gooch (SUNDERLAND v Tranmere, March) How about this for a pair of exquisitely placed volleys? Joachim Waroi (WESTERN UNITED v Laugu United, July) Azzeddine Toufiqui (EMMEN v Maastricht, September) Thought the scorpion kick was just a passing fad? Think again: Cyril Ngonge (GRONINGEN v AZ Alkmaar, October) Elisha Sam (NOTTS COUNTY v Oxford City, February) And here are more feats of footballing contortionism … Olivier Giroud (Atlético Madrid v CHELSEA, February) Kristian Kushta (IERAPETRA v Karaiskasis, February ) Joca (Benfica B v LEIXÕES, March) … though not nearly as unlikely as the scorer of this iconic injury-time winner: Alisson (West Brom v LIVERPOOL, May) And last but not least, Ryan Broom dons his flippers and snorkel to get on the scoresheet in rainy Plymouth … and celebrates in the only way he could: Ryan Broom (PLYMOUTH v Bolton, October) Happy new year!Under a 1986 newsletter headline, “Ubuntu, Abantu, Abelungu”, Black Sash, the anti-apartheid organisation founded as the vanguard of white liberal women’s opposition in South Africa, reported surprising findings from a white fieldworker in their programme against forced land removals – Black people of the land do not consider white people to be people. That is, we do not consider them to be Abantu. Instead, they are abelungu. “Ubuntu, Abantu, Abelungu” appeared a few years before the late archbishop Desmond Mpilo Tutu thrust Ubuntu – the African philosophy best understood through the proverb found in Bantu languages across the continent, “umuntu ngumuntu ngabanye bantu” (a person is a person through other people) – into the global imagination as he presided over post-apartheid South Africa’s truth and reconciliation commission (TRC). “Ubuntu is very difficult to render into a western language,” Tutu acknowledged in his book No Future Without Forgiveness. In his earlier classic African Religions and Philosophy the Kenyan theologian John Mbiti famously rendered Ubuntu’s philosophy of mutual personhood as an African humanist analogue to Enlightenment humanism’s “I think, therefore I am” by translating “Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu” as “I am because we are”. Mbiti’s classic humanist translation of Ubuntu obscures the fact that, in contrast to the western conception of the human, the African conception of the person is a social being who is always becoming. Ubuntu holds that to be a person, umuntu, among people, Abantu, one must continually uphold the personhood of others. It is for this reason that when I misbehaved, especially to the injury of others, my mother, like many other elders, reprimanded me in our mother tongue, Shona: “Ita munhu!” “Be a person!” “[The] white man has become umlungu because of us,” dispossessed farmworker Aron Mlangeni stated in “Ubuntu, Abantu, Abelungu”. Mlangeni articulated what philosopher Ndumiso Dladla describes as “Ubuntu as an African critical philosophy of race” rooted not in biology, but in ethical historical and social relations. After centuries of conquest, the settler state formalised land dispossession through the devastating 1913 Native Land Act, which seized 87% of land for the white settler minority, leaving 13% to the Black majority, who were press-ganged into cheap mining and farming labour. Given white South Africa’s unjust historic land conquest and continuing relations of dispossession, it is unsurprising that Black people of the land, that is, we, do not consider white people to be Abantu. Instead, they are abelungu. On the eve of Black majority rule, global whiteness held its breath in anticipation of a “night of long knives” for white South Africa. Instead, South Africa gave a world at the end of history a “miracle” – the teleological release, a moral arc bending towards justice, a rainbow. After the negotiated settlement secured Black political rights with the protection of white property rights, the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act mandated the creation of the TRC. Dutch conquest of the Cape in 1652 is the genesis of genocide, slavery, indenture and land dispossession, yet the TRC had the limited mandate to hear allegations of human rights abuses between 1 March 1960, the month of the Sharpeville massacre, to 10 May 1994, the date of Nelson Mandela’s inauguration. Without the mandate to right the historic conquest of land and people, Tutu’s impossible task was to wield Ubuntu to reconcile the conflicting worlds of Abantu and abelungu into a nation of what he called the “Rainbow People of God”. As Allan Boesak, the anti-apartheid leader and Black Dutch Reformed Church minister who, alongside Tutu, helped cement Black liberation theology’s centrality to the Black Consciousness Movement, has shown, Tutu’s theology of grace and forgiveness was grounded in a Christianised Ubuntu. “African jurisprudence is restorative rather than retributive,” Tutu said, describing the rationale for amnesty at the TRC. If white South Africa did not repent (the apartheid-era president PW Botha declared “I only apologise for my sins before God”) or make itself humble (white radio listeners’ objection to TRC stories caused a rescheduling to hours “when most of the farmers are no longer listening”), it was surprised by and grateful for Black South Africa’s lack of “bitterness” and “vengeance”. “In some incredible way God has sown the seeds of a gracious attitude, of the spirit of Ubuntu, in the hearts and minds of the whole African community,” proclaimed Beyers Naudé, the Dutch Reformed Church minister who was one of the few Afrikaner leaders to publicly oppose apartheid. Naudé’s awe at the seeming miraculousness of the transition revealed some of the ways in which even the more sincere, committed part of white South Africa had failed to truly reckon with what the ethical demands of Ubuntu requires of them to have meaningful reconciliation with Black people and become Abantu. As Black people we ask “Uxolisa ngani?” (“What are you atoning with?”), because it’s understood that ukuhlawula, paying reparations for injuries caused to others, is indivisible from ukubuyisa, the restoration of injured relations. Ubuntu demands costly forgiveness – you cannot receive forgiveness without giving something up as an act of your contrition. The TRC recommended reparations to victims and families who testified. Later, Tutu called for a wealth tax on all white South Africans. The government ignored both recommendations. Too often, calls for national reparation and restoration are conflated with retribution, but Ubuntu among Abantu requires the righting of relations through inhlawulo yokubuyisa, reparations for restoration. Today, we Black people, 79% of South Africa’s population, own 4% of agricultural land, while white South Africans, 9% of the population, own 72% of agricultural land. In 2014, Oxfam reported, two white men – Johann Rupert and Nicky Oppenheimer – owned as much wealth as the bottom half of the population. The 74% youth unemployment rate – concentrated among Black “born frees” – is the world’s highest. It is unsurprising then, that in their statement to the South African Human Rights Commission’s 2015 hearings, Abahlali baseMjondolo, a Durban shack dwellers’ movement whose members have faced arrest, assault and assassination in their struggle for post-apartheid liberation, cried out that poor Black people “are not counted as human beings”. In other words, despite the flourishing of Ubuntu in post-apartheid discourse, lending its name to software, businesses, books and philanthropic organisations, South Africa is a country in which we have, as Dladla argues, Ubuntu without Abantu. Just as Black people have been dispossessed of their land, Ubuntu has been dispossessed of its deeply radical demands for ethical historical and social relations among people. In a land left bereft by the loss of Tutu, it’s still common to hear Black people answer the question “Ngumuntu na?” (Are they a person?), “Cha, ngumlungu.” (No, they are white.) For white South Africans to no longer be abelungu, settlers in Africa, and to become Abantu, people of Africa, they would have to restore that which made them settlers in the first place – the land. Restoration of the land would begin the national process of ukubuyisa ngokuhlawula, restoring relations through reparations, among Abantu and abelungu into a common world of people bound by Ubuntu. Until there is a true reckoning with the reparations Ubuntu demands, Black and white South Africa will continue to live worlds apart as Abantu and abelungu. White South Africa, nixolisa ngani? What are you atoning with? Panashe Chigumadzi is the author of These Bones Will Rise Again and a doctoral candidate at Harvard UniversityAfter a year of record-breaking climate disasters and a grim prognosis from the world’s top experts who warn the planet has already sustained “irreversible” harm, a movement is gaining momentum to force change. As the UN secretary general declared in August, the urgent need to curb carbon emissions marks a “death knell” for the fossil fuel industry. For decades, Americans were told that standing up to powerful oil and gas companies wasn’t possible. But the reality is that everyday people are making a difference in the fight to cut emissions. These grassroots victories also show that the people who have been made most vulnerable by fossil fuel extraction, including Black and brown communities, already have solutions on hand. Here’s a roundup of their accomplishments over the last year. *** The money movers Large institutions with significant financial holdings in fossil fuel extraction corporations divested their assets Marquee victory: The divestment movement sweeps through Massachusetts. After a nine-year, highly-contentious organizing battle, students with Fossil Fuel Divest Harvard succeeded in pushing the university to divest all of its $42bn endowment – the largest in the world – from fossil fuel-related companies. Other universities like Boston University (BU) and Wellesley University divested from fossil fuels this year as well. Wellesley’s achievement comes after almost a decade of student activism from campus groups called Renew Wellesley and Fossil Free Wellesley. The university agreed to end fossil fuel investments in the next two decades. For BU, the shift is significant. When the student-run group DivestBU first launched eight years ago, university president Robert Brown argued divestment wasn’t feasible. But after a “long journey,” Brown acknowledged in September that activists successfully swayed the board of trustees to divest and put the university “on the right side of history.” Meanwhile, Boston mayor Michelle Wu signed an ordinance in late November phasing out the city’s investments in fossil fuel, tobacco, and prison industries, to be achieved by 2025. Why it matters: “It’s a really clear testament to the power of persistence and of young people organizing,” says Ilana Cohen, a junior at Harvard and organizer with Fossil Free Divest Harvard. “The way that we won divestment was by making it fundamentally unaffordable for the university to maintain its intransigent and fundamentally unfounded, as well as immoral stance on the issue.” *** The community battles Local communities organized to push back against extractive companies setting up shop in their neighborhoods Marquee victory: A majority-Black neighborhood in Memphis, Tennessee, fought off the construction of the 49-mile Byhalia Connection underground pipeline that was slated for approval in mid-2021. Residents had petitioned local, state and federal officials to reject the permit after representatives for the pipeline company said construction through the historically Black neighborhood of Boxtown represented the “path of least resistance”. The company later pulled its permit request for the project, citing low oil production caused by the pandemic. In the north-east, the multi-state environmental organization known as the Delaware River Basin Commission formalized a moratorium on new drilling permits, an action that local environmentalists hailed as “historic”. The new fracking ban covers the near 14,000 sq miles of the river’s basin. Meanwhile, the board of supervisors for Los Angeles county voted unanimously in September to scrap new and existing oil and gas drilling projects. The new rule is slated to impact Inglewood Oil Field, the largest urban oil field in the country, which is surrounded by many majority-Black neighborhoods. In April, a pipeline in the oil field spilled 1,600 gallons of oil just a few hundred feet from the nearest playground. “There are tens of thousands of people who live in very close proximity to oil wells, 73% of whom are people of color,” Supervisor Holly J Mitchell, who authored the motion, told the Associated Press ahead of the vote. “So, for me, it really is an equity issue.” Why it matters: Justin J Pearson, one of the organizers with the Memphis pipeline campaign, says their victory shows the power of the people still holds sway. “When the voices of those who’ve been most excluded and marginalized become the leading voices for change in championing the cause of environmental justice, everyone benefits,” he said. “In Memphis, we stopped a pipeline, but we really catalyzed a movement for justice and change.” *** The shareholder rebellions Activist investors leveraged their collective power to force major oil companies to change from within Marquee victory: Hedge fund activists claimed three of the 12 voting seats on Exxon’s board. Climate activists and dissident investors successfully executed a shareholder rebellion within ExxonMobil and Chevron last spring, protesting the companies’ continued inaction toward meaningfully curbing carbon emissions. The activist hedge fund Engine No 1 staged an upset victory in electing three new directors to Exxon’s board after disgruntled investors hoped to push the oil giant toward a greener future. Meanwhile, Chevron faced opposition from the Dutch activist campaign group Follow This, which led a shareholder revolt in voting to force the company to implement tougher emissions targets. Why it matters: Mark van Baal, who founded Follow This, said the shareholder rebellions mark a “paradigm shift” for investors and a “victory in the fight against climate change”. *** The land repatriation Indigenous groups negotiated the return of traditionally stewarded and stolen lands to halt destruction to the environment Marquee victory: The Passamaquoddy Tribe reacquired 150 acres of land that was stolen in the late 19th century by settler-colonists. The Passamaquoddy lands, which cover an island in rural eastern Maine, were slated for real estate development and timber production. But instead, the Maine chapter of The Nature Conservancy, a global environmental organization based in the US, provided the tribal government with the funds to purchase the land. And in Minnesota, the state returned 120 acres of land to the Lower Sioux Indian Community. The US had broken the Mendota Treaty of 1851, shared with the Mdewakanton and Wahpekute bands of Dakota, by settling the newly repatriated land. In response, the tribes pushed the federal government to uphold its end of the agreement. This led to the Dakota War of 1862, in which the US executed 38 Dakota men – the largest mass hanging in US history. Why it matters: The move is a milestone in US governing bodies acknowledging past wrongs and how these atrocities contribute to the current day. “They should let the Lower Sioux have the entire site,” said Lower Sioux citizen Pamela Halverson, who used to be the tribe’s historic preservation officer. “I would like to see a complete release of all the land.” *** The courtroom rulings Climate activists leveraged the legal system to help enforce a reduction in emissions Marquee victory: A Dutch court ruled that Shell was legally obligated to reduce its emissions by nearly half within this decade. A Dutch court handed down a landmark decision in May to force Royal Dutch Shell, one of the top 10 polluters in the world, to cut emissions by 45% before 2030. Though the court didn’t find the company had broken any laws, it said Shell had endangered human lives, violating the country’s civil codes. Another 2021 courtroom victory came for the 16 young plaintiffs in Held v State of Montana, a suit alleging that Montana contributed to the climate crisis and violated their constitutional rights. It is the first case of its kind to make it to trial, which could set a precedent for similar lawsuits that seek to hold the government accountable for climate change. The young people, now ranging in age from four to 20, first filed the case in March 2020 and are asking that the state implement a plan to reduce emissions. Why it matters: “At this political stage where our governments, both federally and in Montana, are determined to continue to rely on fossil fuels, we turn to our courts to protect [our] constitutional rights,” says Grace Gibson-Snyder, 18, and one of the youth plaintiffs. “We have this opportunity to present the whole story of the government causing climate change.”The prosecution: Roland James resents paying more rent than me and constantly criticises my spending habits My boyfriend, James, is a great guy but he’s very tight with money. We moved into a lovely two-bedroom flat six months ago when I was on a fantastic salary, working in finance. Then, I changed to work in the charity sector, which I’d always wanted to do, and couldn’t afford my half of the rent. James is a lawyer who earns a near six-figure salary, and so for him, money shouldn’t be an issue. But when I asked if we could split the rent 70:30 or 60:40 while I found my feet, he made a huge deal out of it. He told me I should “learn to budget” and that he would be “giving me money” each month by paying more rent. I don’t see it like that – he’s simply paying a bit more because he has the means to do so. James agreed to a 60:40 split, but now takes every opportunity to criticise my spending habits. He waits until the fridge is totally empty so I have to go out and buy groceries. He’s also always telling me to turn off lights, and turn down the radiator because “it’s costing him”. And when I bought a scented candle for our home recently, he snarkily asked “is that really a wise purchase?” before walking out of the room. I can’t remember the last time he planned a date, either. When we met, he wasn’t like this. He would take me out regularly and we’d both spend our spare income on treating the other. Since he’s started paying more rent, he’s grown bitter. I went travelling last year before this new job and he brings it up often, saying it wasn’t a good financial move. But I paid for it all myself, so why is he still going on about it? James grew up with less money than I did, and seems to have a scarcity mindset despite his brilliant salary. It’s like he wants to teach me a lesson because I’ve never had it hard. My family aren’t millionaires but when we first got together, he stayed in my family home, rent-free, for weeks. James should remember that when he insists on reminding me of my past expenditures. And if he’s going to help with the rent, he needs to do it gladly, or not at all. The defence: James Of course I want to support Roland, because I love him, but this can’t be the case for ever Moving in together was a big step. I was fairly happy with where the relationship was, but Roland convinced me that we’d see more of each other and that it made financial sense. It has had the opposite effect. A few months after moving in, Roland decided to travel around South America. He sorted his share of the rent as he was on a sabbatical, but obviously it was up to me to cover all the food and other expenses while he was away for three months. It also put a bit of strain on our relationship, keeping things going over Zoom. When he returned, Roland quit his job, a move I supported. He’d always wanted to work in the charity sector and he’s much happier now. But Roland does need a lot of help splitting the rent and bills. Having less money is stressing him out in a way I’ve not seen before. I’ve agreed to help out, but of course I think he should make more effort to budget. He still buys lunch at work, or comes home with frivolous purchases for the flat that we don’t need – like the scented candle. I’m on a better salary than Roland, but it has taken me years to get here. I grew up with a lot less than him and I understand the value of money more. Roland shouldn’t rely on me to fund his life. The travelling was indulgent and if he’d thought ahead, he could have used some of that money to support his career change. When we discussed the possibility of me paying more rent I was initially reluctant. Of course I want to support Roland because I love him, but this can’t be the case forever – it’s a temporary safety net until he climbs to the next rung of his career ladder. I disagree that we’re going on fewer dates because I resent him. I just think moving in together means we both make less effort. We take each other for granted – it happens to lots of couples. We could make more time for each other and we should both arrange date nights in the flat. I’ll try not to be so critical of Roland’s spending habits, but I think it’s fair that I keep tabs on the heating or the lights. I’m paying more, after all. The jury of Guardian readers Should James continue to pay a larger share of the rent? James needs reminding that they aren’t flatmates. All this about who pays for what smacks of behaviour that should’ve been left behind in student digs. What’s next - labelling food in the fridge? This relationship seems doomed. James knows the price of everything and the value of nothing. Doug, 47 Roland seems to be a have-his-cake-and-eat-it type of guy. To go travelling in South America just before taking a huge drop in salary, then expect James to subsidise him seems very entitled. All relationships involve give and take, but I suspect James will become resentful in time. Ashley, 54 James seems petty and passive-aggressive. He’s not treating the relationship as a partnership. At the same time, it sounds like he never really wanted to move in together. He even resents having to pay for his own food. Keith, 53 James, your attitude to the house finances is more like a flatmate’s than a lover’s. Roland, you can’t just suddenly “realise” you can’t pay your rent. You’re as bad as each other. But James, you need to stop moaning about one candle. Helen, 38 The conversation on money should have taken place earlier so both of them knew exactly what was going to happen. I have sympathy with James as he is justifiably afraid of becoming a cash cow. Margaret, 71 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should James pay more of the rent? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result We asked if Aileen should stop being a tyrant with the Christmas decorations, something which her daughter, Ciara, says takes all the fun out of the festive period. 7% of you said no – Aileen is innocent 93% of you said yes – Aileen is guilty Have a disagreement you’d like settled? Or want to be part of our jury? Click hereTwo years ago today, as New Year’s Eve fireworks lit up skies across the world, news reached the World Health Organization (WHO) about an outbreak of “pneumonia” in Wuhan, China, the cause of which was unknown. There had been several cases in December and possibly as far back as November in the region. But the subsequent WHO announcement was the first time that the world at large was made aware of its existence. At first the announcement garnered little public attention: like the fireworks that had preceded the announcement, fears of potential diseases usually just flared then faded. But as it turned out the disease that came to be known as Covid-19 was something entirely different. In the two years that followed, more than 5 million people worldwide have lost their lives to the virus; “lockdown” has become part of the world’s common vocabulary and governments and their citizens are still waiting for a “new normal” to emerge. The virus has also exposed inequalities within countries in terms of the impact on lower-paid, public-facing employees, as well as exacerbating global inequities as vaccine rollouts take place at vastly different rates. This global retrospective shows, in graphics, the varying impact of Covid worldwide. Europe and Americas have had the highest caseloads More than one in 10 people in Europe and America have tested positive for Covid at this stage in the pandemic, according to figures from Our World in Data that run to 20 December. And even this is likely an underestimate, given that case figures do not capture cases that have gone under the testing radar. Recorded cases rely on the number of Covid-19 tests carried out in a country. Still, we can get a sense of how the pandemic has spread – and how case rates have expanded and retracted – over the last two years by looking at case rates on continents. The highly infectious Omicron variant has caused cases to surge in Europe in December, meaning the continent currently counts for 60% of all new cases being recorded worldwide. This wasn’t always the case, however. As the west reaped vaccine dividends to coincide with the northern summer, South America’s case rates soared for several months, starting in April 2021. This was partly driven by consistently high case rates in Brazil, which have had an effect on the continent’s numbers throughout the pandemic. North America had the highest case rates at the end of 2020, driven by figures in the US as Trump’s presidency came to a turbulent end. The US recently reported it had surpassed 800,000 deaths, the highest absolute figure reported anywhere worldwide. While Africa’s recorded cases seem low, the continent has still been hit hard throughout the pandemic, most recently with the Omicron variant which was first reported in South Africa. Case rates are influenced by how much testing a country does, which in turn is influenced by the funding a country has available to combat Covid-19. The vaccine rollout gave many countries cause for optimism … As 2020 drew to a close the world’s hopes were pinned on the vaccine rollout. As of 20 December, close to 8.8bn coronavirus vaccine doses had been administered to 4.5 billion people worldwide, of whom 3.7 billion were fully vaccinated. It provided real-life proof that vaccines reduce the risk of a Covid-19 infection leading to hospitalisation or death. After signing a deal with Pfizer, Israel was the first major country to achieve strong vaccination coverage. The US and the UK also enjoyed early success in their rollouts, unlike the EU which took longer to pass regulations followed by supply delays. Many countries have since outpaced the early leaders, among them Portugal, Chile, Cuba, Spain, China, Canada, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand, although another frontrunner, the United Arab Emirates, has managed to fully vaccinate more than 90% of its population. The latest figures from Our World in Data show that dozens of countries have vaccinated at least two-thirds of the population. … but the vaccine rollout has been inequitable While the rollout of over 8bn vaccine dose worldwide is a success, the distribution of these vaccines is unequal. The latest figures to 20 December show that more than three-quarters of people in high-income countries have received two doses of the vaccine, compared with just 8% of those living in low-income countries. Data from October revealed how more people have received a Covid booster vaccination in the UK per head of population than are reported to have had their first shot in Africa. Rollout remains stubbornly low in some with dozens of countries – the vast majority in Africa – reporting double vaccination rates of less than 10%. This doesn’t only affect those countries in which vaccination rates are low: as Omicron has shown, uneven vaccination affords the virus opportunities to adapt and spread through new variants. Vaccine inequity moved the death burden from richer nations – but winter 2021 shows they’re not out of the woods As vaccination campaigns started to cover the most vulnerable in wealthy nations, the impact was quick to see. Data from late April revealed a record shift in the burden of global Covid-19 deaths to poor and lower-middle income countries. However, in the months that followed a combination of a relaxation of restrictions, the emergence of the Delta variant, the northern hemisphere winter and vaccine hesitancy in some wealthier nations (most notably the US) has meant that high-income nations are once again recording high levels of deaths. As 2021 comes to an end, close to half (47%) of all global deaths are being recorded in high-income countries. This is lower than the 57% recorded last winter, but far higher than the 8% recorded in July 2021 when some in richer nations thought that they had vaccinated themselves out of the pandemic. These deaths figures, from Our World in Data, are as reported by each country. As countries have different methodologies for counting and reporting a Covid-19 death these numbers need to be interpreted with care. While large countries such as the US, Brazil and India have recorded the highest overall number of Covid-19 deaths, Peru, Bulgaria and Bosnia and Herzegovina are the countries that have the highest death tolls when population is taken into account. Peru has recorded 6,062 deaths per million people over the course of the pandemic. Excess deaths figures can provide further clarity when doing international comparisons: this figure is the difference in the number of people who have died in a given time period compared with the average number of deaths that occurred in the same period in the previous years. Our analysis was conducted using the country-level reported deaths from Our World in Data as it provides the most frequent and current picture of what is being reported by each country. • This article was amended on 6 January 2022 to clarify that North America’s high case rates at the end of 2020 were driven by figures from the US.If the holiday period has left you in need of some calm, the Small Pilgrim Places Network might have the answer. Founded by the late Reverend Jim Cotter, the network consists of meditative places, gardens, holy wells, ruins, churches and open spaces in England and Wales that are “small, simple, welcoming and inclusive”. The network’s online directory lists more than 70 places, from an ancient church carved from a quarry crag to woodland sanctuaries and tiny labyrinths. Here are 10 favourites: all are free to visit and most are open to the public, although in some cases advance notice is required. Saint Michael de Rupe, Brent Tor, Tavistock, Devon Brent Tor is a rock outcrop on the western edge of Dartmoor that soars 330 metres above sea level, and perched on the summit, surrounded by the remains of iron age earthworks, is the tiny church of Saint Michael de Rupe (“Saint Michael of the Rocks”). This ancient sanctuary dates from the 13th century when, according to legend, “Hugh the Merchant” endeavoured to build a church at the highest visible point after surviving a shipwreck nearby. Overlooking Dartmoor, the Tamar Valley and Bodmin Moor, Saint Michael de Rupe is always open, and is reached by clambering up the tall hill – while, of course, keeping an eye on adverse weather conditions. Chapel of Our Lady of the Crag, Knaresborough, North Yorkshire Carved into the rock face above the River Nidd, half a mile from the 12th-century market town of Knaresborough, North Yorkshire, the Chapel of Our Lady of the Crag is thought to have been completed in 1408 by “John the Mason” who, according to legend, built the chapel after his son survived a rock fall. It was probably conceived as a wayside shrine for pilgrims and local quarry workers, and its entrance is guarded by an austere stone knight, who is mentioned in William Wordsworth’s poem Effusion in the Pleasure-Ground on the Banks of the Bran, Near Dunkeld. Visit the chapel and explore its intricately carved interior by walking up Abbey Road, a stone’s throw from Knaresborough high street, itself a noteworthy site for pilgrimages. The Chapel of Our Lady of the Crag is open in summer from 2pm to 4pm, and at other times a visit can be arranged by contacting chapel volunteers. The Labyrinth, Windsworth, Looe, Cornwall Crop circles have long captivated UFO-watchers, but the source of this earthen etching is a little less mysterious: in 2009 local landowner Caroline Petherick set about carving a Celtic-influenced spiral pattern, adjacent to a scenic coastal footpath. The “sevenfold labyrinth” offers gorgeous views over the seashore, and Petherick, who dabbles in dowsing, picked the site for its location at the cross-section of two “energy lines”. Adventurous ramblers can find it by walking east, at mid to low tide, along the shore for a mile from Millendreath, climbing about 20 metres up a shale slope with the aid of a thick knotted rope, then walking a very steep path for a quarter of a mile. Alternatively, they can email Caroline, who runs the Windsworth guest house, and access thesite via her garden. Hedd Wen Peace Place, Abergavenny, Monmouthshire In the gardens of a house in the small village of Llanfoist, on the edge of the Brecon Beacons, is a statue of Sadako Sasaki, a Japanese girl who was in Hiroshima when it was bombed and folded hundreds of origami cranes in her hospital bed when she was dying, 10 years later, of radiation-induced leukaemia. Sculpted by Hazel Reeves, the statue was erected as a “focus, in a quiet space for reflection, healing and renewal” and stands opposite a “peace wall”, where written prayers for peace hang in the gardens. Hedd Wen is the female spelling of the pen name taken by Welsh-language poet Hedd Wyn, who was killed on the first day of the battle of Passchendaele in 1917, and the private gardens, whose name means “tranquil place”, can be visited by walking about 35 minutes from Abergavenny station along the River Usk and through the Castle Meadows; visitors just need to email in advance. Hawkwood Woodland Sanctuary, near Stroud, Gloucestershire Hidden in 10 acres of woods on the Hawkwood estate, half an hour’s walk from Stroud, the Hawkwood Woodland Sanctuary is a cabin resembling the cross-section of a pointy hat. A small group meets regularly for meditation between 8.30am and 9am every Wednesday, but the public can visit any time, provided you notify reception in advance. The estate is home to a “centre for future thinking” and runs regular courses and retreats. The grounds include a walled garden, a natural spring, an organic farm, ponds, wetlands, a labyrinth and the occasional beehive, and views extend as far as the Forest of Dean and south Wales. Saint Margaret’s church, Wichling, Kent Completely off grid and powered by historic gas lights, this remote Saxon church in the North Downs is mentioned in the Domesday book and contains Roman bricks and tiles. To access this wildflower-ensconced “eco church” on the edge of Kent’s Wichling Wood, ramblers can follow footpaths through farmland from nearby Lenham (an Ordnance Survey map or app is advised); or it is a six-mile drive from the A2. Music is played with medieval folk instruments during church services from spring to autumn, when it is open to visitors every day. Winter opening times are more limited: it is worth checking on the St Margaret’s website. Back in Lenham, there are a few cosy pubs where you can quench your thirst. Saint Tanwg, Llandanwg, Gwynedd In Hiroshi Teshigahara’s 1964 Japanese New Wave drama, Woman of the Dunes, the titular woman is doomed to spend day after day shovelling away the sand encroaching on the entrance of her home. Saint Tanwg, the “Church in the Sands”, has repeatedly been rescued from a similar fate, having been dug out of the sandbanks on a semi-regular basis over the centuries. One of the oldest places of continuous Christian worship in Britain, Saint Tanwg dates from AD425 but was probably built on the site of an earlier temple. The interior contains remnants of a gothic window, plus traces of medieval wall paintings and a Celtic cross from the ninth century. Saint Tanwg is usually open daily, but occasionally shuts in poor weather. It is on the 870-mile Wales Coast Path (or a short walk from the Llandanwg request stop between Barmouth and Harlech on the Cambrian Coast Railway Line). Saint Andrew’s church, Winston, Darlington Had Dominic Cummings’s eyes not supposedly betrayed him on his trip to Barnard Castle, he might have spotted Saint Andrew’s church, high on a ridge over the River Tees in Winston. On clear days the tranquil spot offers views far into North Yorkshire. Building buffs might be interested to know that prolific South Shields-born architect John Dobson re-arranged the church, originally built in 1245, in the Victorian era. It is a Grade I medieval building, one of two listed churches called Saint Andrew in the area (the other’s down the road in Aycliffe). Along with its peaceful location and gorgeous views, it boasts three lancet windows in the chancel with very fine “grisaille” glazing dated from the 1860s. From October to Easter, Saint Andrew’s is open every Saturday 9am-5pm; visits can also be arranged by phoning 01325 730392. Saint Winwaloe, Gunwalloe, Cornwall Everyone loves a good peninsula, and the forking tongue of the Lizard in Cornwall, lashing at the sea with its serpentinite-bearing rock, is particularly striking. This most southerly point on the British mainland has one of the mildest climates in the UK, and is packed with natural beauty, from the unspoiled beaches of Kynance Cove to the clear waters of Frenchman’s Creek. A coastal footpath north from sandy Poldhu Cove leads to the ancient church of Saint Winwaloe, the “Church of the Storms” – the only one in Cornwall that’s on a beach – built atop the remains of a sixth-century monastery. In addition to its beautiful surroundings, the site contains an engraved Cornish cross and a font dating back to Norman times. Saint Winwaloe is usually open daily. Saint Tecwyn, Llandecwyn, Gwynedd Constructed on top of a burial place thought to have been in use 2,500 years ago, this is a remote, picturesque Victorian church that offers spectacular views. Adventurous walkers can reach it with a long hike based on a bronze age route through the Snowdonia foothills, or a shorter journey from Llanfihangel-y-traethau, a few miles south-west of Llandecwyn – a traditional pilgrimage called “Saint Tecwyn’s Way. It is also reachable by road or rail: it’s signposted off the A496 and close to Llandecwyn railway station request stop. Whichever way you travel, you’ll be treated to vistas of Snowdon, Cardigan Bay, the Dwyrd estuary and the Rhinog mountains. Saint Tecwyn and its simple interior is open daily for visitors, and private “quiet days” can be arranged for individuals or groups with notice. If you’re in the area, don’t miss Pen Llandecwyn, the tiny 203-metre hill between Saint Tecwyn and Llyn Tecwyn Uchaf, which surely wins a participation trophy for being the 2,033rd-highest peak in Wales.While western countries scramble with their booster rollout to deal with the Omicron wave, only 8.4% of people in low-income countries have had at least one Covid vaccination dose. The gap in the vaccination rates between high- and low-income countries is wider than ever. We cannot keep turning a blind eye to it. The vaccines being distributed to African countries under the Covax scheme are often close to expiry and their delivery is ad-hoc at best. In Nigeria, where only 2% of the population is fully vaccinated, they just had to destroy more than a million vaccines that were close to expiring. Nigeria is not the only country struggling. In Ghana, where 7.4% of the population is vaccinated, Fred Osei-Sarpong, representative of the World Health Organization said: “The receipt of vaccines with a short shelf life puts excessive pressure on the staff and makes it difficult to adequately plan for effective vaccine delivery.” These short shelf lives seriously impede the delivery of vaccines to rural areas. We have worked with Benjamin Ongeri, health supply chain specialist with Crown Agents in Kenya – where 7.2% of the population is fully vaccinated – on the delivery of medicine for neglected tropical diseases (NTDs). He says: “There are enormous challenges in getting medicines to the last mile. We know this from years of working with NTDs. It is very hard to reach people who are most affected since they are vulnerable, often marginalised, and live in remote locations with poor roads and infrastructure.” The same challenges have slowed the uptake of Covid vaccines. And this is exacerbated by the fact that these vaccines require cold (or ultra-cold) chain logistics infrastructure that is often nonexistent in these areas. It also doesn’t help that the vaccines mainly being administered in Africa are those the west has decided not to accept. “In Ghana, at the initial stage of the vaccine rollout, a high demand was generated,” said Osei-Sarpong. Then there were no vaccines. The break in the rollout affected communication efforts and this gap created the space for misinformation and rumours to thrive. According to the WHO vaccine strategy, published in October, the goal is to have 70% coverage across the world by June 2022. How can this target be achieved? Will freeing up intellectual property rights, often cited as a possible solution, bridge the widening gap? Neither Osei-Sarpong nor Ongeri believes it is the answer. For a country to start producing vaccines from scratch would be a massive challenge. According to Ongeri: “Countries like Kenya have begun this journey by targeting the final filling of vaccine vials locally which is still quite challenging given the need for state-of-the-art pharmaceutical manufacturing plants that will guarantee safe production with no chance of contamination.” A lot more will be required in terms of technology transfer and building the expertise needed to fully produce vaccines locally, these cannot be achieved in the short to medium term. The answer lies in global funding mechanisms such as Covax – provided they can guarantee a pre-planned availability of vaccines. More equitable distribution of the jabs on a structural basis with longer shelf lives will allow for realistic and efficient planning. “With the provision of funds for operations and the availability of vaccines, Ghana will be able to strategise and meet the coverage set by WHO,” says Osei-Sarpong. Added to common elements such as the lack of sufficient vaccines with adequate shelf life, each country has its own unique set of circumstances that lead to a low vaccination rate. So, with funding made available, each country can tailor their efforts to combat those circumstances and make sure the vaccines can reach the last mile. In Kenya, Ongeri says they need the resources to undertake door-to-door vaccination campaigns as they do for childhood immunisation. Where there exists a well-functioning delivery system, nations have high vaccine delivery rates. Kenya, for example, has an estimated 80% coverage for childhood vaccines. In Ghana, it’s above 90%. The goal set out by the WHO may not be as unreachable as it appears. It is not just in the interest of the countries with a shortage of vaccines that urgent action needs to be taken. As the UN secretary-general, António Guterres, said: “None of us is safe until we all are.” Bipasha van der Zijde is a marketing and communications adviser at KIT Royal Tropical InstituteWell, that is it for the blog for today – and for the year! It’s been a big one, and I know I speak for the whole Guardian Australia staff when I say thank you so much for being here with us throughout 2021. From the insurrection in the US, to mice plagues, Cop26 and now Omicron. Through lockdowns and Australia’s political #MeToo movement, we are so thankful you have walked with us. To every one of our readers, I want to say you are what makes us, why we do what we do and why we go into the new year with hope. Before we go, let me recap the big stories today: NSW recorded 21,151 new Covid cases and six deaths, Victoria 5,919 cases and seven deaths, Tasmania 137 cases and Queensland 3,118, South Australia 2,093 cases and four deaths, Western Australia one new case and the ACT 462. Queensland police asked revellers: Don’t party too hard tonight. Testing sites in South Australia and Victoria closed due to extreme heat. The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee said changes to testing, tracing, isolating and quarantining were “pragmatic”. The NSW chief health officer, Kerry Chant, said actual case numbers were likely to be higher than reported. Cricket Australia confirmed Travis Head had tested positive to Covid, ruling him out of the Sydney Ashes Test. The Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, said a third of cases in Victoria were Omicron and there was a national shortage of rapid antigen tests. South Australia said it would drop entry testing requirements for domestic travellers. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, maintained the state was in a “strong position” despite rising case numbers. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced a change to isolation time – there will be no day six rapid antigen test for confirmed cases in isolation. The Northern Territory introduced indoor masks after recording 60 Covid cases. The Greens senator Lidia Thorpe was rebuked for appearing to back protesters who set fire to the facade of Old Parliament House in Canberra. Two Tasmanian jumping castle victims were farewelled at funerals. And with that, there is a drink with my name on it, so I am putting this blog to bed. Stay safe, don’t make your resolutions too hard – we’ll see you tomorrow! Leaders of a group of protesters who set fire to the facade of Old Parliament House in Canberra are closely linked to a complex network of anti-vaccination and conspiracy groups which have been accused of spreading misinformation in Indigenous communities during the Covid-19 pandemic. The fire, which broke out during a protest at the entrance to the building on Thursday, caused extensive damage to the doors and portico. There have been a series of demonstrations by Indigenous groups as well as elements of the anti-vaccination movement and sovereign citizen groups at Old Parliament House over the past days. Read the full story here: The Victorian and New South Wales governments are scrambling to organise the distribution of rapid antigen tests to vulnerable people amid short supply, confusion over who should use them and skyrocketing Covid case numbers. Amid a national shortage of the tests, both governments said they were working out how best to distribute tens of millions of kits they have ordered, most of which will not arrive until the end of January. NSW and Victoria have watered down previous commitments to provide free tests after a national cabinet meeting with the federal government on Thursday. Read more here: Police have confirmed one man is dead after part of the cliff at Victoria’s Bells beach collapsed earlier today. The victim is aged in his 20s and was part of a group of six that got stuck after the 30-metre cliff face gave way at about 2.15pm. A man and a woman also sustained non-life-threatening arm injuries and were taken to hospital in Geelong. Emergency crews originally said four people were injured but the number was revised. The beach is an internationally renowned surf spot, which up until the Covid pandemic held the annual Rip Curl Pro competition. With Australian Associated Press. Further breakthrough Covid cases have been detected in the Frozen The Musical company at Her Majesty’s Theatre in Melbourne. As a result, all performances are cancelled up to and including 2 January. The show is expected to return on 5 January. All ticket holders will receive an automatic refund. From AAP: Coronavirus cases have been recorded on remote King and Flinders Islands off Tasmania as the state registers another record daily infection tally. The state registered 137 new cases on Friday, bringing its number of active infections to 520. “Confirmed cases of Covid-19 have been identified on King and Flinders Islands,” acting public health director Julie Graham said. “Both cases are interstate travellers who received positive test results after arriving. They are both in isolation.” The two islands, which are situated in Bass Strait, have a combined population of about 2,500 people. Public Health is conducting tracing and will notify anyone who has been a close contact. Dr Graham said it was an important reminder that people should check-in at locations and wear a mask indoors as part of public health orders. In facts that just hit you in the face, one of our data journalists Josh Nicholas just sent me this tweet. He added a note: “NSW is less than double the NZ pop.” Cool cool cool. The New Year’s Eve matinee of Moulin Rouge! The Musical came to an abrupt mid-show halt today when one member of the company received a positive test result for Covid during the show. The curtain was rung down in Act II. An announcement was made to the audience that the show could not proceed and that everyone should leave the theatre immediately. Contacted for clarification, a spokesperson for Global Creatures, the show’s producer said: “Due to an abundance of caution, we made the decision to discontinue this afternoon’s performance of Moulin Rouge! The Musical after a positive Covid-19 test result within the wider company was made known to us.” Moulin Rouge cast and crew are tested regularly. There will be an update regarding future performances as soon as possible, the statement said. Cast member Ryan Gonzalez, who plays Santiago, has also posted on Instagram that he is at home isolating. NSW health authorities are working to contain the outbreak of Covid in aged care facilities. Of about 70 such centres in western Sydney alone, almost 50 have reported positive cases or have staff who have tested positive, a senior health official tells the Guardian Australia. Some are easier to contain where there is no transmission. A committee convenes to decide which centres will be locked down to limit the spread. The state’s residual contact tracing operations are targeted at high-risk places such as aged and disability care and Indigenous communities, as we reported earlier this week. Prior to 5pm, authorities had already counted more than 11,400 cases since midnight in NSW, and will likely exceed 20,000 today, the official said. The total may double that to 40,000 before peaking. (The midnight to midnight rate was more than 22,000 compared with the 21,151 number reported by NSW Health today that counts 8pm to 8pm.) Eastern suburbs of Sydney were among the biggest clusters of new cases. In recent days, though, the highest rate of positives to tests has been in the Hunter Valley of the state, reaching as much as 40% of those being tested. How much of an impact on the health system will follow this surge remains unclear, of course, with authorities hoping the lower severity of Omicron compared with the Delta variant will limit the numbers requiring intensive care or ventilators. The AFP has announced it will lead a joint investigation with ACT to identify who was responsible for the protest at Old Parliament House yesterday. Those who break the law will be arrested and charged. The taskforce will use the AFP’s world-leading forensics and technological capability to identify and locate those responsible for damaging commonwealth property, which carries a penalty of up to 10 years’ imprisonment. The statement says they have interviewed a number of people and will have an increased presence there in the coming weeks. Sending my thoughts to the good people of Avalon – you do a lot of good in this country and you do not need this NYE nightmare. Work colleagues of confirmed cases, not just people who live together, may be classed as close contacts if a significant transmission event occurs, according to expert health advice cited by Scott Morrison to overhaul Covid-19 rules in Australia. Newly published advice from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee also went beyond health factors to justify the “pragmatic” changes to testing and isolation rules. It said it was a response to fast-increasing case numbers and “the living with Covid policy approach”. The expert advisory panel – which brings together all state and territory chief health officers and is chaired by Australia’s chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly – said the changes would support “public health sustainability, social cohesion and economic recovery”. Yesterday someone was telling me how Australians are obsessed with the weather. But when you have a cyclone (about to hit) at one end and a total fire ban at the other, I think that obsession is more than warranted. Australian Christian minister Bill Crews tweeted this earlier. It’s a toasty end to 2021 for many parts of southern and inland regions of Australia. So far, the hottest place in Australia on 31 January is in Jervois, about 350km north-east of Alice Springs in the Northern Territory. The mercury there topped 42.2 degrees. The populations bearing the brunt of the heat are mostly in Victoria, with Melbourne reaching 37.4C and the state’s top temperature so far touching 40 degrees at Avalon, to the city’s west. South Australia also nudged 42 degrees, with the state capital Adelaide exceeding 38C. Sydney was a mild 28.1 degrees at its top while Brisbane’s top so far of 25.8 degrees came soon after 8.20am, local time. WA, which has a bit more of the day to go, recently reached 41.1C at the attractively named Mount Magnet. While 2021’s year-end warmth is impressive, much of the country was relatively damp over the year and that typically meant temperatures on the cool side. Here are some of the year’s highlights: The federal opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, has issued the following New Year message: 2021 has been a really tough year where people have been isolated, often for long periods of time, from their loved ones and their friends. So let’s hope 2022 brings health and happiness for all and a much easier time. Have a happy new year and I wish you all the best for 2022. Scott Morrison has issued the following message for the New Year: Happy New Year, Australia! Despite the tough times we’ve been through these past few years, we can always be thankful in Australia that we live in what we know is the best country in the world. And it’s not just the physical beauty of Australia, it’s who we are as a people. It’s the care we show for each other that has been so richly on display during the many trials we have been through this past year. It’s our freedom and our preparedness to stand up for that freedom when it counts. It’s our unique sense of the fair go and the responsibility and obligations we know we have to each other and our country, that’s part of the fair go. We’re a quietly confident people with an optimistic spirit. That is why, despite the pandemic, despite the floods, the fires, continuing drought in some areas, the cyclones, the lockdowns, even mice plagues, Australia is stronger today than we were a year ago. And we’re safer. We have one of the lowest death rates and the highest vaccination rates from Covid anywhere in the world. And we have one of the strongest advanced economies in the world to come through Covid – there’s more people in work, more apprentices in training, a secure credit rating and businesses investing in their future with confidence. That gives us confidence to face what lies ahead. Our work in 2022 is to continue to keep our economy strong, to keep Australians safe, to care for our country and work even harder to keep Australians together. Our plans are to ensure Australians grow together, not apart. To ensure that especially rural and regional parts of our country share in the same benefits and opportunities as in our cities. This summer you can play your part in keeping Australians safe by going out there and getting your booster shot and ensuring that children aged five to 11 go and get their vaccinations as well. In 2022 we are looking forward. It’s like the kangaroo and the emu on our Coat of Arms – they never take a backwards step. Now as we keep supporting each other, Australia, we will be even stronger, even safer and always together. There’s a lot to do in 2022. Happy New Year, Australia! There are reports audience members at this afternoon’s performance of the musical Moulin Rouge in Melbourne were asked to leave midway. We’ll find out what is going on and update you. Testing sites in Victoria are closing due to severe heat. From AAP: Two 11-year-old Tasmanian jumping castle victims have been farewelled on New Year’s Eve at separate funeral services in the state’s north-west. The lives of Addison Stewart and Chace Harrison were celebrated in Devonport on Friday. They were among six children who died while enjoying end-of-year celebrations at Hillcrest primary school on 16 December. Addison has been remembered as a “mother hen” and best friend to her brother and sister, who loved singing and dancing, dogs and food. Her favourite treat, Nutella, was placed prominently on a table at the service. Her father, Nathan, also made sure she shared his sporting passions – AFL club Essendon and Supercars team Dick Johnson Racing. “I was on a mission to turn her into my little tomboy,” said her father, who placed a tiny Bombers AFL guernsey on the lectern. Her small coffin was in aqua, with mourners also wearing her favourite colour. “Farewell our beautiful baby Bomber,” her father said. Addison I want to let you know that my children’s book that you had some input in, I will try my hardest to get that finished and published to honour your memory. Earlier at the same Devonport venue, Chace was farewelled with family and friends encouraged to wear Western Bulldogs or Golden State Warriors colours to celebrate his life. He passed away in hospital three days after the 16 December tragedy, the last of the children to die after a freak gust of wind picked up the castle and several inflatable zorb balls. Chace has been remembered in funeral notices as a much-loved big brother and son with a “cheeky grin” who was often involved in “fun-loving antics”. His parents, Teresa and Craig, wrote: Our hearts are broken. Our world has changed forever. Our love for you will always remain the same. The new infection in Western Australia is a close contact of a recent case and is in hotel quarantine. New South Wales daily cases have likely exceeded 25,000 a day, a month earlier than the government was predicting a fortnight ago, an acceleration likely to bring forward the strains on the health system, experts say. The NSW government reported 21,151 new cases in the 24 hours to 8pm on Thursday, almost a 90% jump on the previous day’s tally. Kerry Chant, the state’s chief health officer, said in a video briefing it’s “likely” the increase is higher than reported. Michael Lydeamore, an infectious disease modeller at Monash University, said tests were probably catching about 80% of actual cases, meaning NSW will already be at the 25,000 cases a day rate flagged by health minister Brad Hazzard on 15 December. From AAP: Greens senator Lidia Thorpe has been met with a sea of criticism after appearing to endorse a protest at Old Parliament House in which the doors of the historic building were set on fire. The blaze burnt the front doors of Canberra’s heritage-listed building, causing “tragic” and potentially irreparable damage, according to Museum of Australian Democracy director Daryl Karp. The fire broke out amid a protest at the entrance and also caused extensive damage to the portico. Police confirmed officials had agreed a small smoking ceremony could take place as part of a peaceful protest but said it got “a little bit out of hand”. Senator Thorpe retweeted footage of the fire and wrote: “Seems like the colonial system is burning down. Happy New Year everyone.” The tweet has since been deleted. Deputy Nationals leader David Littleproud said her reaction was “disgraceful”. For politicians to sit there and encourage this, it is not responsible, it is disgraceful, and they should consider their position in the Australian parliament. Aboriginal Tent Embassy activists distanced themselves from the protest, saying a smoking ceremony that took place did not have knowledge or consent from the embassy council. Aged and Community Services Australia is calling on the federal government to model how the new testing requirements will impact the aged care workforce. In a statement, ACSA chief executive Paul Sadler said the aged care workforce was already experiencing a shortfall and was now approaching crisis, given the pressures of two years of the Covid pandemic. The new year is bringing unprecedented challenges for the aged care system, and the lesson of the past two years is the government must minimise the risk by planning now. National cabinet yesterday moved to ease the strain on the overburdened state and territory testing systems but it must now ensure the stretched aged care system isn’t unintentionally pushed to the brink. The reality of the current greater circulation of Covid in the community is that it’s already resulting in an increase in staff who become Covid-positive or must isolate at home in states and territories with high community transmission. Providers must have adequate government support to maintain a workforce that can continue providing high-quality care and services and help protect residents, their families and staff, while furloughing Covid-affected staff. Chris Minns, the NSW Labor leader, did a doorstop earlier. Here a few things he had to say: The truth of the matter is, we do need to live with Covid, but that doesn’t mean that we live without government. There’s an important role for the New South Wales government to run at the moment, in terms of policy development and action. Now, I think that it’s clear that the government’s decision to scrap QR codes and mask mandates midway through December was the wrong decision. It’s led to a situation where Christmas has been cancelled. It’s had a big impact on the New South Wales economy. You’ve got a situation where pregnant women are waiting five and six hours to get PCR tests, and it’s clear the government was not prepared for the large increase in numbers over the last six or seven days. We’re at a delicate point – we’re calling on the NSW premier to be clear with the people of the state; clearly articulate what the plan is. Recognise there’s a role for government in advising the people of the state what decisions need to be made, what their obligations are and what the government’s next moves are. Seven players from the Melbourne Stars Big Bash League team have tested positive. Gunner says there is no end date yet for the mask mandate. It will apply for high schools but not primary schools. Gunner says 24 people currently in hospital are these none are in ICU. There are 2787 tests done in the NT yesterday. That is down a third on yesterday. But the cases are up by more than 60%, so 33% reduction in tests but a 60% increase in cases. There are currently 536 close contacts; 471 have been contacted and [are] isolating; 273 of these have returned a negative test. Gunner tells people to “mask up” tonight. We want you to go out. We want to have as much fun as you can. But we need you to do this as safely as possible. That’s why you need to check in. That’s why we need you to wear a mask at all times while you’re indoors, except when eating, drinking, [and] one-and-a-half metres away from all others. The Northern Territory will introduce an indoor mask mandate after recording 60 new Covid cases. The NT chief minister, Michael Gunner, is speaking now: There are 11 cases that we believe are community transmission. There are 15 cases which are still under investigation for cases [in] the area we believe one of these people was infectious, but all in the community. Hello everyone, this is Cait Kelly. A big thanks to Mostafa for taking us through the morning. I will be sending off 2021 with you – what a wild, weird year it has been! First up, the official statement from NSW on ditching the day six PCR test for confirmed cases: And with that I will hand over the blog to the ever-capable Cait Kelly. Thanks for reading, and have a happy new year. Prof Adrian Esterman, an epidemiologist from the University of South Australia, has been on ABC News discussing the surge in case numbers, saying that “things are getting out of hand.” Prof Esteman said the easing of restrictions in NSW likely sparked the surge, and hoped case numbers would peak before coming down in January. In NSW we are not seeing it going anywhere near the peak yet. So numbers will keep going up at an exponential rate unless something else happens. Modelling, as least for South Australia, has put the likely hospitalisation rate at 5%. Now, when you are starting to get 20,000 cases a day, that’s an awful lot of people going into hospital every single day. And taking up beds that other patients need. So I think states and territories are going to struggle ...Yes, Omicron is much, much milder which is a wonderful thing, but with sufficient numbers of cases then you will start getting hospitalisations going up. And the other thing that no one mentions is the elephant in the room – long Covid. And we have our politicians saying oh, look it doesn’t matter if cases go up because hospitalisations aren’t. I’m sorry, but it does matter if cases go up because there will be a reasonable proportion of those cases ending up with long-term health problems. It appears the ABC’s 7.30 will be gearing back up in 2022 earlier than expected, most likely due to the surge in Covid case numbers: The Antipoverty Centre has urged the government to reverse its decision to adopt changes to testing and isolation with regards to close contacts. It says the changes throw society’s most vulnerable communities under the bus and weren’t made in the name of public health, but for economic reasons. Jay Coonan of the Antipoverty Centre called the National Cabinet’s decision “heartless” and said it meant the poor will die at “even higher rates than we did last year”: During soaring cases and rolling lockdowns in 2021 those without paid work were excluded from any financial support. People in the lowest-paid jobs were confronted with the choice to starve or go to work and risk their own and their loved ones’ health. The results spoke for themselves: people in the poorest parts of the country were nearly four times [more] likely to die of Covid than those in wealthy areas. With the complete rejection of public health measures to help keep the virus at bay, our governments have unanimously decided that business and industry lobby groups’ concerns are more important than our lives. Back to NSW, with Perrottet again urging people not to line up for PCR tests unless a RAT test returns a positive result or people are directed to get tested by NSW Health. Capacity and wait times have been a key issue this week, and Perrottet has doubled down in asking people to avoid queuing up unless absolutely necessary. So my message today for people across our state is: if you are not required to be tested with a PCR test, don’t line up, because you will be taking the place of somebody who is required by NSW Health to receive that PCR test. I understand that’s a change and that will take some time to adjust ... The direction we provided as a government in the circumstances of an unvaccinated population [was] to go out there and get tested. But today, as we move through this next phase in line with the position of the national cabinet, if you do not need a test, if you are not required to by NSW Health, please do not line up. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has just issued the following statement – a “national cabinet update”: Further to National Cabinet on 30 December 2021, and following further consultation with the Chief Medical Officer and Chief Health Officers, leaders have also agreed to remove the requirement for a Day 6 RAT for confirmed cases in isolation. If confirmed cases remain symptomatic, they should remain in isolation. Anyone with symptoms will continue to seek a PCR test. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has stepped up for his presser, and has repeated that he thinks the state is in a “strong position” considering its high vaccination rate. Perrottet says NSW will get through this outbreak on the back of the “effort and spirit of the people of our state”. (Not government policy, apparently.) I know and understand that many people across our state today are anxious. But just like the challenges of the last two years, we will get through this challenge as well and come out stronger the other side. And we’ll do that because of the effort and the spirit of the people of our state. We have made enormous sacrifices over the last two years, enormous sacrifices over this year as well, with many people not being able to say goodbye to their loved ones. It has been an incredibly challenging year, but we stand here today in an incredibly strong position as we head into 2022 because of the efforts and the sacrifices and the great spirit of the people of New South Wales. Marshall has addressed why his state is adopting a different definition of close contacts to the rest of the country (except for WA). He says South Australia is a “different phase of the overall disease”. So, in South Australia now, you’re a close contact if you’re a household or intimate partner, or those two exceptional circumstances in South Australia: if it is related to a vulnerable cohort – for example, an aged care facility [or] Aboriginal community, where there’s no logic in narrowing that down, because those two communities are more likely [to develop] higher-level illness. And the other one, of course, is where we do have an identified transmission site. South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, has announced the state has dropped any testing requirements for people looking to enter the state. He also announced that travellers will no longer need to use the EntryCheck SA app, as well as no longer needing a rapid antigen test before entry. It was not a good use of our resources at the moment, and so the EntryCheck requirement has been removed. The rapid antigen test requirement has been removed. But we are asking all of those people coming from interstate into South Australia to observe exactly the same situation that we require of all South Australians, and that is to monitor their symptoms and to take action should they develop any symptoms. South Australia has reported another record daily increase in case numbers, reporting 2,093 new cases overnight. Sadly, four deaths were reported. There are now 44 people in hospital with the virus, with four in ICU. South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, said the jump in case numbers was “in line with the very steep increases we’re seeing across the country”. It is a further increase on yesterday, and obviously this would seem to be linked to activities that occurred on or around Christmas Day. This is one of the reasons why we had to move very, very quickly on Boxing Day to try to slow the growth, the exponential growth, of positive cases here in our state because we know that many of those people ultimately end up in hospital and in ICU. Foley has continued, saying that RATs should be widely available and free, and seemingly taking a swipe at the federal government for refusing to do anything about the shortage: We prioritise those that are most at risk in the community, and we’ll work though those that are most at risk in the economy, the healthcare system. ... $10, $15, $20, sometimes $25 a pop is prohibitive for many families. And we think there’s a really important role for government to lead and to partner with the wider community in the provision of the tests. We think they should be free. We think they should be widely available. Foley has addressed the discussions around rapid antigen tests today, acknowledging there is a “national shortage” of the tests, and that they are hard to get, regardless of government procurement. The Victorian health minister is being peppered with questions about the tests, saying he feels for those trying to get their hands on the tests. He says free and accessible tests are important in a pandemic response. I know the private sector is equally procuring record amounts, and we’ll work closely with all parts of the community to get those rapid antigen tests out as a pillar of our testing system heading into the future. Victorians have come to I think rightly see testing as a key part of ongoing public health response. Free testing is a critical part of that. But at the moment we are really facing some challenges right across the country. And we’ll work through those challenges as quickly as we can whilst acknowledging the frustrations that that is creating for families and Victorians for a while. Queensland has seen a huge jump in case numbers, reporting 3,118 new cases overnight. A man in his 50s is in the ICU with the Delta variant. There are now 11,697 active cases in the state. Victoria’s Covid-19 commander, Jeroen Weimar, has warned that the severe heat Melbourne is facing today and tomorrow will affect health staff taking PCR tests, and has asked people to avoid getting tested if possible. He said authorities are doing a “site by site assessment” in light of the forecast heatwave, with temperatures in Melbourne looking to peak at 38C today. We’re expecting to peak temperatures of 38 degrees in Melbourne and in other parts of the state. As a result of course, we are doing a site by site assessment of our testing system where we particularly have outdoor testing facilities. We are closing some of those sites as the temperature in those parts starts to rise. You’ll appreciate of course that our staff have been out there for weeks and months on end ... in full PPE, and the temperature in our outdoor testing tents is increasingly 10 degrees above the ambient temperature outside. Equally we do not want to see people waiting for long hours in cars in exceptionally hot weather. So please, you only need to get a PCR if you have symptoms or if you have tested positive on a rapid antigen test. Cricket Australia has released a statement which outlines that batter Travis Head will remain in Melbourne, and that he will not be available for the fourth test: Australian batsman Travis Head has tested positive to Covid-19 following a routine PCR test. Head is asymptomatic and will remain in Melbourne and isolate with his partner for seven days in line with Victorian Government Health requirements. He will be unavailable for selection for the fourth Vodafone men’s Ashes Test, starting at the SCG on January 5. The remainder of the Australian squad, their families and the support staff have undergone PCR and RAT tests this morning. Both the Australian and England squads are expected to separately travel to Sydney as planned today. As a precautionary measure Mitchell Marsh, Nic Maddinson and Josh Inglis have joined the Australian squad as additional cover. Victorian health minister Martin Foley has stepped up for the daily Covid update, and has said that roughly a third of new cases in the state have contracted the Omicron variant. He says he expects the new variant will become the vast majority of cases in the “near future”. The minister also confirmed that the state had adopted the new close contact definition set out after national cabinet yesterday. Building on the below reports, Cricket Australia have confirmed that batter Travis Head has tested positive. Mitch Marsh, Nic Maddinson and Josh Inglis have been added to the squad in the interim. In a statement, CA have said Head is asymptomatic and that they hope he will be available for the fifth test: As part of our testing procedures, we are PCR testing players, their families and our support staff daily. Unfortunately, Travis returned a positive Covid-19 result earlier today. Thankfully, he is asymptomatic at this stage. We anticipate that he will be available to play in the fifth Vodafone men’s Ashes Test in Hobart. We are grateful to our exceptional medical staff for all the work they have done throughout this series and we will continue to work with and support the players, their families and staff from both teams. Reports are emerging of an Australian batter testing positive, meaning the virus has now infected both Ashes camps in the lead up to game four. The Australian is reporting the Australian side have delayed their flight to Sydney amid reports of the diagnosis. The flight was due at 12.35pm, but has been delayed as authorities scramble to work out if other players have been infected. The English side has already seen seven positive cases among their camp. It comes after reports of 14 cases among the Melbourne Stars team. NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant has given a video update, and said that while case numbers are currently very high, it is “likely” actual case numbers are higher: Whilst we’re reporting 21,151 cases in the community, it is likely that the case numbers are higher than that. There is a lot of transmission of Covid occurring in our community and so the risk of transmission and acquiring Covid is high. NSW Health has deleted and re-uploaded their Covid figures this morning, changing the number of people in hospital. The initial figure had it at 763 in hospital, which represented a small jump over yesterday’s numbers. But the updated number is 832, a significant jump in hospitalisations. The number of hospitalisations yesterday was 747, which means there were 85 new hospitalisations overnight, not the initially reported 16. NSW Health has tweeted the latest figure without providing any comment on the issue, so it is unclear where the mixup comes from. Lastly, this is what the AHPPC recommended about isolation and quarantine requirements “in a high case-load environment”: In a high case-load environment, there is a need for a modified, risk-based approach to quarantine and isolation settings. AHPPC advises that the isolation period for Covid-19 cases should be standardised regardless of vaccination status to a length of 7 days. Household contacts or those identified as being at risk of significant transmission should quarantine for 7 days after last exposure to a case regardless of vaccination status and then, subject to a negative test on day 6, monitor for symptoms for a further 7 days and repeat testing if these occur. Other contacts who have been potentially exposed to a case but who are at lower risk of infection should monitor for symptoms and have RAT or PCR test if these occur. All contacts should wear a mask when outside home, monitor symptoms and avoid visiting high risk settings for 14 days following exposure to reduce their risk of transmission to others. If RAT tests are positive, these should be followed by a positive PCR test to confirm the diagnosis. You can read the full statement here. The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) says the existing settings for testing were “placing considerable pressure on available laboratory resources”. Its statement says: In a higher caseload environment where resources are strained, public health resources and clinical vigilance need to be directed to identification of cases most at risk of infection and/or severe disease, and settings where there are people at risk of severe disease. And here’s what the AHPPC says about the management of contacts of Covid-19 cases (note it goes beyond household contacts to allow for possibility of workplace contacts if there’s a high transmission event): Detailed follow up of individual cases and identification of all individuals with whom they have been in contact is not possible with high caseloads. Given significant levels of population exposure and consequent disruption to social and business functioning, it is also not desirable if large numbers of contacts are quarantined. Therefore, household or household-like contacts are the key group who should be required to quarantine as these individuals are the most likely to develop disease. These will be defined, except in exceptional circumstances, as those who usually live with or who have stayed in the same household as a case during their infectious period ... In addition, where a significant transmission event has been documented those who were at this site or venue may be determined to be close contacts. This may include worksites. The advice further adds: There is still risk of transmission based on the nature of exposure for other contacts (such as in social, educational or workplace settings) who have had less extensive exposure to a case ... This group will not be required to quarantine, except in exceptional circumstances, and may be required to undertake other behaviours to decrease their risk of transmission to others. The AHPPC also says that for the effective control of outbreaks, “different management approaches will be needed for contacts in closed, high-transmission settings”, particularly where vulnerable individuals are concerned, such as residential aged care facilities and remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. The health advice that went to national cabinet yesterday argues the changes to testing and close contact definitions are “pragmatic” in “a high case environment and the living with Covid policy approach”. A statement by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) - which brings together all state and territory chief health officers and is chaired by Australia’s chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly - was published overnight. It includes a lot more nuance than Morrison’s comments at the post-national cabinet press conference. It is also interesting how the expert health panel justifies the changes, pointing to issues with community adherence and economic recovery. The AHPPC notes “current and expected future high caseloads necessitate a change in public health actions including policies and processes for test, trace, isolate and quarantine (TTIQ) to support public health sustainability, social cohesion and economic recovery”. The advice says the effectiveness of TTIQ declines as case numbers in Australia increase: The AHPPC acknowledges that public health efforts may not identify considerable numbers of cases and may not manage a significant proportion of the transmission risk. Public health efforts will be required to focus on highest risk and rely on individuals and workplaces to manage their own risk. Consequently, the AHPPC stresses that the proposed changes will likely limit the ability of TTIQ to suppress transmission of COVID-19 at a population level but taking a focused outbreak approach can reduce the impact on the most vulnerable in our community. Welfare recipients should get free access to rapid antigen tests, according to the Australian Council of Social Service, which has branded the federal government’s failure so far to adopt such a measure as “irresponsible and callous”. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said yesterday the government would not be making the rapid tests free, though he said “concessional” arrangements for those on low incomes and pensioners were being worked on. He did not give further details. The Acoss president Peter McNamara said on Friday: We are very concerned that people relying on income support payments just can’t afford $70 for a rapid antigen test kit, leaving them unable to assess their risk from Covid-19 for themselves, their families and the community. It is irresponsible and callous of the federal government to fail to make provision for up to three million people already struggling to survive below the poverty line. Especially when we have evidence that people living in the lowest socioeconomic group have experienced almost four times as many Covid-19 deaths as people in the highest income group. We know that the hardest hit by Covid-19 and all variants are people who are homeless, people with disabilities, First Nations people, especially those who live remotely, the elderly [and] single parent households. McNamara also called for “greater clarity of information from the NSW and Victorian governments” on how people in these states can access free rapid antigen tests. Those states initially said they would provide rapid tests for free, but were contradicted by Morrison’s announcement yesterday that no such policy would be adopted. The Omicron variant has “created a significant speed bump for the economy” due to problems with testing and staff shortages, BIS Oxford Economics’ chief economist for Australia, Sarah Hunter, says. But she says the rollout of vaccines and boosters means health outcomes are a lot better than last year and the chances of a return to hard lockdowns has been reduced. “The reintroduction of some rules and restrictions will weigh on consumer spending,” Hunter said. The challenges around test results and travel is a very tangible example of this, and some people may not feel comfortable going to settings that are likely to be crowded. We’re also starting to see the impact on some businesses, where staff shortages are being created because individuals are having to go into isolation due to contracting Covid or being a close contact. She said similar effects have been felt in the UK and Europe, where countries have been forced to relax isolation rules to keep essential services including healthcare and the food supply operating. Despite soaring case numbers globally, very few countries have had to revert to a hard lockdown to protect their healthcare system, and so the drag on the economy will be much less pronounced than earlier in the pandemic. ... The vaccine is also a key reason why consumers and businesses feel more confident about the outlook. The protection it provides gives people confidence to at least start to return to normal, through increased travel, spending on services etc, and this response will also be a critical driver of positive momentum through the first few months of 2022. Sixteen testing sites across South Australia have had to shut down for part of the day today due to severe heat. A number of metropolitan sites will be closed for a majority of the day, opening between 6.30am and 10.30am, and then again between 5.30pm and 8.30pm. These hours are expected to remain the same on Saturday as the heat persists. The temperature is forecast to hit 39C on Friday and 37C on Saturday. With the state maintaining its reliance on PCR tests, these reduced hours will no doubt affect wait times at testing sites. Tasmania has set a new record for daily cases, reporting 137 new infections overnight. There are currently 520 active cases in the state, with zero patients currently in ICU with the virus. Health program director at Grattan Institute, Stephen Duckett, was on Sky News this morning, and labelled the federal government’s move to redefine a close contact as a “political decision”, not a public health decision. Duckett said the changes had “nothing” to do with transmissibility, and everything to do with “managing PCR testing facilities”: The reason they chose to change the definition of a close contact was nothing to do with transmissibility. In fact it’s the reverse of what should have been done if you’re worried about transmission. Omicron is more transmissible, not less transmissible, it’s more transmissible than Delta. What it was about was managing the PCR testing facilities; in my case I waited in line longer than I had been exposed. So it was entirely about managing the testing. Nothing about the risk to the whole population. China’s foreign ministry has responded to reports that the Australian Department of Defence has not recommended scrapping a Chinese company’s long-term lease over the Port of Darwin. Earlier this week, the Australian newspaper reported that a Defence review had found there were no national security grounds sufficient to recommend a government intervention to overturn the 99-year lease to Chinese company Landbridge. The newspaper reported the cabinet’s national security committee had not yet taken any action, because there was no formal recommendation from Defence for a national security intervention, but the Morrison government was still reviewing the matter. The Australian government has yet to formally confirm the outcome. But when asked about the report, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, told a regular press conference in Beijing overnight: “The economic and trade cooperation between China and Australia is mutually beneficial and win-win in nature. The Chinese government encourages Chinese enterprises to conduct investment cooperation overseas in line with market principles, international rules and local laws. “Australia should stop overstretching the concept of national security and provide a fair and non-discriminatory business environment for Chinese enterprises operating in the country.” In response to another question about closer cooperation between Australia and Japan, including over China’s growing military pressure against Taiwan, Zhao told the press conference: “What we need in the Pacific is the joint efforts of countries in the region to uphold peace, not attempts to drum up the so-called ‘threat’ theories or stir up trouble. All moves against the tide are doomed to fail.” Talk about party poopers. Queensland police acting chief superintendent Chris Stream was on the Today show on Channel 9 this morning, urging NYE revellers to go easy tonight. “Don’t party too much – it’s been a hard year for many people,” he said, paradoxically. Plan ahead. Watch your alcohol consumption in relation to the Covid-safe deployments. We ask you to maintain masks and physical distancing. If you’re going to areas and it’s crowded and you can’t physically distance, look for another area. Yesterday, NSW police took a similar stance, saying they will be launching their usual crowd control operation, and will be monitoring “responsible activity on the road”. NSW police minister Paul Toole yesterday said police would be “out in force”: Police will be out in force on our roads and at events, not just in Sydney, but right across the state to make sure everyone rings in the new year safely. In some perhaps mildly positive news, the South African government has announced overnight that the country has “passed its Omicron peak”. The New York Times is reporting the South African Medical Research Council saying the peak of cases took four weeks, and began declining in two weeks. Fareed Abdullah, from the council, said its speed was “staggering”. The speed with which the Omicron-driven fourth wave rose, peaked and then declined has been staggering. Peak in four weeks and precipitous decline in another two. This Omicron wave is over in the city of Tshwane. It was a flash flood more than a wave. He said the rise in deaths over that period was small, and in the last week was “marginal”. Now obviously, there are many, many caveats to add to this, including differences in vaccine uptake, infectious spread, government policy and so on, but there is at least some light somewhere in the world. It is also worth pointing out that the Omicron variant’s spread in South Africa preceded Australia’s, peaking at more than 23,000 cases a day in mid-December. But cases have been falling for two weeks, currently averaging 11,500 cases a day. I would like to break up the pretty bad news with someone pulling a wheelie at a press conference yesterday: I have to agree, more wheelies at press conferences please. Adding to those numbers, I wanted to list here the hospitalisations. NSW reported another 16 hospitalisations overnight, with 69 people currently in the ICU. Victoria reported 32 hospitalisations overnight, with 54 people still in ICU. Victoria has also reported an increase in case numbers, this time reporting 5,919 new cases – up from 5,137 yesterday. Sadly, seven people died overnight. Another daily record for NSW, and another significant jump in Covid cases, with 21,151 locally acquired infections overnight. There was also a jump in deaths, with six people sadly losing their lives. So, it appears South Australia will resist the changes to the definition of close contact the national cabinet agreed to yesterday. In a Facebook post earlier this morning, the premier, Steven Marshall, lays out his government’s definition of close contacts. Marshall says a close contact will be a: Household and household-like contacts and intimate partners. Those who have been in a setting where there has been significant transmission of Covid-19 (and there has been greater than 15 minutes face-to-face contact). Those in high-risk communities/settings/workplaces where someone has tested positive to Covid-19 (and there has been greater than 15 minutes of face-to-face contact). That is different to the definition introduced by Morrison, under which a close contact is someone who lives with or has been in a “household-like” situation with a confirmed Covid-19 case for at least four hours. Marshall also refused to drop the reliance on PCR tests, saying close contacts will still need to get an “initial” PCR test and another one on day 6, or “immediately if symptoms develop”. Yesterday, Morrison had said a RAT was enough for close contacts to be able to tell if they were still positive or not. South Australia joins Western Australia as seemingly the only two states refusing to adopt the new changes. So, I wanted to just zero in on the conversations surrounding rapid antigen tests this morning. Chief executive of Pathology Technology Australia, Dean Whiting, told the Guardian all providers want is clarity. It doesn’t matter to us whether they’re free, subsidised or other some other thing. What we as an industry have been more concerned about is having a clear role for rapid testing in managing infections, in keeping the economy going and in keeping people safe. In a sense I don’t think we really care if they are free or not in terms of supply of the tests, as long as there is a clear position from governments on the role of the tests. The industry doesn’t have a position because we sell to the government for market price and we don’t care if they are free or not. I am on the record saying that if they were free it would improve access and equity in testing and access to tests. But that isn’t a point about market supply. President of the Pharmacy Guild, Trent Twomey, also told the Guardian they had not been lobbying: So our representation to them [the federal government] has always been that there needs to be a hybrid system, because it may only be $10 or $15 a test and yes, that may be a lot cheaper than a PCR test. But $10 or $15 per person per household twice in a seven-day period is still not affordable for some low-income earners. This, of course, all comes after Scott Morrison told reporters yesterday the reason RATs aren’t free is due to suppliers’ “concerns.” You can read more on this with reporting from Michael McGowan, Ben Butler and Luke Henriques-Gomes at the link below: Good morning and happy New Year’s Eve to all. Mostafa Rachwani here with you to take you through the morning’s news. We begin with the prime minister Scott Morrison, who yesterday announced changes to the definition of close contacts after a national cabinet meeting. The changes include shortening isolation periods for positive cases and restricting close contacts to someone who has been with a confirmed case in a home-like setting for more than four hours. The changes became active from midnight last night, with thousands now free to leave isolation. The new definition comes with a new standard for testing so that close contacts need to only get a rapid antigen test, with the hopes this will ease congestion on PCR testing sites. It comes after Morrison refused to provide rapid antigen tests for free to the general public, citing concerns by suppliers. But industry groups have denied pressuring federal and state authorities to abandon a commitment to provide free kits. More than 21,300 new Covid cases were reported yesterday across Australia, a new daily record for the country, with multiple states reporting record numbers. Meanwhile, New Year’s Eve plans appear to be going ahead in major cities, with some authorities in Melbourne and Sydney encouraging revellers to come out for the occasion, in spite of surging case numbers.I’m standing on a five-metre diving board – about the height of a two-storey building – preparing to throw myself off, headfirst. And I’m terrified. I take a determined step towards the end, lock my arms above my head and begin to tip forward. I have always admired people who can dive, and secretly wished that I could do it. I watch them taking off from great heights, seemingly floating for a second, before arrowing smoothly into the water. How do they do that? When I get up there, the thought of leaping headfirst short-circuits my brain. Won’t my neck snap? So I’ve come to one of the world’s best diving centres, the Life Centre in Plymouth, the former training pool of diving superstar Tom Daley. Hopefully, with a little help, I can become one of those elegant, effortless diving types. My instructor, Fito, a former champion cliff diver, starts by getting me to dive from the side of the pool, before moving me on to the one-metre board. Following his instructions, I find myself plopping easily into the water. After just three dives, he says I’m ready for the three-metre board. I look up. Really? Already? He comes up on to the board with me and we stand at the edge. It feels higher up here than it looks from below. “It’s exactly the same process,” he says. Hands above my head, thumbs locked, tip forward and then jump. Except it’s not the same at all. I start to bend forward, but just at the tipping point, before the point of no return, I stop. I stand up, take a breath. But Fito doesn’t give me time to overthink it. We start again. “Arms locked, bend … one, two … go.” Following his calm instructions I tip forward – and I’m gone. It’s over in less than a second. I hit the water smoothly, going straight through it as if it’s made of soft foam. No smack or slap, just a soft embrace sucking me in. Then I’m straight out of the water and back up the steps, like a child. This is incredible. It’s so much easier than I expected. Again, I pierce the water cleanly, straight as an arrow. On the third dive, however, my concentration slips, my hands flail apart on impact, and my head hits the water with a smack. Fito tells me not to worry, that I have to do it wrong a few times in order to remember to do it right. After about 10 more dives, some better than others, he motions to the five-metre board. If I can dive from there, I think, I’ll have cracked it. I’m feeling confident as I scale the steps. But then I get on to the board and look down. “You’ll be fine,” Fito says from below. I nod. Arms locked, legs locked. But it’s so high. I suddenly feel dreamy. I have to remind myself where I am, that I’m about to dive. I step forward … but I can’t do it. I step back. Fito encourages me again. “You can do it”, he says. “OK, I’m doing it,” I shout. I take a purposeful step forward, bend at the waist, look down at the shimmering water. A childhood memory flashes through my mind. I’m sitting on my bike, about to tip over the edge of a stupidly steep woodland slope, about to smash myself to pieces. “No,” I say. Something, some invisible force, pulls me back. “Take your time,” says Fito. But a safety alarm is ringing in my head. Earlier, talking about his cliff-diving days, Fito had told me that he is a thrill-seeker. But I’m not. I like to challenge myself, but rather than hurling myself out of my comfort zone, I prefer to expand its limits from the inside. So I step back. Maybe after another session on the three-metre board, I would be ready. Maybe then it would feel like a natural progression. But this is as far as the road goes today. I dived from platforms three times higher than ever before. I’m content with that. It’s only later, on the way home, that I feel a little pang of disappointment. Why didn’t I do it? In my memory, the platform height has already shrunk. “Next time,” I think. “Next time.”Pick of the week Young Adult Charlize Theron’s underused talent for comedy is seen to full effect in Jason Reitman’s cutting 2011 film. Her YA author, Mavis, returns to her childhood Minnesota town with the half-baked notion of seducing ex-teenage sweetheart Buddy (Patrick Wilson) away from his wife and baby. Reluctantly abetted by ex-schoolmate Matt (a touching Patton Oswalt), she puts her plan into action by playing her old college rock mixtapes, drinking too much and acting like the “psychobitch prom queen” she once was. Grass-is-greener delusions and the debilitating effect of youthful trauma reverberate as Theron storms through suburbia, a magnificent car crash of a character. Friday 7 January, 11.25pm, BBC One *** The Sound of Music Sneaking into the festive schedule in time for the dregs of the mulled wine, Rodgers and Hammerstein’s nun-on-the-run musical makes its welcome, perennial appearance. Julie Andrews, coming off the back of Mary Poppins, is a natural as Maria, the novice governess whose real calling is turning the seven Von Trapp children into a happy family of choristers. Christopher Plummer has more gravitas than charm as the stern father, and the looming Nazi peril is at a family-friendly level, but the songs are the clincher – Edelweiss still wrings out a quiet tear. Saturday 1 January, 2.20pm, BBC One *** Cast Away There are few actors who could carry an entire film by themselves – and then make you want more of them – but Tom Hanks is that guy in Robert Zemeckis’s 2000 drama. His FedEx executive, Chuck, is stranded on a desert island in the remote Pacific Ocean after his cargo plane crashes, with only a volleyball for company (which he names Wilson and personalises with a bloody handprint for a face). Chuck’s initial mishaps and despair give way to practicality and acceptance – the seven stages of grief, in effect – all orchestrated deftly by Zemeckis. Sunday 2 January, 6.05pm, Channel 5 *** The Peanut Butter Falcon Tyler Nilson and Michael Schwartz’s 2019 film is an engaging adventure with more than a touch of the Huckleberry Finns about it. But the most impressive thing about it is the agency it gives its co-lead character, would-be wrestler Zak (Zack Gottsagen), who has Down’s syndrome. Stuck in an old people’s home because there’s nowhere else to put him, Zak makes his escape and hooks up with Shia LeBeouf’s dodgy fisherman, Tyler. Yes, their river trip together is a learning experience for Tyler but it is equally so for Zak, who grabs his newly won independence with both hands. Monday 3 January, 10pm, BBC Two *** Starred Up The title refers to the procedure where a juvenile offender is moved to an adult prison. Jack O’Connell’s cocky Eric has that dubious honour due to his violent behaviour, but his new home also contains his dad (Ben Mendelsohn) who is a lifer. O’Connell is a livewire presence here, holding his own against Mendelsohn’s hardman act. David Mackenzie’s edgy drama reveals the powder keg that a prison run on rules both legal and illegal can be, fuelled by a fractious father-son relationship. Monday 3 January, 11.15pm, Film4 *** A Quiet Place Part II Here’s more of the same horror from director John Krasinski and star Emily Blunt – but the first film’s triumph of nerve-tingling tension is worth repeating. After a flashback to the origins of the alien invasion, we take up with Blunt’s newly widowed Evelyn and her children, Regan (Millicent Simmonds), Marcus (Noah Jupe) and that crying baby. Cillian Murphy’s lone wolf Emmett mixes up the family dynamic a bit, but silence is still golden – and deaf Regan the key to survival – as the group discover signs of human life amid the sound-sensitive ETs. Friday 7 January, 12.40pm, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere *** The Trial A convincing adaptation by Orson Welles of Franz Kafka’s novel, about an office worker accused of an unnamed offence who becomes lost in a nightmare of bureaucracy as he tries to clear his name. Anthony Perkins brings the nervous energy of Norman Bates to the role of Josef K, and Welles uses his usual limited budget to great effect (not least by dubbing most of the actors himself), throwing Perkins into a disconcerting world of pan-European architecture and people – Jeanne Moreau and Romy Schneider among them. SW Friday 7 January, 10.50pm, Talking Pictures TVBoris Johnson has urged people to get tested before going out to “enjoy” New Year’s Eve, despite the health secretary, Sajid Javid, warning that there would be a two-week shortage of lateral flow tests during a record rise of Covid-19 infections. Three Britons share how they plan to bring in the new year, with some going out to celebrate and others staying home to self-isolate. ‘My son came back from school with Covid so we’re self-isolating until 5 January’ “My son came back from school with Covid symptoms at the end of term,” said Daniel Lewis in Pontypridd, Wales who is self-isolating until 5 January after a positive PCR test. Lewis, 36, said he, his wife, and two children, four months and three years old, started self-isolating at the end of the school term in the hope of meeting people over Christmas. “We were going to visit my mother-in-law who is quite vulnerable but unfortunately I started getting symptoms not long after school finished,” he said. Lewis, the founder and CEO of a cybersecurity company, said he received his booster at the beginning of December and feels as if he has a “heavy cold” with “sinus pain and a blocked nose”. He and his wife have tested using lateral flow (LFTs) and PCR tests, but only he tested positive despite his wife having similar symptoms. “I’m concerned that lateral flows are not a good indicator of positivity of the Omicron variant. I took four LFTs prior to my PCR test, and all were negative, whereas my PCR was positive. I’ve taken two LFTs since my PCR and they have also been negative. “I think the current policy in both England and Wales relies on LFTs a little too much and I fear that lots of people are going to be going out on New Year’s Eve, spreading Omicron, because they’ve had a negative result. In our household, we will just be putting our two small children to bed as normal, and hoping that the fireworks don’t disturb them.” ‘Everyone’s desperate to get out and enjoy themselves’ Kath, 57, a cleaner from Folkestone, plans to spend New Year’s Eve dancing at a roller disco. “Normally, on New Year’s Eve I tend to go to bed early, get woken up by fireworks, then get up early for work. I’m quite boring. But this year I’m meeting up with some friends who are roller skaters. “There are some roller discos in London that run until 1am, but this isn’t quite that intense – it’s only an hour and a half, but we always enjoy it.” Kath’s plans have been unaffected by the rise in Omicron cases in England. The disco company will ask customers to wear masks in and out of the venue, but not on the dancefloor. “We trust each other,” said Kath. “There have been no incidents of people getting ill so far. We did wonder if the disco would be cancelled, but there are actually more people going than we expected. I think everyone’s desperate to get out and enjoy themselves. “Omicron hasn’t been a concern for me when going out. I’m vaccinated and boosted. My son had Covid in January, and despite being in the same house, I was fine. I realise many people haven’t been that lucky, and the government hasn’t done a good job [during the pandemic]. But I don’t want to be frightened by it.” ‘Hopefully it will be a joyful night’ Katy McDowall, a junior doctor working at Northampton general hospital, has postponed her New Year’s Eve dinner with friends to work the night shift on the labour ward. “Like rotas all over the country, ours has been devastated by Covid recently. This new year, shifts have been covered and changed again multiple times. I was aware for some time that it was likely I’d have to fill in.” McDowall, who is 58 and continuing her speciality training in obstetrics and gynaecology after a career break, expects the shift to be “hectic, but full of positivity”. “We’re OK for PPE, but staff have been hit by a lack of access to lateral flow tests while testing at home.” Despite the pressures, McDowall looks forward to the shift. “I have done new year shifts in the past, and it’s serious work, but it’s a special time,” she said. “Parents are excited to know whether their babies will be born in 2021 or 2022, and take enormous pride in having the first babies of the year. Hopefully it will be a joyful night.”A huge number of people in England are not turning up for their Covid vaccine appointments, health leaders have said, saying as many as 40% of bookings are missed. The revelation comes as the government claimed to have met its coronavirus booster jabs target, and that every adult in England had been offered a top-up shot. The NHS Confederation said it was “encouraging” to see people coming forward and getting their Covid-19 jabs but that it was receiving reports that some sites were only a third full. People have been urged to get the booster jab to tackle a growing number of cases of the Omicron variant of the virus. Confirmed daily Covid cases in the UK hit yet another high on Thursday, with 189,213 reported in the past 24 hours, while the number of people in hospital and deaths have also risen, data reveals. Evidence showed that having two doses of the Covid-19 vaccine does not provide strong protection against Omicron. However, a third dose provides about 70% protection against symptomatic infection. Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said it had been informed by some primary care leaders that people were not showing up to as many as 40% of their scheduled bookings. “It is encouraging to see people still coming forward for their first and second doses, as well as the massive achievement on boosters,” he said. “However, cases of Omicron are rising rapidly … Health leaders are worried about the level of illness and demand that their staff across the NHS could have to respond to in January and so, it is vital that everyone who is eligible takes up the offer of a jab or booster shot.” “Some primary care leaders are telling us their vaccination clinics are only a third full and that people are not turning up to as many as 40% of their booked appointments. “While walk-ins continue to be on offer, they are calling on people to stick to their scheduled vaccine appointments and if they can’t for whatever reason that they cancel with notice as this will help manage pressures, particularly given the staffing crisis we are facing currently.” On Friday, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, welcomed news the booster had been offered to all adults in England. He said these efforts meant that “tens of millions of people” got to see loved ones this Christmas. He added that he was “incredibly proud” of the work the NHS had done to accelerate the programme, and thanked “the frontline staff, volunteers, armed forces and British public who have made it possible for us to meet this commitment”.In September, Joe Biden stood in a ravaged area of Manville, New Jersey, after Hurricane Ida brought hundred-year flooding. He motioned at the water marks that reached as high as the first-story windows on some of the homes on the block. “Literally over your head, that’s pretty amazing,” the president reportedly said, while consoling a family whose home was destroyed by a fire that began alongside the flooding. “Well, thank God you’re safe.” A presidential disaster tour is a play that has been performed thousands of times, in gentle words and resolute shows of strength to build again, against Mother Nature’s fury. It used to fall mostly to vice-presidents to make visits to disaster areas, but in the last 20 years, Americans expect presidents themselves to turn up – and some of that shift can be traced to George W Bush’s decision not to visit New Orleans in the immediate aftermath of Katrina. But 2021 has pushed climate disasters to the forefront, and Biden has made at least five disaster tours in the past year, visiting with victims of hurricanes and extreme storms on the Gulf coast and in the New York area, and with victims of wildfires in the west. At the same time, his administration has tried to pass sweeping climate policies, with only mixed success. The 18 weather disasters that hit the United States in 2021 together cost more than $100bn, according to the most recent estimates. According to Noaa, the last five years of climate and weather disaster events have comprised nearly one-third of the disaster cost total of the last 42 years. And 2021 is on pace to be the costliest disaster year of all time. The climate disaster year began in January, when northern California experienced flash flooding and severe winter storms as a “bomb cyclone” and an “atmospheric river” hit the Sierra Nevadas and surrounding areas. The storm unloaded 16in of rain in a few days and delivered blockbuster snow along with 100mph winds in the middle of the state. Atmospheric rivers are like fast-moving, airborne conveyor belts that shuttle moisture from the Pacific to the west coast about a dozen times a year, and much of the west’s water comes from them. Texas went into a deep freeze in February – a phenomenon that scientists say is linked to a changing polar vortex. But some scientists believe that the warming of the Arctic has disrupted the winds that encircle the pole, unleashing giant blobs of frigid air into lower latitudes. At least 210 people died during the storm’s aftermath, where the underprepared power grid gave out and more than 4m households lost power. Travel was nearly impossible, as many areas were covered in snow and ice. Biden visited the Houston area in late February, where he was briefed by emergency officials and thanked workers for doing “God’s work”. He promised the federal government will be there for Texans as they try to recover. In June, a heat dome pummeled the pacific northwest, pushing temperatures into the triple digits in Seattle and Portland. An analysis conducted by the World Weather Attribution group, which specializes in using computer modeling to examine the links between ongoing weather events and climate change, finds that the extreme heat wave would have been “virtually impossible” without human influence. July brought the most destructive wildfire of the year on the west coast, about 100 miles north of Sacramento. After a horrible 2020 wildfire season, experts feared extreme summer heat – and that’s exactly what happened in creating the Dixie fire. It became California’s second-largest fire ever, burning nearly 1m acres in the Lassen national forest and destroying the town of Greenville before it was finally doused in late October. In an airport hangar in Sacramento county, Biden reflected on the realities of climate change on weather events across the United States. “These fires are blinking code red for our nation,” said Biden, who used the occasion to promote two bills pending in Congress that would fund forest management and more resilient infrastructure as well as combat global warming. The country couldn’t “ignore the reality that these wildfires are being supercharged by climate change.” After Hurricane Ida, a category 4 storm, caused $65bn in damages in Louisiana, Biden visited the area in September, reminding locals that the storm was another reminder to be prepared for the next one. “And superstorms are going to come, and they’re going to come more frequently and more ferociously,” he said. “I’ve been working closely with the governor and our colleagues in Congress in both parties on my Build Back Better plan that will modernize our roads, our bridges, sewers and drainage systems and power grids and transmission lines to make sure they’re more resilient.” And this month, Biden flew to Kentucky to survey the damage after a series of tornadoes tore a 200-mile swath through the state, killing scores of people and leaving more than 1,000 families homeless or with severe damage to repair. Biden pledged to do “whatever it takes, as long as it takes” to help Kentucky and other states after a series of deadly tornadoes that he said left a trail of unimaginable devastation. “You will recover and rebuild,” he said. In the halls of government, it has been a mixed year on changing the course on this country’s response to the climate crisis. There was a general disappointment with the outcome of the global Cop26 climate summit. Wealthy nations refused to agree to reparations for poorer countries to compensate for climate-related harms. And while many countries did agree to increase their climate action pledges, scientists say the world is still on track to warm significantly. And Biden’s plans to pass a historic social spending bill, which includes $550bn worth of climate and energy provisions – and the president’s climate agenda – have been halted by West Virginia senator Joe Manchin’s pledge to vote no. But there were also some big wins for climate this year. Biden revoked permits for the long-disputed Keystone XL pipeline, shuttering the project for good. In addition, Biden signed an executive order called Justice40, which promised that at least 40% of all benefits from federal investments in clean energy and climate adaptation will go to “disadvantaged communities.” That has already taken effect, and the bipartisan infrastructure bill signed in November includes $240bn for environmental justice projects–the largest such investment in US history. Climate disasters disproportionately impact communities of color, so investing to keep them safe is an important step in minimizing harm. Biden also had a climate win at the end of the year, with his administration raising vehicle mileage standards to significantly reduce emissions of planet-warming greenhouse gasses. A final rule being issued Monday would raise mileage standards starting in the 2023 model year, reaching a projected industry-wide target of 40 miles a gallon by 2026. The rule will prevent an estimated 3.1bn tons of carbon dioxide emissions over the next three decades, the Environmental Protection Agency estimates, which is equal to shutting down more than 700 coal plants for a year. And perhaps the biggest climate action this year came in the minds of the American public, as they watched these disasters unfolding month after month. An October poll by Pew Research Trust found that more than two-thirds of Americans are perceiving a rise in extreme weather. Another survey showed nearly eight in 10 Americans are more concerned about climate change as a result of severe weather. And for the first time, more than half of Americans say that they have personally experienced the impacts of climate change. “Climate change poses an existential threat to our lives, our economy, and the threat is here,” Biden said as he toured a neighborhood in Queens, New York, after Hurricane Ida in early September. “It’s not going to get any better. The question is: can it get worse?”Mom went into labour on 31 December 1999, while playing cards with family. My sister and I had not been due until February; though twins are often born early, I don’t know if my parents had imagined us arriving so close to the new year. At the hospital in Indianapolis, a doctor came into the maternity ward at about 11.30pm and asked on which side of the millennium they wanted their babies to be born. Before Mom had time to respond, my dad piped up, “How about one of each?” We were delivered by C-section, which gave the doctors more opportunity to influence the outcome. The deliveries could hardly have been timed better: I emerged at one minute before midnight and Jordan joined me at one minute past. Worldwide, four other sets of century-straddling twins were reported that night, though I don’t think any of them were quite so close together as we were. The news spread fast. An announcement was made at our church as its parishioners welcomed in the new year, and my parents were interviewed over and over by the media. This included a few television appearances – everything from our local stations to The Today Show and Good Morning America. On our first birthday, camera crews came to film us devouring our birthday cakes. Newscasters called us the “Millennium Twins” and the label stuck. That footage has come to be a real blessing, because when Jordan and I were only 14 months old, Dad passed away from complications relating to diabetes. He was only 34. Though we never really knew him, the footage of him holding and talking about us not only gives a sense of what he was like, but also makes it clear how proud he was of us, and his playful sense of humour. We’ll always have that gift, and a real sense of connection to him. There was another set of twins in our class, back in primary school. They were identical and did everything together. Jordi and I are fraternal twins, and growing up, we had lots of mutual friends, but different interests: I was into sports, she preferred show choir (choral singing with choreography) and fashion. Some of the other kids couldn’t understand why we had different birthdays. We had joint parties, but Mom realised that the fairest way to do it was to alternate the dates, so one year the party would be on the 31st and the next on the 1st. We have an older brother, Tyler; he enjoyed the attention at the start, but I think it was sometimes hard for him. Later, we started having separate birthdays. By the time I was 13, I’d got into football and travelled to Dallas to see a game. Word got around that one of the Millennium Twins was in town and I ended up being interviewed. I was being followed around by a guy with a camera while everyone else looked on in bemusement, obviously thinking, “Who is that kid?” It’s a curious situation, because it sounds quite grand to say, “My sister and I are twins born in different centuries” but it doesn’t mean we get to jump queues or that we have superpowers. It’s invariably one of the first things people bring up when they’re introducing me, and it can make a good icebreaker. In some ways I’m luckier than Jordan – I get to have my birthday party on a night when everyone’s already celebrating. I can pretend it’s all about me. She has to have hers on New Year’s Day, when people tend to be a bit jaded. I also get to mark our milestones 24 hours before she does. On 30 December 2020, for example, I was in Vegas for my 21st birthday, and the moment midnight hit I sent Jordan a photo of myself with a drink in my hand. She had to wait another day before being able to drink legally. I’ve got a feeling the shoe will be on the other foot in future, though. She already calls me “20th-century boy”, and my eagerness to be first is probably going to come back and bite me when we’re turning 50 and she gets to stay in her 40s for an extra day. We’ve never made contact with any of the other millennium twins, but perhaps we should. After all, we’re part of a very exclusive club: it’ll be the better part of a thousand years before anyone else has a chance to join. • As told to Chris Broughton Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comThe hack Do your eyebrows need a new year boost? Social media recommends an unusual technique – brushing them upwards with soap. The promise Applying household soap to your brows using a spoolie brush (the sort you get in a mascara or eyebrow wand) is a cheap and foolproof way to mimic the thick eyebrows sported by actors Lily Collins and Emilia Clarke. The test The method – pioneered during the golden age of Hollywood and now beloved of drag queens and experts such as Rihanna’s makeup artist Priscilla Ono (with more than 200m views on TikTok) – is simple. Take a translucent, glycerine-based soap and spray a little cold water on it. Sweep a clean toothbrush or spoolie over the bar, then lightly coat your brows in the paste, brushing upwards to create a “feathered” or “laminated” effect (a brow treatment that’s been popular for the past few years). And that’s it. I can see how the glycerine coats the hairs, making them look thicker, and my eyebrows do look as if they’ve been laminated. Does it work? If you’ve already got thick brows, or just like the feathered aesthetic, soap up. For anyone else, Hourglass Arch Brow Volumising Fibre Gel (£27) thickens your brows and holds them in place. Job done.“Fans are fickle. You never know when taste might change. It’s a numbers game, and I’m going to play it,” says Bodi, the guitar-hero hound from the village of Snow Mountain. While Rock Dog 2 nominally denounces selling out, perhaps mindful of how the 2016 original – one of the most expensive Chinese-produced animations ever – bombed, it hectically plays the numbers game itself. Half modern entertainment-biz trawl, half nostalgic Asian rural fable, this messy sequel tries to cover both western and Chinese angles – and toss around enough scattershot energy to keep everyone happy. Bodi’s power-pop trio True Blue are the hottest new act on the block, their music radiating cyan energy waves out to their following. But they have popped up on the radar of Lang, a music-impresario sheep with a fluffy pompadour and British Invasion accent, who has multiple agendas: not just to separate Bodi from his bandmates by teaming him up with starlet Lil’ Foxy, but to shut down Rock’n’Roll Park where the city’s diehard guitar warriors keep the flame burning. Meanwhile in Snow Mountain’s Tibet-style fastness, Bodi’s family are fretting about his sudden fame – though, making a killing selling keychains to True Blue-mad locals, possibly succumbing to the mania themselves. Despite the throwback big-label svengali setup, Rock Dog 2 is a very digital-age chimera: all-over-the-place plot, liberal borrowings including a Zootopia-style anthropomorphised city, and fervid pop-culture references from Bill &amp; Ted to the Rolling Stones. The production values seem to be downgraded from the first film: the animation is cheap and stiff, predominantly zooming in on static backdrops rather than featuring much true “camera” movement, and there’s no star voice cast this time. But younger viewers won’t care. While its generic celebrity-age satire doesn’t bother to root out the original story kernel Pixar would have demanded, it is worldly enough to intrigue pre-teens, and even drums up a certain demented energy for the finale. • Rock Dog 2: Rock Around the Park is released on Sky Cinema and Now on 8 January.For the first time, possibly in a millennium, fewer than half of all Britons call themselves Christian. This month’s updating of the 2011 census suggests the latest figure is down from 60% to 51%, with predictions that next year it will be in the 40s. No one yet knows what the pandemic has done to religious faith, but the trend across the western world is the same. At least in wealthier countries, religion of any sort is becoming a minority practice. The archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, is an ardent evangelical. His Anglican church has spent a phenomenal £240m since 2017 on a mission to “plant” new churches, apparently to no avail. Vicars are some of the most dedicated and public service-minded people I know. They are underpaid and overworked. They will be further demoralised by predictions of another 20% of worshippers poised to desert their congregations after Covid. Yet the public will regard all this as Christianity’s problem, not theirs. As the retreat continues, some will shed a tear but few will worry. They should, for one reason. This ebbing tide will leave on the foreshore an astonishing litter of church buildings. Of 16,000 English parish churches, 12,500 are listed for preservation, with 3,000 in Grade I status. Indeed, 45% of all England’s Grade I structures are places of worship. No other country has a legacy even remotely as splendid or precious. These buildings are undemolishable. Though standing mostly empty and underused, churches have an eerie hold on local people, Christians and atheists alike. The church is their history, their museum, their place of ceremony, their source of comfort in distress. Clergy and volunteers supply a supporting social service, gamely put by the National Churches Trust as worth £55bn a year to the national wellbeing. Many are stunningly beautiful, many others are aloof, dishevelled and grim. But they exist and are not going to vanish. All they can do is fall down, as Britain’s medieval castles did centuries ago. A derelict ruin at the centre of every town and village in Britain is not a fun prospect. This has to be the greatest challenge ever to face cultural conservation in Britain. In the next five years, it is estimated about 350 churches face closure or demolition. Most underused churches already share services and a vicar with others. You can share a vicar but you can never share a church, any more than you can “share” a community. Its very presence denies it. At this point I regard the problem as no longer for the Church of England but for the country, or rather for every community where these buildings are located. Most people I know fiercely want to keep their local church, even the 2,000 churches that see fewer than 10 worshippers a week – with an average age of 61. Yet wanting to save a building that stands empty virtually all week is not the same as knowing how. The Anglican faith is in a perpetual state of “consultation” over what to do. A recent report to its synod put forward the usual suggestions: easier closures and amalgamations, fewer clergy, more online services, more lay-led “mission hubs”. This has provoked a ferocious backlash from Save the Parish, which has been raging for the past three months. But it is getting like a fistfight on the Titanic. At the heart of the argument is precisely the debate that consumed the church in the 17th century and spawned nonconformity and local independence. Do England’s parish churches belong to their congregations – their communities – or to a national corporation of grandees with 42 diocesan bishops and bureaucrats in tow? In Britain, it is currently the latter. There is an “established” church answerable to the crown. The Westminster parliament is the only one in the world with priests as ex-officio members – other than Iran. A properly “congregational” church would look to its community in this bind. If unable to survive and prosper, a local church would transfer itself to a charitable trust or local authority to put it to new uses. In 1976, the C of E stripped its parishes of control of their assets and imposed a tax, a “church share”, on parishioners to support its bishops and overheads. This inevitably crippled local initiative and leadership. I was told the image of a parochial church council is of six people sitting round a table weeping. The public issue is thus not the future of Christianity but the future of parish churches. Across Europe the problem has been cracked. No fewer than 10 countries, including Italy, Germany and most of those in Scandinavia, enable the state to order the upkeep of churches and levy a local tax to do so. In six, including Spain and Portugal, the tax is optional, but most people still pay it, even in strongly non-clerical Sweden. In Britain there is no such tax. But demolition is unlawful and converting historic churches to houses would be a tragedy. New uses are now slowly being found by the more enterprising parishes (and denominations). Churches are already hosting orchestras, theatres, coffee bars, post offices, village shops, libraries, art galleries, yoga classes, playgroups, campsites, farmers’ markets and even breweries. As austerity shuts down urban youth clubs, we should open churches to young people, as at the successful St Mary’s Primrose Hill in London. There is a plan to turn ailing post offices into joint banking hubs. Why not use churches? These are precisely the services being evicted from high streets under government planning reforms. Thousands of village shops must be closing. Pubs are now frequently shutting. Perhaps they should merge. Beer was sold in naves in the middle ages. Usually any changes face fierce ecclesiastical opposition and indecision. The answer must be in some way to copy Europe. It must move underused church buildings into local trusts with a requirement to put them to local use as charities or social enterprises. The best agency to oversee such a move should be the lowest tier of government, the civil parish or town council, its discretion crucially liberated by the power to levy a possibly optional church rate. The C of E is unlikely to oversee such a radical act of denationalisation. It must be the government’s job. I sense many in the church would heave a sigh of relief if it came to pass. But then it always claims to be about faith not buildings. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistAt least Eddie Howe has retained his sense of humour. “If we signed everyone we’ve been linked with we’d end up with a squad of around 1,000 players,” reflected Newcastle’s manager as he surveyed the gap between appearance and reality. Howe finds himself in charge at St James’ Park at the strangest of moments. Over the next month Newcastle are expected to establish themselves as football’s biggest paradox; theoretically the world’s wealthiest club yet currently an extremely hard sell to the planet’s best players. Admittedly Kieran Trippier, an England right-back, could arrive from Atlético Madrid as early as next week after talks between his representatives and Newcastle over activating the £31m release clause in the 31-year-old’s La Liga contract reached an advanced stage in recent days – but that potential deal looks a bit of an outlier. While Trippier is apparently keen on a reunion with Howe, the manager who once signed him for Burnley, and seems enthusiastic about relocating to Tyneside, other players of similar calibre may take more persuading. This is much less about geography – those who tend to roll their eyes in horror at the idea of living in the north-east have frequently never actually visited the region – than league position. Money invariably serves as a talent magnet but there are exceptions to every rule and no club as rich as Newcastle have previously found themselves floundering in the Premier League’s relegation zone at new year after recording only one win during the entire first half of a season. Given that the club’s new Saudi Arabian led owners bought the club from Mike Ashley in October and Howe replaced Steve Bruce as recently as November, the new regime cannot be blamed for the current disconnect yet must somehow conjure the quickest of quick fixes. Newcastle’s manager has now seen two successive games postponed – his side’s scheduled visit to Southampton on Sunday followed Thursday’s aborted trip to Everton – due to a mounting list of players hit by Covid and injury. Howe appreciates there are no guarantees he will be able to conduct sufficiently extensive repair work by 1 February. “We’re under no illusions,” said Howe, who hopes to have at least Trippier in his starting XI for forthcoming relegation six-pointers against Watford and Leeds. “There’s no promises about what we can and can’t do but work’s going on behind the scenes to try and make things happen, to try and bring players here. “We have targets we’ve identified between myself, the coaching team and the recruitment team and we have a big body of people working on the club’s behalf to try and find a way to strengthen the squad. A lot of detail’s gone into that but you can have the most detailed process in the world yet if players don’t want to come to your team, or clubs don’t want to sell them, the challenge of January becomes very difficult.” It hardly helps that, as yet, Newcastle have not filled their vacancies for a director of football and chief executive, although Nick Hammond, who previously filled the former role at Reading, is on board as a short-term consultant and Steve Nickson, Ashley’s old head of recruitment, remains in post. Nickson was the man responsible for driving Newcastle’s £40m capture of Joelinton from Hoffenheim in 2019. While the Brazilian is now excelling as a midfielder and appears reborn under Howe’s tutelage, he was signed as a centre-forward. Significantly, it did not take long for Bruce to emphasise that the most expensive acquisitions are not necessarily always the safest transfer market bets by explaining that the record signing was “not really that interested in scoring goals”. Maximising due diligence and minimising transfer market mistakes is Howe’s immediate challenge but this task has been complicated by the need to not only repair a sieve-like defence but replace his key striker, Callum Wilson, who is likely to be sidelined by a torn calf for about two months. Although Howe would prefer to recruit an established Premier League No 9 there is a tacit acceptance he will almost certainly need to import one from abroad. Before Wilson’s injury, the manager’s shopping list was defender-heavy. While the Sheffield United midfielder Sander Berge and his Spurs counterpart Harry Winks have been monitored, the principal focus has centred on hiring not only Trippier but at least two new centre-halves from a list topped by Lille’s much-admired Netherlands international Sven Botman, Manchester City’s Nathan Aké, Bournemouth’s Lloyd Kelly, Liverpool’s Nat Phillips, Burnley’s James Tarkowski and Brentford’s Pontus Jansson. A loan move for Tottenham’s Joe Rodon is another option. Despite Newcastle playing down suggestions that rival clubs fiercely opposed to the Saudi takeover including, perhaps most notably, Spurs, could well decline to take transfer-related calls from St James’ Park, it remains hard to envisage Burnley selling Tarkowski to fellow strugglers. Moreover, the board’s initial hopes of spending no more than £50m before February appear increasingly fanciful. Unsurprisingly, agents are swarming chaotically around a perceived honeypot, leaving Amanda Staveley, the director who runs Newcastle on a daily basis, besieged by a queue of player representatives wanting to become her best friend before charging her top dollar. By way of further complication, every decision has to be agreed with Staveley’s co-owners, the British based Jamie Reuben and the powerful Saudi-domiciled chairman, Yasir al-Rumayyan, who represents the majority shareholder, Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund. There remains a clear consensus about one thing, though: when it comes to transfers, there is a price for Newcastle and another, more modest, rate for everyone else. Potential sellers are acutely aware that financial fair play rules could permit the St James’ Park hierarchy to spend almost £200m in January and seem determined to hold the Saudis to ransom. A high stakes game of “Who blinks first?” beckons.What’s the point of another Macbeth movie? It wasn’t that long ago we had Justin Kurzel’s big realist version, with Michael Fassbender and Marion Cotillard. Well, there’s always a point if the film is as compelling and visually brilliant as this. Director Joel Coen, working for once without brother Ethan, has delivered a stark monochrome nightmare, refrigerated to an icy coldness. With Shakespeare’s text cut right back, it’s a version that brings us back to the language by framing the drama in theatrical, stylised ways: an agoraphobic ordeal in which bodies and faces loom up with tin-tack sharpness out of the creamy-white fog. Coen’s visual contrivances have something of Kurosawa and Welles, with some German expressionist shadows, and this looks like a crime drama from the 30s or 40s – but entirely naturally rather than as an interpretative affectation. Bruno Delbonnel’s cinematography is pellucid and austere and Stefan Dechant’s magnificent production design imagines Macbeth’s castle as a giant, rectilinear modernist house, with chilly courtyards bounded by vast vertiginous walls and corridors that extend like some sort of open-plan death row. Disturbingly, there is no sense of what it looks like from the outside: we are always within its Escher-like weirdness, with battlements that can extend infinitely into the fog. This Macbeth is in many ways similar to the Coen brothers’ black-and-white crime thriller The Man Who Wasn’t There, which had Frances McDormand as the barber’s wife, brooding and suffering, a lot like Lady Macbeth. And McDormand is of course Lady Macbeth here, a role she was born to play, bringing a hard-won domestic authority and her own sort of military determination to the plan to kill King Duncan. Macbeth is Denzel Washington, who portrays the Thane as already exhausted by his great triumph in the King’s cause at the very beginning, a moment at which he might be expected to look forward to retirement. Washington’s signature rolling swagger looks careworn, but his Macbeth submits to both the duplicitous supernatural promises and his wife’s demands like a soldier taking his orders. And then, angry and paranoid, he escalates his fanatical rule with a series of pre-emptive murders while McDormand’s Lady Macbeth retreats into horror and despair. Brendan Gleeson has a cameo as the King, and Coen imagines a gruesome close-up murder scene for him. Corey Hawkins is a fierce Macduff, lacerated with self-hate for abandoning his wife and children to the tyrant. Bertie Carvel is Banquo; Harry Melling is young Malcolm. Kathryn Hunter is the witch apparition who presents herself disturbingly to Macbeth with two reflections in a pool of water and Stephen Root is the hungover porter making gags about erectile dysfunction, hinting at the reason behind male rage. Washington takes the big speeches at an even pace, sometimes rolling over shades of meaning. He sees the floating dagger and the ghost of Banquo but we don’t. McDormand is more specific and precise in her delivery. Interestingly, Coen lets the two do the cheeky “If we should fail? We fail!” line-reading, which isn’t strictly accurate but has an irresistibly modern sound. Unlike Kurzel, Coen does not directly address the mystery of the couple’s childlessness but lets the issue hang in the air with Lady Macbeth’s lines about breastfeeding. And Coen offers an ingenious new theory about the identity and significance of the third murderer. The movie hits its stride immediately with a taut, athletic urgency and it contains some superb images – particularly the eerie miracle of Birnam Wood coming to Dunsinane, with Malcolm’s soldiers holding tree-branches over their heads in a restricted forest path and turning themselves into a spectacular river of boughs. This is a black-and-white world of violence and pain that scorches the retina. • The Tragedy of Macbeth is released on 26 December in cinemas, and on 14 January on Apple TV+.Rewilding has been one of the big environmental stories of 2021, with successful species reintroductions and the return of wildlife previously thought extinct or critically endangered thanks to efforts to restore ecosystems across the world. In Argentina, just as plans to reintroduce sea otters to the Iberá wetlands were advancing, a giant river otter popped up nearby. A red wolf reintroduction programme returned to prominence in North Carolina in the US, and white rhinos arrived in Rwanda for the first time, while in the UK support for the return of the lynx grew. Scientists even announced plans to bring back the woolly mammoth. Here are eight new species to look out for across the British Isles in 2022: Bison Four bison are arriving in north Kent in spring 2022 as part of a 210-hectare (519-acre) rewilding project to create more wildlife-rich woodlands. Bison, which are Europe’s largest land mammal, were driven out of the UK 6,000 years ago by hunting and habitat loss. Ahead of their arrival, rangers are putting up a 1.4-metre electric fence around the site in Blean woods, which is managed by Kent Wildlife Trust and the Wildwood Trust. The founding members of the herd will be a bull from Germany, an older female from the Highland wildlife park in Scotland (who will be the matriarch) and two young females from Fota wildlife park in Ireland. These large mammals create dynamic habitats in woodlands by knocking down trees, stripping off bark, nibbling vegetation and making dust baths. Ranger Donovan Wright described them as “gentle giants” which are like “jet fuel for biodiversity”. Females can produce one calf a year and up to 10 animals are licensed to be on the site. Bison used to be vulnerable to extinction but populations are rising across Europe thanks to a number of successful reintroduction projects. Frogs The northern pool frog is finally croaking again on Thompson Common in Norfolk – its last stronghold before it became extinct in England about 20 years ago. A batch of 300 tadpoles was released in July, bringing the total to more than 1,000 during the six-year project. The critically endangered northern pool frog is England’s rarest amphibian and was driven to extinction by the destruction of wetland habitats in East Anglia. Conservationists are confident the frogs have formed a self-sustaining population, breeding successfully on multiple ponds. Keeping back vegetation growth and making sure ponds are relatively open will give the frogs the best chance of survival. It also benefits other reptiles and amphibians, including the common toad, great crested newt, smooth newt and grass snake. Beavers Beavers are often called “ecosystem engineers” for their ability to benefit other species, help reduce flooding, increase water retention and reduce silting. This year was a record for beavers, with 17 released into enclosures around England and Wales: two in west Dorset in February by Dorset Wildlife Trust; three in March at Cors Dyfi nature reserve in Wales; and in September, four adults were released in Derbyshire at Willington Wetlands. In November, eight beavers, including four kits, were released in an enclosure in Idle valley nature reserve near Retford. The first baby beaver born in Exmoor for 400 years was named Rashford, after the footballer Marcus Rashford, by popular vote, in celebration of England reaching the Euro 2020 final. Grasshoppers Large marsh grasshoppers have been reintroduced to wetlands across Norfolk thanks to work led by Citizen Zoo, in partnership with the Wildlife Trusts and Natural England. About 1,000 of these elusive green insects were released at two secret marshy sites this summer. Before the translocation, Britain’s largest grasshopper only existed in a few fragmented sites in Dorset and Somerset, with concerns the species would go extinct in the next few decades if nothing was done. After this success, wildlife charities and private landowners have been in touch with Citizen Zoo about returning the grasshoppers to sites elsewhere in the UK. Dwarf pansy The dwarf pansy has returned to an uninhabited island in the Isles of Scilly thanks to long-term habitat restoration work, after an absence of 16 years. Smaller than the tip of a pencil, this little flower is found nowhere in Britain apart from Scilly. After the second world war, the abandonment of grazing, as well as the disappearance of rabbits from the island, made life difficult for the pansy, which thrives on well-grazed, regularly disturbed grassland. Seeds had lain dormant in the soil since 2004 until rangers created a suitable habitat for them to germinate by removing bracken, coarse grasses and scrub. Two flowering plants were discovered this spring, but rangers are hoping there will be more. Oysters Native oysters are being restored on the west coast of Scotland after being almost wiped out after several decades of overexploitation. The Scottish charity Seawilding is reintroducing molluscs, along with seagrass, to Loch Craignish near Argyll to stimulate wider ecological recovery. Native oysters create nursery habitats for fish, improve water quality, remove nitrogen from the water and sequester carbon. Seawilding, which is part of the rewilding network, says it has released more than 300,000 oysters into Loch Craignish by transporting juveniles from Morecambe Bay hatchery and raising them in a nursery. Seagrass is also a vital habitat for marine species and 95% of it has disappeared from the UK coastline. A quarter of a hectare (o.6 acres) of seagrass has been planted by the charity this autumn. There are now several native oyster restoration projects around the UK. Ospreys The 200th osprey chick fledged this year after a 25-year successful reintroduction project at Rutland Water nature reserve, which was started by translocating birds from Scotland. Conservationists hope that the fish-eating bird – which became extinct in England more than 150 years ago – will soon become a common sight in the countryside again. At the Rutland site, there are believed to be up to 10 breeding pairs. The latest fledged female chick was ringed with the number 360 to identify her. In September, the birds make a 3,000-mile migration to the west coast of Africa where the young usually spend a couple of years before returning to breed. Sphagnum moss Sphagnum mosses are being reintroduced at sites across Manchester to help capture carbon and support other bog-loving species, such as sundews, invertebrates and fungi. These important peatland species create the conditions in which other plants can thrive. Two species of sphagnum moss – papillose bog moss and red bog moss – were reintroduced on to Astley Moss in October. On the same site, lesser bladderwort was reintroduced in 2018 after it became extinct on the peatlands of Greater Manchester more than a century ago. From just a few initial strands there are now 2.4 million plants, which catch aquatic insects using little “bladders” on their tendrils. Next year, conservationists want to bring back a small population of juvenile bog bush crickets to Astley Moss and Risley Moss. These efforts are part of the Greater Manchester wetland species reintroduction project. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresTens of thousands of residents in the northern Colorado region have been evacuated due to two fast-moving wildfires driven by strong winds. Nearly 600 homes have been destroyed with at least one first responder and six others injured. Whether you live or work in the area, or are helping with search and rescue efforts with the emergency services, we would like to hear from you. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Good morning. With Russia amassing tens of thousands of troops near its border with Ukraine over the past two months, Joe Biden and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, hopped on a 50-minute phone call yesterday to exchange warnings. “President Biden urged Russia to de-escalate tensions with Ukraine,” said Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, in a statement. “He made clear that the United States and its allies and partners will respond decisively if Russia further invades Ukraine.” The talk – the leaders’ second conversation this month – did little to lower the political temperature, according to their governments. Biden has laid out “two paths” out of these escalating tensions, according to a senior administration official: one of diplomacy and deescalation, the other of deterrence “including serious costs and consequences” such as economic sanctions, strengthening Nato’s force posture and military assistance to Ukraine. “Our president immediately responded that if the west decides in this or other circumstances to impose these unprecedented sanctions which have been mentioned then that could lead to a complete breakdown in ties between our countries and cause the most serious damage to relations between Russia and the west,” Yuri Ushakov, Putin’s foreign policy adviser, told Reuters. Speculation grows that Ghislaine Maxwell may try to cut deal to reduce her sentence Now that former British socialite Ghislaine Maxwell has been convicted of recruiting and grooming teenage girls for sexual encounters with the disgraced late financier Jeffrey Epstein, speculation is growing that that she may try to cut a deal to reduce her sentence and become a government witness in any broader investigation into Epstein’s elite social circle. Maxwell was found guilty Wednesday of five of six charges for her involvement in ex-boyfriend Epstein’s sexual abuse of teenage girls. There is pressure for high-profile visitors to Epstein’s properties in New York, Palm Beach and the the US Virgin Islands to be held accountable for any potential crimes – especially as the government’s case against Maxwell appeared to avoid reference to broader aspects of the conspiracy. Several obstacles stand in the way of a possible deal, however, including statutes of limitations on criminal and civil sexual crime complaints and the fact that there are just some defendants whose crimes are so egregious that the government would not want to strike a deal in exchange for testimony. Colorado wildfires destroy hundreds of homes, force tens of thousands to evacuate Two fast-moving wildfires driven by strong winds have destroyed close to 600 homes and forced tens of thousands of residents to flee in northern Colorado. At least one first responder and six others were injured, with officials acknowledging the possibility of more to come due to the intensity of fires burning to the north and south of the city of Boulder. Colorado governor Jared Polis has declared a state of emergency in the region. In other news … The Colorado governor has reduced the 110-year sentence handed down to a trucker for his role in a fatal 2019 collision following widespread outcry and calls for leniency. Nascar driver Brandon Brown has partnered with a sponsor inspired by his unintentional association with the rightwing anti-Biden “Let’s go Brandon” meme. US senator Ted Cruz is being ridiculed for mistaking a Facebook post by the government of Western Australia on New Year’s Eve party Covid restrictions for an edict by the Democrat-run state of Washington. Stat of the day: almost 8.8bn coronavirus vaccine doses have been administered to 4.5 billion people worldwide Today marks two years since news reached the World Health Organization (WHO) about an outbreak of “pneumonia” in Wuhan, China, the cause of which was unknown. In those two years, more than 5 million people worldwide lost their lives to the disease now known as Covid-19, as vaccination rollouts offered new hope – and proof that they reduced the risk of infection leading to hospitalization or death. As of 20 December, about 3.7 billion people were fully vaccinated. Don’t miss this: how 2021 made Joe Biden the climate change president The disasters that came one right after another in 2021 – the floods, the freezes, the fires, the storms – have forced Joe Biden and his obligatory presidential disaster tours to take on different meaning under the long shadow of the climate crisis. The last five years of climate and weather disaster events have comprised nearly one-third of the disaster cost total of the last 42 years, with 2021 on course to be the costliest disaster year of all time at more than $100bn. … or this: the trauma hitting wildland firefighters upon their return home Wildland firefighters who spent months in the trenches, battling wildfires, are returning home in the offseason to find themselves ensconced in yet another fight: with their mental health. Climate check: a look back on a year of victories This year, everyday Americans stood up to powerful oil and gas companies, making a difference in the fight to cut emissions and put fossil fuels in check. Here’s a roundup of those victories, everything from the divestment movement to local communities fighting back against communities looking to set up shop in their neighborhoods. Last Thing: a testing situation An American woman voluntarily self-isolated in an airplane bathroom for five hours after testing positive for Covid-19 mid-flight to Iceland. “There’s 150 people on the flight, and my biggest fear was giving it to them,” Marisa Fotieo, a teacher from Michigan, told NBC News. Fotieo had taken a rapid Covid test midway through her trip after her throat began to hurt. She had received two negative PCR tests prior to boarding, and is fully vaccinated with a booster shot.Asad Rahman woke up feeling like someone had punched him in the face. It was the winter after one of his first seasons as a wildland firefighter and he’d battled a blaze that had claimed the lives of six other firefighters. The stress left Rahman grinding his teeth at night until his jaw ached. It would be years before Rahman could acknowledge the symptoms of strain. He’s not alone. Now that another wildfire season has come and gone, firefighters who spent months in the trenches are returning home. Along with the familial problems caused by their prolonged absence and the financial stresses some will face during a season without work, the off-season can bring simmering mental health struggles to the surface. Downtime away from the rush of firefighting and the camaraderie in the camps can be the perfect opportunity for stress to rear its head, says Rahman, who has spent 36 years in the field and now serves as a battalion chief for the Bureau of Land Management. “We are in this work-mode and we are adrenaline junkies and it is really hard to come down,” Rahman says. “You’re under so much constant danger all summer that your system is on a constant state of alert. And it’s a crash when you come off of that – an absolute crash.” The cumulative effects of the perilous and prolonged assignments show up in higher rates of alcohol abuse, divorce and sleep deprivation. First responders are also 10 times more likely to contemplate or attempt suicide than the general public and mental health-related deaths now outpace line of duty fatalities. But for years, the toll trauma takes on first responders has been buried behind a culture of stoicism that’s persisted in the profession. Over the last three decades, Rahman has faced more danger, more fatalities, more fear and the relentless trauma of bearing witness to the devastation wildfires leave in their wake. But “it was always, suck it up and go forward. Just rub some dirt on it and keep going”, he says. It comes at an enormous cost. Six of Rahman’s friends have died by suicide. They are among thousands of first responders who struggled silently under the building pressure as fires become more frequent, more dangerous and more difficult to contain, adding a devastating new dimension to an already taxing line of work. Pressures of being a public ‘hero’ After two consecutive record-breaking seasons sandwiching the Covid crisis, Dr Mynda Ohs, a mental health clinician who works with first responders, is concerned that this winter could be one of the worst for mental health. “As soon as we settle down and they can come out of work brain – oh man”, she says. “It’s going to hit.” Ohs has spent years working with wildland firefighters, but she also knows their plight from personal experience. Her husband and son both work in the field. In 2020, her husband was deployed for 61 straight days. “He came home and he was a shell of a man,” she says. It took months before he started acting like himself. “The off-season can be very difficult for first responders,” says Jeff Dill, a former fire captain who founded the Firefighter Behavioral Health Alliance, an organization dedicated to helping emergency workers navigate the emerging mental health crises in their field. Dill cites what he refers to as “cultural brainwashing” – the public’s reliance on a hero narrative that diminishes firefighter vulnerability and reinforces the stigma many feel about seeking help – as a key obstacle to creating more openness around the issue. The result has been deadly. Dill tracks the rising suicide toll on firefighters and EMT crew members, a grim tally that previously went uncounted. He validates the numbers himself and coordinates support groups for loved ones grappling with the loss. So far this year, 81 firefighters and EMT workers have been counted. Between 2015 and 2020, his counts included 818 men and women. Dill believes his data only reflects about 65% of the actual number. “We do it to remember them but also to understand the reasons why,” he said, adding that “these are not numbers – these are the faces and names of my brothers and sisters and the families that they left behind.” He’s found that ruptures in family relationships after long assignments is a top trigger. “[Wildland firefighters] are gone for months and when they come back they are strangers.” A hard job that’s only getting worse Tony Martinez, a Cal Fire captain who has spent 28 years working for the state agency, said the work has undergone a profound change in recent years. The intensity of the modern fire season, combined with a continuous crunch on resources, has created a cycle that both creates more strain and drives people away from the profession. “I have people telling me they don’t ever want to go on another fire again – and these are guys who are only a third of the way through their career,” he says. “From the things they have seen, close calls, stress of being on duty for weeks and months on end, and worried about if their family will still be there or not – that was never a thing before.” That’s also why Martinez, who comes from a family of public servants, says he hopes his two teenage sons will break with tradition. “We have a major mental health issue right now,” he adds. “I only see that as the weeks and months and years go by, that increase – and I don’t think the public has any idea.” A federal wildland firefighter, who asked to remain anonymous out of fear of retribution from his employer said he’s considered ending his career, mostly because of the impact it has on his young family. “You come home, after being gone for two or three weeks and it’s a dumpster fire at your own house,” he said. “Everyone is stressed out, my kids haven’t seen me, I am stressed out, my wife is stressed out because she’s been a single working mom – it just gets to the point where it’s not worth it for me to go on these fires.” Federal firefighters rely on hazard and overtime pay to supplement their small wages and survive through the off-season and that, he said, also incentivizes crews to push past their limits. Colleagues have refused care, declined important surgeries, and denied themselves the rest and recuperation they need. “In the last five-10 years the fires have gotten so much more intense,” he said. “And you couple that with the low pay and the low staffing – now people just can’t afford to do the job. It’s so stressful.” Federal agencies, including the US Forest Service have struggled to retain qualified candidates and with each new empty seat, the strain grows. A wakeup call and push for solutions Officials are beginning to heed the call. Joe Biden oversaw temporary pay-increases to ensure no firefighter made less than $15 an hour. The $1tn infrastructure bill also includes language to permanently increase salaries, improve job titles, minimize hazards and establish essential mental health programs. Separate legislation, passed as part of the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2022, grants federal firefighters housing stipends and funds programs that provide peer-support, stress management, mental health leave, and mental health professionals with trauma expertise. Advocates still want to expand on these improvements and ensure that the changes will stick. Another bill – named Tim’s Act for Tim Hart, a smokejumper who died fighting a blaze in New Mexico this year – aims to go further. The act, introduced in October, includes provisions to guarantee mental health leave, create career transition funds and expand stress management programs that have been successful at helping first responders cope. For Hart’s wife, Michelle, the issues tackled by the bill are extremely personal. She witnessed Tim push himself through pain and fatigue to do one of the most dangerous jobs – parachuting into fires too difficult to reach from the ground – in order to earn enough overtime and hazard pay to get through the off-season. “You can tell them until you are blue in the face that they have to take classes about mental health and recognize depression and suicidal tendencies in their friends and co-workers and utilize the programs – but if they know that their family’s welfare is dependent on them getting 1,000 hours of overtime, there is no way in hell they are going to take a break,” said Michelle. That’s why this year was supposed to be Tim’s final year as a firefighter. He and Michelle were going to start a family, but that dream ended on 2 June. Michelle got the call she had always dreaded and rushed to be by her husband’s side as he was airlifted to a hospital. Tim didn’t look like himself. His face was swollen. His leg was badly broken. Staples tracked across his head. “The way I recognized it was him was his feet were out,” Michelle said through sobs. “It was the only part of his body that still looked like him, that wasn’t broken and swollen. His perfectly pale, baby-soft feet, because they were always in socks.” Tim spent nine days in the hospital before he was taken off life support. Michelle was there with him, holding his hand and stroking his head. “It’s important for people to understand how hard this is – and that it’s not just me,” says Michelle, who has since committed to preserving her husband’s legacy by pushing for systemic change. “This is happening to the people who are putting their lives on the line for their country.” Asad Rahman, the battalion chief, is also heartened that, along with the legislative changes, the stigma is starting to shift. While he’s continued to fight fires, for the last 15 years he’s been part of a peer support network designed to foster the trust needed to help firefighters heal. He now serves as a lead. He likened the agencies to a big ship, one that’s difficult to turn, but expressed hope that the culture is changing. The US Forest Service, which employs more than 10,000 firefighters, has brought on clinicians trained in trauma counseling. The Bureau of Land Management, the agency Rahman works for, has initiated pre-season discussions with its wildland firefighters in order to encourage a culture of openness. “People who had years and years of trauma are now getting the tools they need to live normal lives,” he says. Mindfulness, meditation and connections to clinicians who specialize in working with firefighters have been game-changers, Rahman says, adding that he’s hopeful everyone – from rookies to retirees – will receive better trauma training. Rahman has benefited from the shift himself. Five years ago he was diagnosed with PTSD – 31 years after he’d started his career. Now, as he prepares to retire in the new year, he credits the culture-change with saving his life and is excited about his future away from fire. “I get emotional thinking about it because it was a turn of the tide to have that support and to know that your feelings – the anger, the rage, the frustration, the hurt, depression – all of that was a normal response to what you encountered,” he says. “I didn’t know it was normal. I thought I was broken.” In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 and online chat is also available. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgWhy will I love it? The deep green, super-glossy ZZ plant (Zamioculcas zamiifolia) can thrive in almost any position in your home. It is easy to care for and very resilient. Light or shade? The ZZ plant will tolerate pretty much any kind of light except strong direct sunlight, which makes it an excellent plant for beginners. It can live just about anywhere – as long as the room has windows. Where should I put it? You can put this baby in the corner … It’s great for those darker spots that most other houseplants can’t hack. It grows to be rather tall – eventually reaching about a metre – so suits a side table or a plant stand. How do I keep it alive? It can handle frequent watering and slight neglect – make sure you balance the watering with sunlight exposure, increasing the watering at times when there is plenty of light and decreasing it when there is little. Water every seven to 10 days, and feed it during the growing season. Did you know … Take care with children and pets – all plant parts contain calcium oxalate crystals, which are toxic if ingested by humans, cats or dogs.Mohammad Dawood Mommand was at home in Sacramento, California, when he received a call that left him in shock and unable to stand. Ahmad Fawad Yusufi, a cousin who he considered like a brother, had been shot and killed in San Francisco, where he worked as an Uber driver. Yusufi, 31, was an Afghan immigrant and father of three who came to the US on a special visa after serving as a translator for the US military. Family and gig worker organizers say Yusufi was getting some rest in his car between driving shifts when someone attempted to steal his wallet and shot him to death. “When my friend said someone killed my brother, I felt someone had broken my legs, broken everything,” said Mommand, who is called Ilays by friends. Police arrested a 38-year-old man in Oakland on 18 December for the murder of Yusufi last month. Now Mommand and others are calling for justice, and say the circumstances surrounding Yusufi’s death highlights the tough conditions and long hours that Uber drivers face just to make ends meet. Like scores of other Afghan Uber drivers, Yusufi would drive for two hours from Sacramento to San Francisco on weekends and work three or four days straight, often sleeping in his car because he couldn’t afford to stay in a room overnight. In recent years, there have been reports of a growing group of commuters who are forced to travel sometimes more than eight hours away to make a decent living by picking up fares in San Francisco during the day and spending nights in their vehicles. Mommand is urging Uber to take responsibility for the situation, penning an open letter to top execs including CEO Dara Khosrowshani and issuing a list of three demands from Yusufi’s family. This includes giving the family access to Yusufi’s Uber account, $4m in aid to his family, and better pay for all drivers. “I will not rest until my brother’s children are taken care of,” Mommand wrote in the letter. “All I think about is the three kids. Four months, three years, 10 years. They have no father,” he said. “One day my brother’s kids will grow up and they’ll ask me, ‘What did you do for my father? He was killed and what did you do for him?’” Andrew Hasbun, a spokesperson for Uber, said in a statement: “We’re saddened by the senseless act of violence that took Mr Yusufi’s life. Our hearts go out to his family during this difficult time, and we are grateful to San Francisco police for their quick actions which led to an arrest.” The ride-sharing company said Yusufi was offline at the time of the murder, and that he took his last trip with Uber on 27 November and logged off the app shortly before 10pm. According to police, the shooting occurred about 5am on 28 November. Uber said Yusufi’s account has now been unlocked, and that accounts are blocked in situations like this for security and safety reasons. “No worker should have to sleep in their car to make ends meet,” Cherri Murphy, an organizer with Gig Workers Rising, a San Francisco Bay area organization supporting the family, said. For years Uber and Lyft drivers have commuted from all around the Bay to work in the city, she added, sleeping in car parking lots wherever they can. “Ahmad was one of those drivers. Uber knows this is happening. When they learned about Ahmad’s killing, Uber washed their hands of him. That’s simply unacceptable,” Murphy said. Earlier in 2021, Uber and Lyft drivers joined daylong strikes protesting against poor working conditions and demanded the right to protest, with rallies taking place across several US cities. The strikes came as the pandemic underscored the vulnerability of gig work and as work dried up, leaving drivers fearing for their livelihoods. Uber has fought efforts in California to give workers more benefits and protections, most notably in November 2020, when Californians voted to pass Proposition 22, a ballot measure that exempted ride-sharing companies from treating drivers as employees. Under Prop 22, which was heavily funded by Uber and Lyft, app-based drivers are considered to be independent contractors, so companies are only required to grant accident insurance or death insurance to dependents when the driver dies while using the app. In the first few years in the US, Mommand also made the long commute to San Francisco with Yusufi to work as an Uber driver, before giving up the gig because of the pandemic. He said he tried to persuade his brother to do the same. “Everytime I talk to my brother. Please stop it because it’s not safe.” But Yusufi continued driving as he relied on his job to support his family. Yusufi would drive to San Francisco and work for 12 hours, which is the app’s driving limit. He would then rest or sleep for a few hours, before going online to pick up fares again. “If someone works one day driving they make $300. And they’re supposed to give money for gas, insurance, and mechanics. “If they rent [in San Francisco], they’ll have no money. They cannot send anything [home]. It’s really expensive. So they need to work hard and sleep in the car to take care of the family,” Mommand said, adding that better pay and benefits from Uber would help drivers save more money and not have to push themselves to the limit. Since the killing, Mommand has taken Yusufi’s family into his own family home as they have no other assistance or family in the US. He added Yusufi’s wife cannot speak English and is unable to work. Mommand has organized a GoFundMe page to raise funds for Yusufi’s family, which had reached almost $67,000 by the end of December. Mommand is still searching for answers for what happened. “When family calls from my country – his father, mother, everyone – they’re crying and asking: ‘Where is my son?’ “I don’t have any good answers for them,” he said.I have lived in cities all my life. My childhood did not involve any education in the outdoors. It would be fair to say my knowledge of birds doesn’t go much further than the varieties mentioned in Old Macdonald Had a Farm. So when I arrive at east London’s Walthamstow Wetlands on a cloudy November day to meet Ollie Olanipekun and Nadeem Perera for an afternoon of winter birdwatching, I am already apologetic for all that I do not know. But it’s fine: Olanipekun and Perera are used to showing beginners around. In June 2020 they brought 15 people to this very same spot for the first outing of their collective, Flock Together, a birdwatching club that organises monthly walks for people of colour. Since then, they have regularly taken bigger groups of birdwatchers to woodlands across the south of England, from the Surrey Hills to the Essex marshes. They estimate that on each walk, 60% of the group are first-timers. I ask whether demand stays high in the winter. “We had 80 people turning out in the rain last December,” Olanipekun says with a grin. At this time of year, you might be able to see redwings and fieldfares arrive from colder parts of Europe for the winter. The wetlands is also home to one of the UK’s largest colonies of grey herons, and every evening a flock of parakeets make their way there to roost in the trees. The pair were brought together thanks to a chance encounter on Instagram: Olanipekun posted some photos of birds he had seen on his walks, and Perera replied, naming them. They set up Flock Together last summer to challenge the under-representation of people of colour in outdoor spaces. Back then, Britons generally were exploring their local green spaces more, getting back to nature – and taking up birdwatching in droves. Helen Moffat of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) says: “Our website had 70% more views than usual over the first lockdown. More than 50% of those were on pages looking at bird identification. People were looking outside and wanting to know what they were seeing.” Last January, the charity’s annual Big Bird Garden Watch, which encourages participants to note sightings in their own backyards, brought in a million eager birdwatchers – double the usual number. And a study commissioned by the RSPB found that two-thirds of Britons had found solace in watching birds over lockdown. We set off across the wetlands. As we walk, Olanipekun and Perera talk about what brought them together. Olanipekun, 37, an advertising executive, and Perera, 28, a youth sports coach, were both avid birdwatchers, but were used to going alone. When Perera took it up at 15, after becoming fascinated by a woodpecker, “everyone thought it was the strangest thing to be doing, ever,” he says. Their friends refused to join, thinking it was a “white thing”. Olanipekun, who turned to birdwatching when he was 28 to escape pressure from work, doesn’t blame them: the typical birdwatcher is still seen as someone white, elderly and middle-class. “Of course you’re going to think that’s not for you.” In the wetlands, our first attempt at birdwatching is frustrated by a tall closed gate. The southern walkway is closed for repairs. We turn around and head north, walking through the grass, briefly stopping by a sprawling tree. There, Perera points out a wren – our first bird of the day. He tells me that wrens on the island of St Kilda, out in the Atlantic off north-west Scotland, have evolved into a subspecies to deal with the crashing waves. “They are noticeably louder there,” he says. “The adaptation of these animals is fascinating.” Birdwatching, I soon discover, calls for patience. It is clear but windy today, which means that many are hiding. We see hints of bird life on the path, teasing us as we walk: black and blue feathers from a magpie; a brilliant green one from a parakeet. Perera keeps them all for his collection. What advice do Perera and Olanipekun give to first-time birdwatchers? There are small tricks, like cupping your hand around your ears to help you focus on birdsong. Olanipekun also advises beginners to just enjoy themselves without stressing too much about results – to spend time soaking in the environment and the sounds of nature. As we walk, we exchange (or in my case, learn) bird facts. Olanipekun’s favourite bird is the “beautifully majestic” barn owl, which can hear the heartbeat of the mouse from several metres away. Perera won’t pick a favourite, but admits he does enjoy watching crows, because of their intelligence. “They have the brain capacity of a human five-year-old,” Olanipekun agrees. We begin talking about abilities we’d like to take from birds. Olanipekun envies the golden eagle’s impressive eyesight. After some thought, Perera decides on the bearded vulture, which can swallow and digest bones. “It means I won’t waste any food.” Walking through an underpass, we meet a man on a day out with his family. He spots Perera and Olanipekun, and in a moment of instant kinship, asks what they’re up to. They tell him about Flock Together; he reaches into his backpack and pulls out a cap that shows he works for the Canal &amp; River Trust. He wants to set up a voluntary group of Black Londoners to work on conserving the waterways. Can he stay in touch? Every time they go out, Olanipekun says, people stop and say hello. It shows the incredible appetite there is for communities such as Flock Together, “which makes you ask why it didn’t exist before.” We arrive at a wide-open field, dotted with trees. The sun finally emerges from the clouds. Olanipekun becomes suddenly alert: several metres away, in a tree, he has spotted a kestrel. Perera and I pull out our binoculars. All I can see is a blurry shape. What am I doing wrong? For a start, Perera tells me, I’m holding my binoculars upside down. Olanipekun adjusts my lenses, showing me how to focus, and I home in on the tree. The kestrel has gone. We then turn down a path between marshes and the River Lea. A moorhen is hiding in the swamp, there are goldfinches and parakeets in the trees, and a cormorant flies past. I learn all these names by doing lots of pointing and asking, “What’s that?”. There is no best time for birdwatching, Perera says. But in early November, people in London and the south can spot birds migrating to Britain from colder European climates for the winter. Flock Together will soon venture to Brighton to see the winter starling murmurations, hoping to catch the majestic sight of thousands of birds rhythmically swooping through the air. Yet, with climate change, nothing is certain. A recent study in the journal Global Change Biology suggests that because of global heating, Britain’s birds may stop migrating for the winter. Perera saw changes himself when watching for the arrival of swifts from central Africa earlier this year. “They usually arrive in late April, early May,” he says. “This time they were really, really late. I didn’t notice them until two or three weeks after that.” The swift population in Britain has also dropped by 58% over the past five decades, which has been attributed to a vanishing insect population, loss of viable nests due to building construction, and climate change’s impact on migration routes. It must be staggering, seeing the effects of human activity ripple across the natural world. Of course, Perera says. “The relationship between these animals and the ecosystem dates back millions and millions of years. We’ve messed up the course of the world. We’ve been operating independently of the world, when really we are part of the world. Every action we take should have the ecosystem in mind.” For both founders, Flock Together is as much a movement for racial and environmental justice as it is a nature collective. After our walk, Perera headed to Glasgow to speak on a panel at Cop26. “We’re past the point of no return,” says Olanipekun. Black and brown communities are the most affected by climate change, and are entirely under-represented in mainstream politics; Olanipekun and Perera see Flock Together as a way to effect change at grassroots level. Demand for Flock Together trips continues to grow: satellite groups have emerged in New York and Toronto; Olanipekun and Perera are working on a six-part television series for the BBC’s The One Show, as well as a book, and the group has collaborated with many fashion brands, including Gucci, Uniqlo and The North Face. And they are getting more ambitious with their walks. They are preparing their first night-time expedition this winter, as well as a moth walk, which will be a challenge for Olanipekun, who is scared of moths. For now, though, they are most excited about Flock Together Academy, which runs sessions for younger nature lovers. The children arrive in the morning bored and disengaged, says Olanipekun, but after a day of plant potting, birdwatching and meditation, “they can’t wait to tell their parents how great the day was.” Their projects are underpinned by a simple goal. “Each young mind that we affect is like an acorn from an oak tree. There’s a bird called the jay. It’s thought that over 30% of the oak trees in this country are the result of jays picking up acorns, and carrying them great distances. Who knows where the wider ecosystem will take these little acorns, these young minds, once they’ve been equipped with the skills and confidence to know the outdoors?” Cycling back home that afternoon, I see a group of gulls circling a park. It’s a familiar scene, but now I start ruminating, for the first time in my life, about what their lives look and feel like – their personalities, their life cycles, their magical abilities. My mind has, in the space of two hours, already been decisively changed.Boris Johnson must be ready to restrict social mixing to stop hospitals being overwhelmed by an Omicron-driven surge in Covid cases, a senior NHS leader has said. The rapid spread of the new variant means the prime minister may have to introduce “tighter restrictions, at real speed” to reduce the number of people falling ill with Covid. But any new curbs would take two weeks to cut the number of people needing hospital treatment, added Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers. His comments came as a leading scientist predicted that the sharp increase in Covid infections seen in recent days means that the NHS will be overwhelmed “quite quickly”. Prof Peter Openshaw, a member of the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), warned exposure to only “a whiff of infected breath” could lead to catching the Omicron variant. He also said that mingling during new year celebrations may well lead to a further increase in those testing positive. Hopson said that hospital chiefs understood that the government had set “a high threshold” for how much pressure the NHS would need to be under from Covid before it would tighten the rules. “Trust leaders can see why the government is arguing that, in the absence of a surge of a large number of seriously ill older people coming into hospital, that threshold has not yet been crossed,” Hopson told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “But we still don’t know if that surge will come. Indeed, the NHS is preparing for it right now,” he added. Eight hospitals in England have begun creating their own “mini-Nightingale” on site to help care for patients at “super-surge” capacity. Hopson added: “We are therefore in the same place we have been in for the last fortnight. The government needs to be ready to introduce tighter restrictions, at real speed, should they be needed. “That is somewhat different to suggestions that NHS leaders think there is no need for more curbs. They may be needed, at pace, if the evidence warrants it.” He was responding to a reporton Friday in the Times, headlined “No need for more Covid curbs, say NHS chiefs”, which said that hospital bosses did not think any new measures were needed. Hopson also said: “It’s also worth remembering that it will take around a fortnight for any new restrictions to affect the level of hospital admissions. The pattern for hospital admissions over the next fortnight has therefore already been set.” Referring to the huge recent spike in infections, which caused cases to hit a record high of 189,213 yesterday, Openshaw told BBC Breakfast: “The latest figures show extraordinary rises in infection rates and this is before we’ve had time to see the full effect of what’s happened over Christmas. “The people currently who are very sadly dying of Covid were probably infected on average about 35 days ago, so this was really before Omicron really started to transmit. “It’s therefore too early to say what the impact of Omicron is going to be on more severe disease.” But he warned that hospital admissions due to Covid could increase in the coming weeks as more older people and those not fully vaccinated were infected. “It’s mostly been circulating in children, in people in contact with children, and it’s now going to spread into older adults at much higher risk of severe disease and those with pre-existing illnesses. “I’m very, very glad that a very large majority of those have been triple-vaccinated because that gives you very good levels of protection, admittedly probably not for good, but at least for a while. “But there are of course quite a large number of people who haven’t been vaccinated at all, for various reasons, and it’s this older, more susceptible population who haven’t been vaccinated that we are very concerned about,” Openshaw added. “We’ve had several iterations of this virus going through different stages of its evolution. It has ended up being so infectious that it almost needs just a whiff of infected breath and you could get infected.”So, you’ve been roused from your festive food coma and are ready to hurl yourself headlong into 2022. But what can you expect from the world of popular culture over the next 12 months? I’ve pulled together some notable releases from the world of film, TV and music that I’m personally excited about, or at the very least intrigued by. I’ve largely avoided sequels, prequels and returning series in favour of new stuff (though I have included some long-awaited returns in the world of music). This is by no means an exhaustive list. If there’s nothing here that floats your boat, fortunately the Guardian’s culture desk has a far more extensive rundown of 2022 highlights across film, music, TV, stage, art and more coming next week. Keep an eye on theguardian.com for more. Film 1. Licorice Pizza Any film by Paul Thomas Anderson is a must-watch, but a film by Paul Thomas Anderson set in his spiritual and actual home, California’s San Fernando valley, is a must-must-must watch. His latest, an antic, meandering 70s coming-of-age tale starring Alana Haim and Philip Seymour Hoffman’s son Cooper, is a total delight and quite possibly the funniest film PTA has made. Watch out for some dynamite cameos from Sean Penn, Bradley Cooper and Tom Waits. UK – out 1 January; US and Aus – out now 2. Everything Everywhere All at Once The great Michelle Yeoh stars in a goofy sci-fi about a middle-aged woman who gets dragged into a multidimensional quest while trying to complete her taxes, as you do. It’s from directorial duo Daniels (AKA Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert), whom you might remember from their film Swiss Army Man, in which another Daniel – Daniel Radcliffe – played a flatulent corpse. Everything Everywhere …, which premieres at SXSW festival in March, looks as if it will top that film in the strangeness stakes, going by its truly mind-frazzling trailer. UK, US, Aus – all TBC 3. The Northman Another dizzying trailer, this one for Robert Eggers’s follow-up to his utterly bonkers 19th-century horror The Lighthouse. The Northman delves further into the past, as we head to medieval Iceland for a Viking revenge epic. The cast is as stacked as they come, with Alexander Skarsgård, Nicole Kidman, Anya Taylor-Joy, Ethan Hawke and Björk clambering on board the longship. UK and US – out 22 April; Aus – TBC 4. Nope Little is known about Jordan Peele’s next film, beyond the fact that it stars Daniel Kaluuya, Keke Palmer and Steven Yeun, and that it features a storm cloud trailing some bunting on its poster. Is that enough to be going on for us to put Nope on a list of the year’s most anticipated films? Given the terrifying one-two punch of his previous hits, Get Out and Us, I’d argue that it is. US – out 22 July; UK and Aus – TBC 5. Killers of the Flower Moon The elegiac and extremely long The Irishman felt like something of an extended goodbye from Martin Scorsese, but here he is with another feature film, his 26th. Killers of the Flower Moon sees him reunite with two of his regulars – Leonardo DiCaprio and Robert De Niro – in an adaptation of David Grann’s relentlessly readable book about the real-life murders of wealthy Osage nation people in 20s Oklahoma. UK, US, Aus – TBC Music 1. Mitski – Laurel Hell Four years after the brilliant Be the Cowboy, the Japanese-American singer-songwriter returns with an album which, she says, explores the grey area she occupies, not a “role model” but also “not a bad person”. There’s always been a compellingly gothic tinge to her indie torch songs, and Laurel Hell looks set to push that element further than ever before: its title refers to dense thickets of laurel bushes that produce beautiful flowers and can be impossible to escape from. “I liked the notion of being stuck inside this explosion of flowers and perhaps even dying within one of them,” she says. Out 4 February 2. 100 Gecs – 10000 Gecs Genuinely groundbreaking music, or infantile, nosebleed-inducing noise? Wherever you land on hyperpop duo 100 Gecs (think Sum 41, Aphex Twin and a 1998 Ministry of Sound compilation trapped together in a tumble dryer), it’s hard to argue against their originality. Their second album, 10000 Gecs – so named because it’s “10 times as good” as their debut 1000 Gecs – promises a bigger, stadium-friendly sound but the same “extremely online”, meme culture-embracing humour and blend of EDM, pop-punk and experimental noise. TBC 3. Rosalía – Motomami How to better El Mal Querer, 2018’s chart-demolishing, critic-seducing slice of flamenco-pop futurism which has already lodged itself into Rolling Stone’s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time? Well, if you’re Spanish superstar Rosalía, the answer seems to be to recruit the Weeknd, Frank Ocean and the Neptunes and promise your most “confessional” album to date. Nina Simone, Bach, reggaeton and Andrei Tarkovsky have all been cited as influences for what will surely be one of the year’s biggest releases. TBC 4. Kendrick Lamar – TBC Unlike film and TV, with their fixed production schedules and concrete releasedates, music releases tend be far harder to predict, governed by the whims and circumstances of bands and artists. So we don’t know that Kendrick Lamar’s long-awaited follow-up to Damn will arrive in 2022 but, given the hints that something is on the horizon, we’re entitled to be optimistic. With his track record, that’s very exciting news indeed. Release date TBC 5. My Bloody Valentine – TBC OK, now I’m getting a little greedy. Kevin Shields’s shoegaze pioneers have never exactly stuck to a timetable (their last album, 2013’s mbv, was released 22 years after their previous one, the gamechanging Loveless). But, rumblings have been afoot: the band signed to Domino last year, and Shields promised the Guardian’s Alexis Petridis that a new album – a double album, in fact – was “imminent”. What exactly imminent means in MBV-speak is unclear, but here’s hoping! Release date TBC TV 1. Station Eleven A drama about the aftermath of a deadly pandemic, released in the middle bit of a deadly pandemic, you say? Station Eleven has an awful lot going against it but – as anyone who has read the Emily St John Mandel novel this series is adapted from will know – you’re unlikely to see a more sneakily optimistic portrayal of the post-apocalypse anywhere. UK – 30 January, Starzplay; US – out now, HBO Max; Aus – out now, Stan 2. The Afterparty Phil Lord and Chris Miller, kings of smart, mainstream, big-screen comedy (the Jump Street films, The Lego Movie, Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse), enter the world of streaming with a murder-mystery comedy series for Apple TV+. Fittingly, they’ve brought a murderer’s row of comic talent along for the ride, including Tiffany Haddish, Sam Richardson, Ilana Glazer and, crossing over from north London letting agencies to Hollywood, Jamie Demetriou. 28 January, Apple TV+ 3. House of the Dragon/Lord of the Rings It’s hard to pick one of these two mammoth fantasy franchises over the other. House of the Dragon is the Targaryen-focused prequel to a little show called Game of Thrones and, judging by its teaser trailer, promises the same mix of ultraviolence and spectacular blond wigs. We’ve still not seen a second of footage of Amazon’s TV Tolkien adaptation – which is so under wraps that the entrance to its writers’ room was fitted with a fingerprint scanner – but like House of the Dragon it’s a prequel, set thousands of years before The Hobbit. Lord of the Rings launches 2 September, Amazon Prime Video; House of the Dragon TBC, Sky Atlantic/Now/HBO Max 4. The Curse A comic coming together of the creators of two of the funniest British series of recent years, The Curse pairs Murder in Successville’s Tom Davis with Steve Stamp, Allan Mustafa and Hugo Chegwin of People Just Do Nothing. Unlike those supremely silly series, this at least has a veneer of something approaching social commentary: it’s set during the free-market boom of the 80s, as a group of hapless crooks attempt their own impromptu form of wealth redistribution. UK – TBC, Channel 4; international distribution TBC 5. Inside Man Not the slightly daft mid-00s Spike Lee heist movie, but instead a new drama from Sherlock creator Steven Moffat. Its premise has some of Moffat’s old show’s narrative sleight of hand, following three very different people – a vicar (David Tennant), a US death row inmate (Stanley Tucci) and a maths teacher trapped in a cellar – whose paths cross unexpectedly. Lydia West, who delivered a standout turn as Jill in It’s a Sin, also stars. UK – TBC, BBC One; rest of the world – TBC, Netflix If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Marcelo Bielsa has revealed that Leeds will be without their key central midfielder, Kalvin Phillips, and their captain, Liam Cooper, until March and admitted he is struggling to correct his team’s poor form. “I have not been able to solve the situation as I thought I could,” Bielsa said. “I wasn’t able to resolve the lowering of performance. The evaluation of my task is negative. I imagined resources would resolve them but evidently those resources were not the adequate ones.” The Leeds manager is preparing to face fellow strugglers Burnley at Elland Road on Sunday after seeing his 16th-placed side win only one of their previous eight games and concede 16 goals in the past four fixtures. With Phillips recovering from hamstring surgery and the similarly hamstrung Cooper unavailable at centre-half, Bielsa acknowledges that his squad requires reinforcement during the transfer window. “We will see in January if an alternative comes up which we can take advantage of,” said a manager who has long preferred to work with an unusually small nucleus of senior professionals but is perhaps realising that the spine of his starting XI may be too weak to resist a relegation skirmish. Without England’s Phillips to anchor midfield Leeds have frequently looked a pale shadow of the vibrant side who finished ninth last season. Patrick Bamford has recovered from hamstring trouble and is back, although Bielsa cautioned that his team’s principal striker may begin on the bench. “Patrick is healthy but he hasn’t played for four weeks now,” he said. “That puts into doubt the convenience of him playing.” Junior Firpo, Dan James, Diego Llorente and Jack Harrison have overcome a mix of injuries, Covid and suspension but Rodrigo, Pascal Struijk, Jamie Shackleton and Charlie Cresswell remain sidelined, with Shackleton and Cresswell expected to be absent until early February.James Bond has seen off a late challenge from Spider-Man to emerge as the biggest cinema hit of the year, as UK box office earnings almost double from the record lows of 2020 – but the overall popularity of cinema-going still remains well down on pre-pandemic levels. When the final ticket stubs are officially counted, it is forecast that the UK box office will reach £557m this year, almost double the £297m recorded last year, which was the lowest take since 1992. James Bond: No Time To Die provided cinema owners with the pandemic-busting blockbuster they have been waiting for as Bondmania brought film fans back to venues in numbers not seen since before the coronavirus pandemic. Daniel Craig’s final outing as the superspy 007 has made more than £96m at the UK box office this year, making it the third highest grossing film of all-time, after the franchise stablemate Skyfall, and Star Wars: The Force Awakens. The top earner at the UK box office is also the fourth biggest film of the year globally, taking $774m (£575m) to date. The emergence and rapid spread of the Omicron variant has failed to dent the popularity of the latest Hollywood blockbuster, Spider-Man: No Way Home, which has raced to more than £64m at the UK box office in its first two weeks in cinemas. Already the second biggest film in the UK this year, Spider-Man is the first movie to break $1bn at the global box office since 2019, giving cinema chain owners hope that film-going can permanently return to pre-pandemic levels. “While cinema-going levels are moving upwards, a ‘draw’ movie will push attendance up to previous levels and beyond,” said David Hancock, a film analyst at Omdia. “Most screens are now able to open but some engrained customer hesitancy is affecting overall grosses. Bond brought back the older demographic to cinemas, and also brought back the more hesitant.” Bond, and now Spider-Man, have provided tangible proof to financially stretched cinema owners that the enduring popularity of movie-going has not seen a permanent shift to home streaming during extended periods of closure throughout the pandemic. “Streaming can’t kill cinema,” Hancock said. “Only cinema can kill cinema by not continually investing in its environment to stay ahead of other leisure and film-watching options.” The latest Bond film provided the best October for UK admissions in a decade, with attendance up 130% compared with the same month in 2019. Overall admissions for the year are forecast to top 78 million, well above the 44 million seen in 2020, the lowest level since records began in 1928. Despite the promising signs of a revival, there is a long way to go to reach pre-pandemic levels. In 2019 the UK box office hit £1.25bn and cinema attendance reached 176 million. Omdia is forecasting that in 2023 the UK box office will return to 99% of that level, with attendance at 97% of pre-pandemic popularity. However, the long and financially uncertain road to reach that point, as well as the urban-to-rural shift in living the pandemic-fuelled move to flexible working has created, will result in cinema owners staging a strategic rethink of the viability of locations of sites. “Under-pressure exhibitors will seek to keep alive their most profitable venues, trimming their less-profitable sites or closing down individual screens within sites,” Hancock said. “The move to working from home and the rush for extra space into rural, coastal, and suburban areas will create opportunities for new sites in historically low–cinema-provision areas.” Top grossing films of 2021 (UK &amp; Ireland) 1) James Bond: No Time To Die – £96.5m 2) Spider-Man: No Way Home – £63.7m 3) Dune – £21.8m 4) Shang-Chi And the Legend Of the Ten Rings – £21.3m 5) Peter Rabbit 2 – £20.5m Source: ComscoreTwo fast-moving wildfires driven by strong winds erupted in northern Colorado on Thursday afternoon, destroying close to 600 homes and forcing tens of thousands of residents to flee. At least one first responder and six others were injured, though Boulder County Sheriff Joe Pelle acknowledged there could be more injuries and deaths could be possible due to the intensity of fires that quickly swept across the region as winds gusted up to 105 mph (169 km/h). “This is the kind of fire we can’t fight head on,” Pelle said. “We actually had deputy sheriffs and firefighters in areas that had to pull out because they just got overrun.” The fires, burning to the north and south of the city of Boulder, were fanned by gusts that whipped flames and smoke into a frenzy. Officials said during a Thursday evening news conference that the fires had already blackened 1,600 acres. The Colorado governor Jared Polis has declared a state of emergency, freeing up disaster emergency funds and providing other resources to aid in the response. During the evening press conference, governor Polis thanked first responders and shared that the National Guard and federal resources were being deployed to aid in the firefight, and would arrive soon. “This fire is not so much a question of resources,” he said. “This fire is a force of nature.” Emergency call lines were inundated throughout the day and evacuation routes were heavily trafficked, said Pelle during the briefing. “I have never seen anything like it,” he said of the speed and intensity of the fire, which consumed football fields of land in mere seconds. “This was a horrific event.” Mandatory evacuations were issued Thursday afternoon for the 34,000 people who live in the towns of Superior and Louisville, in Boulder county, as giant black and grey plumes engulfed the residential and commercial areas. Residents in an area of Broomfield were also told to begin preparing to leave. “Life threatening situation in Superior and Louisville areas!” tweeted the National Weather Service in Boulder, alerting locals to gather their things and leave immediately. “Fast moving fires are in the area.” Videos posted to social media showed apocalyptic scenes. In one recorded by a shopper evacuating a Costco, throngs of customers are seen rushing outside into a windy parking lot clouded with dense smoke. Local news cameras captured scenes from a distance, showing black and grey plumes whipping through browned hillsides above lines of gridlocked cars inching toward escape. Hospitals and shopping centers had to be cleared as the flames swept closer, and a nearby portion of US Highway 36 was also shut down because of the fire. Several structures were documented as they burned and officials said initial estimates show more than 580 homes had likely been consumed by the flames. A Target shopping center and hotel also burned. Strong winds, which downed power lines and overturned big-rigs in the area, are expected to continue into the evening, according to the National Weather Service. With gusts of roughly 80 mph. More than 24,000 people lost power during the windstorm, limiting some from being able to open their garage doors while trying to evacuate. An evacuation center also had to be relocated after the original location lost power. The extreme conditions have left firefighters with few options to battle the blazes. “There’s really not a whole lot we can do other than make sure people are evacuated,” said Brad Lupher, a firefighter with the city of Boulder, to Denver7, a local news channel about the firefight. “Air support is pretty much a no-go,” he said of the extreme conditions. “All we’re trying to do is just get people safely out.” The parched area has grappled with severely low levels of precipitation this year, which primed the landscape to burn. Between August and December, the Boulder area received only 1.6in of precipitation, far below its 6.8in average for the same time period. “Genuinely hard to believe this is happening in late December in Boulder, CO,” climate scientist Daniel Swain wrote on Twitter. “But take a record warm &amp; dry fall, only 1 inch of snow so far this season, &amp; add an extreme (100mph+) downslope windstorm ... and extremely fast moving/dangerous fires are the result.” Saying he was at a loss for words, Swain described hearing explosions as homes and ranch buildings went up in flames nearby. Human-caused climate change has heightened the risks and set the stage for an increase in extreme weather events across the west, that’s been grown warmer and drier over the past 30 years. “These are the worst conditions I have seen,” Lupher said calling it the perfect storm. “I can’t imagine it being much worse than this.” The Associated Press contributed to this reportThe popular compendium of correspondence from history is brilliant in book form, but it takes on a whole new dimension in audio. An eclectic treasure trove of letters written by musicians, actors, poets, writers, explorers, dictators and more, this year’s updated edition is read by a host of actors including Noma Dumezweni, Toby Jones, Juliet Stevenson, Gillian Anderson, Sanjeev Bhaskar, Colin Salmon and Stephen Fry. The letters are variously life-affirming, devastating, wilfully mundane, subtly acidic and sometimes downright creepy. Listeners can hear Olivia Colman reviving her cut-glass accent from The Crown as she reads the Queen’s recipe for drop scones that she sent to the US president Dwight D Eisenhower, as promised during his visit to Balmoral, and Alan Cumming hamming up Jack the Ripper’s famous “From Hell” dispatch to George Lusk, chairman of the Whitechapel Vigilance Committee. The letter was sent in 1888 with a preserved human kidney. Among the new additions is a letter, read by Benedict Cumberbatch, from one Thomas J Hanks to George Roy Hill, director of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, in which the young actor, still in high school, puts forward his case to be “discovered”. “I know what you are thinking: ‘Who’s this kid?’ and I can understand your apprehensions,” Hanks wrote. “But I figure if people will pay to see certain films, they will pay to see me.” And Ferdinand Kingsley reads Tennessee miner Jacob Vowell’s heartbreaking missive to his wife, Sarah Ellen, written as he sat trapped underground with their 14-year-old son, Elbert, in May 1902. “O God for one more breath,” he wrote. Sadly, rescue came too late. • Letters of Note is available from Canongate, 11hr, 31min. Further listening Henry “Chips” Channon: The Diaries 1938-43 Edited by Simon Heffer, Penguin Audio, 48hr, 28min Tom Ward reads the second volume of the American socialite’s uproarious diaries chronicling his years mingling with the British aristocracy. My Body Emily Ratajkowski, Quercus, 5hr, 16min The actor and model narrates her book of autobiographical essays reflecting on beauty, the male gaze and the commodification of her body.Whatever 2022 brings, there’s one thing we can bank on: there’ll be some cracking TV. Here we meet the stars of the year’s most exciting new shows, from Danny Boyle’s Sex Pistols biopic to the UK version of Call My Agent and the Steve Coogan-led #MeToo comedy Chivalry. By the year’s end, these four new faces may well feel like old friends. ‘I don’t even know who Alan Partridge is’ Adjani Salmon Growing up in Jamaica, Adjani Salmon wasn’t familiar with the British obsession with Doctor Who. In fact, he only realised the full extent of it in the middle of filming an episode. One of his first acting jobs was Eve of the Daleks (which broadcasts on 1 January), in which Salmon’s Nick gets tangled up with the Whoniverse baddies, alongside his crush Sarah (Aisling Bea). Fans turned up to the Bristol set, and the crew told him they needed to “‘get the umbrellas, because we don’t want to give away who’s in the special’. And I’m like: ‘Oh shit, this is a big thing!’” he laughs from the garden of his family home in Kingston, where he is for Christmas – a coconut tree-dotted idyll that seems to exist in a different universe to grey UK skies. Salmon started out as an editor in Jamaica’s reality-dominated TV industry – mainly on Mission Catwalk, the Caribbean edition of Project Runway – before moving to London to follow his film-making ambitions. Once again he found himself studying in the capital (he’d already done an architecture degree at the University of East London), and was soon making his own web series, Dreaming Whilst Black, which was adapted last year into a charming BBC pilot. In it, he plays a frustrated movie-maker toiling in an office job. But Salmon only cast himself to avoid paying a proper actor – and he’s still conflicted about his inadvertent career shift. “You’re so exposed – there’s a level of vulnerability I don’t like. But I do think acting has made me a better director.” The exposure is about to get much greater. Later this year, the 32-year-old will co-star in Steve Coogan and Sarah Solemani’s #MeToo comedy Chivalry. He plays the husband of Bobby, Solemani’s up-and-coming film-maker who has been tasked with rescuing a flailing project helmed by Coogan’s problematic producer. (Wanda Sykes, Sienna Miller and Lolly Adefope complete the starry cast.) It has hit written all over it – but initially Salmon wasn’t even sure if he should audition. “I thought it’s either going to be really cutting-edge … or really bad,” he says of the #MeToo angle. Thankfully, his Who co-star Bea encouraged him to, even offering up practical tips for making an audition tape (blu-tack is invaluable, apparently). Part of his reluctance was that, again, he didn’t understand Coogan’s significance: Partridge-mania had passed him by. “I’d tell someone I was doing this show and they’d say: ‘Bro, do you not know what Alan Partridge is?’ And I was like, no.” His cluelessness did wonders for his nerves. “It’s so interesting meeting people who are almost icons – they’re beyond humanisation – and being like: you’re cool as people. It was great.” Salmon is planning a return to his directing roots this year, too; he’s also hoping there’ll be a series of Dreaming Whilst Black this year. “I have plans, however it has not been commissioned yet,” he says carefully and emphatically, giving the impression of a man bound up in bureaucratic limbo. Even if it never materialises, you imagine Salmon’s 2022 won’t be a quiet one – at the very least, there’ll probably be an encounter with an unfamiliar British institution somewhere along the way. ‘At school all I got to play was leopard No 2 – no lines’ Emma Appleton Like many millennial women, Emma Appleton devoured Dolly Alderton’s 2018 memoir Everything I Know About Love, a potently relatable coming-of-age tale peppered with 00s nostalgia. “On the second page it’s talking about messaging boys on MSN – it’s a flashback for all of us,” enthuses the 30-year-old. But unlike her fellow fans, Appleton would do more than identify with the author – she’d actually become her. This year, the actor stars in the BBC adaptation of the book, about two childhood friends – Appleton’s Maggie (based on Alderton) and Birdy (played by Bel Powley) – navigating the peaks and troughs of their 20s in a London house-share. Appleton presumed playing a character “so similar to me on paper” would be a breeze – but, in fact, the opposite was true. “It is the hardest job I’ve ever done because when someone’s written in such a complex and nuanced way, it’s a lot harder to portray that in the right tone. I so desperately wanted to get it right and do it justice for Dolly. It felt quite precious.” Just before Everything I Know About Love, Appleton was trying to do another real, but significantly less relatable, person justice. In Danny Boyle’s upcoming Sex Pistols series, Pistol, she plays Sid Vicious’s girlfriend Nancy Spungen. Before filming, Appleton had been aware of Spungen as a semi-mythical rock figure, and heard that “no one liked her and she was a nightmare. Which is true but she’s also incredibly complex,” something she learned reading Spungen’s mother’s book, And I Don’t Want to Live This Life, written after her 20-year-old daughter’s violent, unexplained death by stabbing at Chelsea Savoy Hotel in New York. Despite the troubling source material, the shoot itself was “a dream come true” thanks to Boyle. “Growing up watching his work then being able to step on set with him was great!” For a while, acting was just a dream. She never got the main parts in plays at her Oxfordshire school – “I’d always audition and it would be: ‘OK, you can be leopard No 2, no lines’” – and so instead she became a model. But when Appleton’s agency offered her a short film casting, she won the part, and it all happened very quickly: a lead role in BBC teen drama Clique and 1940s-set spy series Traitors soon followed. Not long after, she was cast as the vengeful Renfri in the sensationally popular Netflix series The Witcher, a role that required her to master a whole new skill set. “I just wanted to get my sword-fighting right and try not to blind Henry Cavill, which I was successful at,” she smiles. “It took about a month of training, six days a week, six hours a day. It was a lot!” ‘Elton John gave me a huge hug’ Kit Connor He may only be 17, but Kit Connor has already endured one of the most daunting moments in any actor’s life: playing a real person in a film, then watching the finished product right beside them. Not any old member of Joe Public, either: that person was Elton John, and that film was Rocketman. “We were sitting with him in Cannes and he was getting a bit emotional,” recalls Connor from his Croydon family home. In a good way, clearly: during a photocall at the festival John made a beeline for the teenager to give him a huge hug. “I think it might have been the best day of my life,” he grins. It was his 2019 performance as the musical wunderkind that introduced Connor as a very promising young actor – but it’s his next project that’s destined to make him a household name. He plays Nick, a “popular rugby boy” who falls in love with Charlie, a boy in the year below at school, in the new Netflix adaptation of Alice Oseman’s beloved graphic novel, Heartstopper. It’s a particularly contemporary gay love story: homophobia doesn’t really seem to enter the equation. “It’s a very optimistic, hopeful portrayal – looking at the world through rose-tinted spectacles,” explains Connor. “The show is a ball of sunshine.” Connor hadn’t read Heartstopper before he got cast as Nick, but he was immediately made aware of the book’s fervent fanbase after an outpouring of love and support on social media. Did he feel the weight of expectation? “Nick is a 6ft 2in, big, built lad and I was very skinny – I don’t know how I got the role to be honest. I was thinking, OK, do I get on a pogo stick?! But I managed to gain some weight and did a lot of rugby training.” Like other Netflix schools – namely, Sex Education – the setting of Heartstopper is a joyful, technicolour place, says Connor. (Unlike the transatlantic hinterland of that show, however, there is a decidedly British vibe to this: “We played it very apologetic. Everyone saying sorry all the time!”) After filming, his real school felt “very drab” – and a lot more stressful. Having spent his childhood juggling education with acting jobs – at 10 he starred in comedy caper Get Santa, and later lent his voice to the BBC adaptation of His Dark Materials (he played Lyra’s dæmon Pan) – the fact he was 17 on Heartstopper’s set meant he was treated like an adult, with no time to study during the day. “I was working 12 hours a day and thinking: ‘I could go home and do my homework right now, but I need to sleep for tomorrow.’ I got back to school thinking this is going to be hell!” It doesn’t seem to have put him off, though. Connor’s already primed for more Heartstopper: “I can’t wait for it to come out – hopefully people like it and we’ll be called back for another instalment.” As teenage dreams go, it doesn’t seem particularly outlandish. ‘I asked Helena Bonham Carter for a selfie on set’ Fola Evans-Akingbola In the British version of the cross-Channel hit Call My Agent, Fola Evans-Akingbola has been plunged into a cast swimming in national treasures. When Helena Bonham Carter came on set, the 27-year-old “didn’t even attempt to play it cool, I was so embarrassingly like: can I take a selfie with you?!” She plays Zoe in the showbiz satire, the equivalent of the original’s Sofia, the talent agency receptionist who is desperate to become an actor. She initially struggled to capture Zoe’s pushiness, but identified strongly with her character’s battle between ambition and “crippling self-doubt.” That self-doubt stems from the fact Evans-Akingbola decided to become an actor relatively late in life. “I envy people who knew they wanted to do it since they were five – I didn’t, so I’ve always felt some insecurity about that.” She was a sports scholar at her school in Dulwich, south-east London, and did no performing arts. “People from my school would be like: ‘What? Fola’s an actor?!’” After deciding not to take a place at university to study philosophy, her mother encouraged her to find some hobbies. She wound up at acting classes, which led to a stint at the Identity School of Acting (other alumni include John Boyega and Letitia Wright). The student body was far more racially diverse than her school, which changed her sense of what was possible. “It was the first time in a classroom with all sorts of different skin tones,” says Evans-Akingbola, whose father, Sola, is a Nigerian-born percussionist who plays with Jamiroquai. “That awakened something for me.” She consulted her uncle, the actor Jimmy Akingbola (soon to star as Geoffrey in the Fresh Prince of Bel-Air reboot), who urged her on. The milestones of British acting both old (“got to get Holby City on the CV!”) and new (Black Mirror) quickly racked up. A big US show soon followed: between 2017 and 2020, she spent six months of the year living in Canada, filming the mermaid-themed series Siren. Despite such a swift rise, she is still eager to pick up acting tips – and the set of Call My Agent was the perfect place to do it. “It’s been so exciting to watch these amazing actors do their thing,” she says of her castmates, who include Dominic West, Jack Davenport, Maggie Steed, and Phoebe Dynevor. If the success of the original is anything to go by, it surely won’t be long before Evans-Akingbola joins their ranks. Doctor Who: Eve of the Daleks is on 1 January, 7pm, BBC OneThe Actual Star by Monica Byrne (Voyager, £20) In her second novel, Byrne braids together three storylines, each set a thousand years apart. The final days of 1012 are depicted through the experiences of three royal siblings in the early post-classical Mayan era; in December 2012, Leah, a 19-year-old mixed race American, makes the journey of a lifetime to Belize; and in 3012, as the last of the icecaps disappear, the end of the diluvian age is celebrated all over the world. The entire population has been reduced to around 8 million, most of whom are always on the move and own no more than they can carry. A way of life forced on climate refugees has become the guiding philosophy of near-universal religion LaViaja, credited to Saint Leah, believed to have been the first person to reach Xibalba, the mystical world beyond this one. This is an incredibly ambitious and thought-provoking work. Termination Shock by Neal Stephenson (Borough, £20) Stephenson opens about 10 years in the future, on a day when the air in Houston is too hot to support planes. This means the private jet flown by the queen of the Netherlands must be diverted, causing some unexpectedly helpful additions to her entourage on the way to a meeting with a Texas billionaire who has a radical plan to cool the planet. How it could work, how it does work, why not everyone is pleased by this privately financed feat of geoengineering and how they might foil it comprises the plot. As usual, Stephenson writes at length and in detail about everyone and everything. At its best, his style creates an immersive depth, but sometimes it goes too far; as his Dutch queen would agree, when she has tidal surges “explained to her at a level of detail that would have rendered most royals catatonic”. But such moments are the exception in an absorbing speculative fiction about our climate crisis. The Book of Sand by Theo Clare (Century, £12.99) A small group of people find themselves in a dangerous desert world, where they are told that their only hope of survival is to treat each other as family. They are tasked with searching through a string of deserted cities for “the Sarkpont” that will allow them to escape. Failure means a terrible death inflicted by terrifying creatures they call the Djinn. Their story alternates with that of 17-year-old McKenzie, an American high school student obsessed by weather patterns and deserts, who begins to question everything she thought she knew. The two strands eventually come together in a way that is both shocking and satisfying. Theo Clare is a pseudonym for the thriller author Mo Hayder: she completed the first two novels in a planned series before her death last July from motor neurone disease. Hayder’s books were memorably disturbing studies of violence, but here she offers something more positive. Yes, there is constant danger, and the characters have to fight to survive, but the joys to be found in friendship and the power of mutual support are themes running through this compelling, absorbingly different quest fantasy. Hare House by Sally Hinchcliffe (Mantle, £14.99) The unnamed narrator of this modern gothic begins her story with the accidental killing of a hare. The creature’s significance will be clear to anyone familiar with legends of shape-shifting witches, and sets the tone for Hinchcliffe’s eerie and subtle second novel. The narrator, formerly a teacher in London, looks forward to peaceful solitude in the small cottage she has rented on a remote Scottish estate. But much as she enjoys her solitary explorations of the beautiful countryside, she is plagued by the sour, disapproving woman in the adjoining cottage, and irresistibly drawn to the big house, where her handsome landlord lives with his troubled young sister. Tension mounts after a heavy snowstorm downs power lines and closes roads. This deliciously chilly tale dodges the expected outcome and maintains a delicate balance between psychology and witchcraft right to its disturbing end. The Last Adventure of Constance Verity by A Lee Martinez (Jo Fletcher, £8.99) For 27 years Constance Verity has led a life of fantastic adventure, solving crimes, uncovering conspiracies, saving lives, even travelling through time and space. But she’s fed up now, and wants nothing more than a normal life, a regular boyfriend and even a boring job. She decides to track down the fairy godmother whose gift set the course of her life and force her to undo the spell. Of course this is no easy task, with danger round every corner, but she’s never failed yet. This very funny, enjoyable fantasy from 2016 is being published for the first time in Britain along with a sequel, Constance Verity Saves the World. A film adaptation is in the works.Some restaurants arrive on the scene all guns blazing with self-hype and wild promises. The Maine, newly opened in Mayfair, central London, describes itself as a “blend of old-world British elegance, New England extravagance and subterranean decadence”. I know: I’m exhausted already, too. Yet, having spent a Saturday lunchtime in this hectic, multi-floored pleasure palace, there are definitely bones of truth among the balderdash. What is more extravagant than taking over a Grade II-listed Georgian building on the west side of Hanover Square and turning it into a gargantuan party venue with seating for 350? If you passed this former residence of the Duke of Montrose during a sightseeing jaunt, you’d certainly be struck by the house’s elegant, imposing frontage, because this is how London looks in a souvenir snowglobe. And now Canadian restaurateur Joey Ghazal has created a vast, dark, twinkling brasserie restaurant/nightclub in its basement, where one could easily imagine Dita Von Teese swirling about in a giant martini glass and where, I’m told, there’s a VIP room through a hole in the bathroom wall. There’s also a “Tavern”, with brick alcoves extravagantly furnished in red leather and, on the ground floor, a Georgian-styled “Drawing Room” that makes you feel a bit like you’re on the set of the Netflix drama Bridgerton, or maybe a Las Vegas hotel called The King George. It’s got an olde-worlde feeling, sure, and a strong synthetic aftertaste, though that might have just been my soft-baked cookie dessert (a similar one is available at Pizza Hut) or the large, rather sloppy “crispy fish taco” in pico de gallo and hot sauce – but more of the food in a moment. More pressingly, much of the drawing room’s seating plan forces couples to sit side by side, as if they’re riding a dodgem, meaning the pair of you end up glaring out at the other diners. Some restaurateurs seem to think this layout is romantic, but it’s just a recipe for a cricked neck and tipping gravy into your companion’s crotch. The Maine’s menu is riddled with New England flavours served in the international language of the soulless private members’ club. There are lobster rolls, clam chowder, chargrilled octopus and soft-shell crab with lime aïoli; oysters come numerous ways; and chicken paillard sits alongside the apparently now obligatory dover sole meuniere. The room filled up quickly with rubber-neckers checking every table lest Tom Cruise had popped in for some ceviche, but by 12.30pm much was already missing from the menu, while there seemed to be a near-compulsory tour of the building being visited on the diners between courses. Lunch began with a complimentary warm, but not especially fresh, baguette with a whole bulb of rather bitter roast garlic and a plate of sliced, good-quality beef tomato with plenty of black pepper. We ordered two types of tacos from the hot starters menu: the aforementioned “crispy” fish and cauliflower in a tahini dressing that turned out to be a lot of rather tasteless beans and sweetcorn. These tacos are simply best avoided; no happiness can be found here. The lobster roll was a forlorn-looking dry brioche filled not overly generously with lobster meat and lettuce, and came with inedible crisps . If I’m honest, by this stage my hopes for the rest of lunch were not high. Sometimes, you just get a feeling. The staff are a heady mix of inexperienced, hyper-confident and assertive, doling out history lessons on the postcode, stopping you mid-order to suggest their own ideas on where you’re going wrong and, excitingly, setting tests throughout the meal to name the dishes you’ve enjoyed so far. Spoiler: not really any of them. I ordered a slice of key lime pie, and somehow ended up with that soft baked cookie due to the ebulliently cheerful over-selling. It turned out to be a blessing in disguise, because the meringue on the pie was both sloppy and gritty. My companion and I shared its alternative: some warm dough in a bowl with a jug of extra pouring chocolate. “This is the best thing I’ve eaten since I got here,” I declared while mopping up the chocolate sauce that one of the waiters had insisted on pouring over it – and the table – before leaving, never to return. Without any booze, we left about £100 lighter and still hungry. The Maine will be a roaring success, however, because it is ostentatious, starry, looks fabulous in photographs and the clientele who will keep it afloat aren’t really interested in eating. It’s so faux-posh that Nicky Haslam has probably already added it to his things that are common list. There are many, many people who will love it, but as Sartre wrote in No Exit: “Hell is other people”. • The Maine Mayfair 6 Medici Court, 20 Hanover Square, London W1, 020-3432 2192. Open Tues-Sat, noon-1am. From about £50 a head for three courses, plus drinks and service. • Episode 11 of the second series of Grace’s Comfort Eating podcast is released on 4 January. Listen here or wherever you get your podcastsAdam Hollioake has answered a distress call to join England’s depleted coaching staff amid the Covid outbreak that is threatening the back end of the Ashes series and has now ruled Australia’s Travis Head out of the fourth Test in Sydney. On the day Australia called up three players to their Test squad in response to Head’s positive result, and the Big Bash League was gripped by a raft of new cases, England asked Hollioake, their former one-day captain, to travel down from his home on the Gold Coast to work with the players next week. Graham Thorpe is now interim head coach due to Chris Silverwood’s enforced isolation period but currently has only Ant Botha and James Foster, two consultants, to help out. Jon Lewis (seam bowling coach), Jeetan Patel (spin) and Darren Veness (fitness) have all been forced to stay behind in Melbourne after contracting the virus. Hollioake, the combative former all-rounder who played four Tests and 35 one-day internationals between 1997-99, has been roped in by Thorpe, his former Surrey teammate. The 50-year-old will meet a squad still reeling from losing the series inside 12 days, even if Cricket Australia’s Covid protocols mean he can only work with the players outdoors before the fourth Test starts on Tuesday. “Adam is not just another set of hands,” said Thorpe, before England’s players cleared their latest round of PCR tests and flew to Sydney. “He can bring a bit of energy to the dressing room and the philosophical side of life as well, which is very important in times like this. He’ll bring that nice sense of perspective. “But also for me it’s about standing up as well. The players have an opportunity. We want to see fight and character. I don’t want to see people drop their heads – there’s no point getting like that. We’ve got two matches left in this series for our players to show they’ve got the character and spirit and the skill to perform.” While England’s outbreak remains contained to seven individuals – three coaches and four family members – and David Boon, the match referee, has also caught the virus, Head represents the first positive case among either set of players. Australia’s response to losing their No 5 – calling up batsman Nic Maddinson, all-rounder Mitchell Marsh and wicketkeeper Josh Inglis – suggests they are braced for further positives among the now daily tests being undertaken by both squads. CA, also battling with outbreaks at two Big Bash franchises, are clearly determined to complete a series that bounces on to Hobart, Tasmania, for the fifth Test. England, 3-0 down and with only pride and World Test Championship points to play for, appear to be on board at this stage, albeit with a number of families having left the tour early. Though Silverwood will speak to his assistant coach from afar, Thorpe appears to have firmly grasped the helm alongside Joe Root, the captain. Their challenge is to rebuild the confidence of a batting lineup that has failed to make 300 and was shattered to the tune of 68 all out at the MCG. The 52-year-old cited an example from his 100-cap career – England being bowled out for 46 by West Indies in Trinidad in 1994, before winning the following Test in Barbados – and at least knows the SCG well, having begun his coaching career at New South Wales in 2005-06 under Trevor Bayliss. Asked about England’s shortcomings with the bat, amid a wider debate about the domestic structure back home, Thorpe replied: “They’re trying to learn in county cricket, but the truth is, when they come out of county cricket, they have to learn it all again, because Test cricket is 10 times harder. “We’ve had a massive focus on white-ball cricket in the last five or six years, our four-day cricket is pushed to one side. We need to address those things. “Some of our young players are getting an education and if they didn’t know before, they understand how tough Test cricket is. Not just on the field, but off it.” While frustrated his charges have failed to adopt his stated blueprint – “Leave the ball well, defend straight, cut and pull really well, bat long” – Thorpe at least hopes the tour has served as a “wake up” that could kickstart careers. Among them is Rory Burns, who was dropped for Melbourne and seemingly will not return until adjustments are made. Thorpe said: “I told him: ‘You’ve played 30 [now 31] Test matches and you average 30. We want you to be doing more, to be better as a player.’ He needs to do the simple things better, calm things down with his movements. It’s tough to do in competition. Sometimes they have to come out and then you can reset a little bit. “When players get a little bit of success they then think: ‘My way is the right way.’ And there’s a balance to it. But the best bowlers in the world are going to analyse your technique and the right-hand [runs] column tells you if you’re getting it right or not. “We’ve seen he’s got a fighting character but at the same time you need a technique and temperament at the highest level.”Madagascar has lost nearly a quarter of its forest cover since 2001. Slash-and-burn agriculture, illegal logging and charcoal production have resulted in the large-scale clearing of ecosystems formed during the 88m years since the island separated from India. Nearly all lemur species are now threatened with extinction, as is much of Madagascar’s biodiversity. Forest conservation and the development of sustainable sources of timber and charcoal, while reforesting large areas, are key challenges this century, especially for the millions of Malagasies whose livelihoods depend on them. As the planet heats, seed-banking threatened plant species has become an urgent task. “Communities which live nearby depend on the forest for their survival. They find food, medicine, construction wood and water. The forest provides vital services like water catchment, pollution control, erosion protection and climate regulation,” says Vonona Randrianasolo, a researcher at Kew’s Madagascar conservation centre, who travels around Madagascar to collect seeds from threatened plant species. “Saving seeds is the best way to save many species from extinction. My actions are for future generations. I feel proud.” The samples collected by Randrianasolo are vital for reforesting areas of the country with disappearing native species that will be more resilient in a changing climate, conserved in Kew’s Millennium Seed Bank and at the Silo National des Graines Forestières (SNGF) in Madagascar. Rainforest stretches down the island’s east coast, while dry tropical forest is found on the west, with scattered patches of montane humid forest found in the central highlands. All areas contain unique biodiversity, much of which is understudied or not known to science. “All the work thus far in seed biology, tree planting and forestry has been about commercial species so we’re really having to play catch up,” says Tim Pearce, who oversees the African programme of the Millennium Seed Bank, an underground collection of more than 2.4bn seeds overseen by Kew. “When Vonona goes out and makes a collection of seeds from a tree we have never seen, we first have to understand how to look after it. That has all been done for a very narrow range of commercial species. For pretty well all wild species, we are well behind the curve.” Many reforestation schemes around the world use fast-growing monocultures instead of native species, and Madagascar is no exception. In a country famous for its towering baobabs, eucalyptus and pine trees are becoming an increasingly common sight. The fast-growing species are important sources of fuel and timber for many Malagasies but can damage native biodiversity, threatening national parks such as Andasibe-Mantadia, where the rainforest is home to the biggest lemur in the world, the indri. Led by Madagascar’s own seed bank, the country is increasingly trying to reforest with native species, such as those collected in Kew seed-banking exercises. “Pines are a big problem in Madagascar because they are very invasive. In the Itremo Massif protected area we manage in the high plateau, there are plantations on the border that are invading the natural forest,” says Hélène Ralimanana, the team manager at the Kew Madagascar conservation centre. “Eucalyptus plantations changes the soil condition. The areas around the trees become dry because they suck up the water.” For Ralimanana, the seed-banking work is about more than conservation and protecting Madagascar’s forest. Many of the eucalyptus and pine plantations were planted by French colonisers, a practice continued by the Malagasy government until a recent policy change. Documenting the country’s biodiversity and ensuring tree nurseries can grow native trees for reforestation projects will help undo some of the damage from the past. “Many native species are slow growing. But it is believed that there is big damage from plantations in the French colonial period,” she adds. RBG Kew is one of four charities supported by the Guardian and Observer 2021 climate justice charity appeal, which is aimed at helping communities at the sharp end of the climate crisis. The others are Global Greengrants Fund UK, Environmental Justice Foundation, and Practical Action. Through RBG Kew’s work in Madagascar, a team of mainly Malagasy botanists, researchers and conservationists is working to document and preserve the country’s biodiversity, which will be crucial to improving resilience in a changing climate. Money from Guardian and Observer readers could help expand community plant nurseries of collected and stored seeds, while also supporting a range of projects to revegetate land and make it productive, such as those already carried out in Madagascar’s seasonal forests. “We need to put the native species back – that’s where they grow and do well, and how they maintain their environment. If you put something else in, over time, it can destroy the ecosystem,” says Jenny Williams, a senior spatial analyst at Kew who has overseen projects in Madagascar to restore fire-damaged forest areas with native plant species and prevent deforestation. “These are the species that are designed to be in the ecosystem. If they are there, they can look after it.” • This article was amended on 1 January 2022. In a quote, Jenny Williams referred to putting back “native species”, not “invasive species” as an earlier version said.If you get a bad taste in your mouth when you hear the name Joe Manchin – the fossil fuel industry-backed senator from West Virginia who torpedoed his own party’s “Build Back Better” bill just before Christmas – you might want to reach for a glass of something to wash it away. Given that it’s New Year’s Eve, there’s a reasonable chance you’re guzzling a glass of prosecco, which now accounts for just under half of all bubbly drunk globally. While this may take the taste away momentarily, there’s also an odd thing about prosecco I want you to consider. How that glass of Italian bubbly came to be in your hand gives us a window into understanding how a Democratic senator can derail a multitrillion dollar climate-focused national programme that promised huge amounts of money for his own state. No, really. Stay with me here. The stories of prosecco wine and West Virginia coal are classic examples of a regional “growth model”. Growth models describe the “how we make money” bit of an economy, plus the political and electoral coalition that supports it. Think of all the social, political and regulatory structures that build up over time around making and selling a certain good, and all the folks whose jobs and incomes depend upon it. Think of Germany and car exports. From workers to unions to production hubs, to supply chains, to institutional investors, there is an entire ecosystem that supports this way of making a living and the identities and interest it supports. When that is challenged, those who benefit from the model do not sit idly by. Now think of Treviso, Italy, where they make prosecco. Last year a sociologist called Stefano Ponte unpacked the growth model behind prosecco. Prosecco was first bottled in 1924, but it was not until the early 2000s that anglo-millennials got a taste for the stuff and global demand blew up. Prosecco was defined at the time by the grape used to make it, glera, and not by its place of origin (like how all “real” champagne must come from Champagne), which meant that the brand was not protected. In fact, the actual village of Prosecco was about 150km away from the main growing areas and had never grown the grape that makes the drink. Some enterprising British importers wanted to stick as much prosecco as they could into bottles, which would have taken control (and value) away from local producers. Rising to defend the “prosecco miracle” as it was called, the then minister of agriculture, Luca Zaia, a member of the rightwing La Lega party, expanded the “denominazione d’origine controllata DOC” to cover the distant village of Prosecco, which gave this rather generic product a claim to geographical exclusivity. That in turn paved the way for a successful Unesco world heritage claim a few years later, further cementing the region’s claim to the product. The result was a major expansion of production, and prosecco hit €500m in sales in 2019. In short, those who benefited from the growth model rose to defend it. But there were other challenges to this success. This massive expansion of production brought challenges from environmentalists – wine is essentially an agribusiness – and from local residents. But those who benefited from the growth model again leapt to defend it, this time by painting the industry as an example of small-scale, pastoral sustainability – part of a high-end wine-making tradition going back centuries. In fact, as the historian Brian Griffith details, this pastoral and authentically local framing of Italian wine was originally a project of the fascist period. After the first world war, Italy was saddled with vast overproduction of low-quality domestic wines and enmeshed in a moral panic over working-class drunkenness. Wine industry interests close to the government of Mussolini sought to make Italian wines articles of middle-class consumption and a source of national unity. And they used state-backed mythmaking to do so. Medical authorities stressed “the advantages of responsible … wine consumption”. National exhibitions of regional wines were sponsored by the state. Indeed, the whole idea of “gastro-tourism” in Italy was invented in the 1930s by the wine lobby. As Griffith puts it, “the roots of today’s … Italian wines stretch back not to antiquity … but … to the interwar years”. The result was the development of an agribusiness growth model. The prosecco story a century later was just one more turn of this wheel. Now what does all that tell us about Manchin and West Virginia? The Democratic party story on Manchin and West Virginia was that coal was a dying industry, it employed few people and Build Back Better provided a way out. It was simply a question of giving Manchin enough “sweeteners” and it would eventually pass. But Manchin first vetoed the “clean electricity” provisions of the bill and then ran down the clock long enough to kill it. Why did he do this? Because his job is to defend the growth model against challengers, just as it was for the folks in Treviso. As Adam Tooze has noted, by some estimates “nearly one-third of [West Virginian] GDP in 2019 can be attributed to fossil fuels [which] makes decarbonisation a mortal threat”. Now add to this the fact that West Virginia has the lowest labour force participation rate in the US and huge healthcare issues stemming from chronic illness and opioid abuse, and you end up with a fiscal nightmare kept afloat by current growth model. Given this, the notion that the best-paid jobs in the state ($77,000 a year) will be traded away by the state’s leading elected official for some promises on “retraining” and a “Green New Deal” is simply not credible. Growth models are hard to change. Those who profit from them fight to defend them. From Alaska to the Dakotas, to Texas and Louisiana, the core of the GOP electoral coalition, all these states have carbon-heavy growth models. Like the Italian wine industry, they are a creation of the state in the 20th century. They are embodied with myths and are supported by powerful coalitions. Few in Treviso are keen to dismantle the prosecco growth model. Why should West Virginia, and with it the other carbon states of the US, be any different? Mark Blyth is a political economist at Brown UniversityLondon’s public fireworks display may be cancelled but new year revellers in Westminster will be treated to a view of Big Ben’s newly painted dials as the clock bongs 12 times to mark the end of 2021. The 96-metre clock tower above the Houses of Parliament, which houses the Great Bell, known as Big Ben, has been mostly hidden from view since a £79.7m conservation projection began four years ago. For the first time since 2017, the clock face has been revealed to show the work that has taken place, including the restoration of the original colour scheme. Using paint analysis and Charles Barry’s original watercolour designs, conservationists have reinstated a Prussian blue and gold colour scheme for the dials and clock hands. They believe the black paint of the clock dials and stonework that many associate with the national symbol was chosen in the 1930s to mask the effects of pollution. The team hope New Year’s Eve will be the last time Big Ben is struck using a temporary striking mechanism that has powered the hammer used to strike the bell during the restoration period to mark events such as Armistice Day, Remembrance Sunday and previous new year celebrations. If all goes to plan, the Great Bell and the four quarter bells will chime hourly to the note of E natural and sound out the Westminster Quarters melody again in the spring. The project has faced bumps in the road, with the repair bill jumping by £18.6m after the discovery in 2020 of asbestos, second world war bomb damage and pollution problems. A doomed project to get Big Ben to bong for Brexit on 31 January 2020 was replaced with a plan to project a giant clock face on to Downing Street to mark the moment Britain left the EU. Ian Westworth, a parliamentary clock mechanic, said it had been a huge privilege for the team to have “had our hands on every single nut and bolt” of one of the world’s most famous clocks. “It’s going to be quite emotional when it’s all over – there will be sadness that the project has finished, but happiness that we have got it back and everything’s up and running again,” he said.My cousin Paul O’Dwyer, who has died aged 42, put others before himself. During a charity paddleboarding event in October, Paul died after jumping into the River Cleddau in South Wales, not thinking of his own safety, to try to help other participants who had got into difficulties. A former soldier, Paul was a doting father and an avid fundraiser. It was his fearlessness and adventurous spirit, his infectious smile and zest for life, that set him apart. He was a staff sergeant in the Territorial Army, with 108 Welsh Squadron of the Royal Monmouthshire Royal Engineers (Militia), from 1999 until 2015, and served in Iraq. He became the UK army surf champion and trained as a ski instructor. After leaving the military, in 2017 he co-founded the charity SA1UTE to support veterans in South Wales and co-launched Trampface to raise awareness of homelessness. He was also a great support for those with mental health issues. He was a determined fundraiser – running 100ks, cycling, completing ultramarathons, the London Marathon, and Iron Man Wales. Just a few weeks before he died, Paul helped raise more than £4,000 for heart screening in Wales, paddling 100 miles along the River Wye in 24 hours. In September he organised another event, that raised more than £2000 for the RNLI and local lifeguards. In February last year, he met the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge during their visit to the RNLI Mumbles lifeboat station. Paul slept rough twice in the Calais Jungle refugee camp to raise awareness of the plight of refugees. Paul was born in Neath, Port Talbot, the son of Kay (nee Francis), a staff nurse, and John O’Dwyer, a teacher. He left St Joseph’s RC comprehensive in the town with 11 GCSEs and joined the local steelworks. After a four-year apprenticeship, he passed his HNC with distinction, quickly rose up the ranks to electrical foreman and then became electrical engineer covering all electrical works across Tata Steel’s Port Talbot site. For the past year, Paul had been a manager at the Ocado grocery delivery service, overseeing electrical engineers. As well as playing rugby for Aberavon Green Stars, Paul loved climbing mountains and in 2013 he started a walking group. The first trip arranged was a walk up Snowdon and one of those who joined the group that day was Ceri Munro. They hit it off and in 2016, a leap year, Ceri proposed to Paul live on the radio. They entered a competition called Get Me to the Altar and won a £20,000 dream wedding that had to be arranged in only six weeks, so they were married by the end of that year. His family was everything to Paul, and he would visit his parents with a “Yo! Put the kettle on!” before sharing his latest adventures. He is survived by Ceri and their son Finley; their first son, Gabriel, died at birth in 2016. He is also survived by two sons, Darcy and James, from an earlier marriage, by his parents and by his sister, Leanne.‘I poured a daiquiri on myself, it was so hot,” says Alli Logout, remembering Special Interest’s first basement gig six years ago. Since then, DIY shows in sweaty confinement have become the natural habitat of the New Orleans-based group, which evolved from an initial lineup of Logout and Maria Elena on guitars and electric drills to include Nathan Cassiani on bass and Ruth Mascelli (found at a back-yard show wearing Minnie Mouse ears and playing a pump organ) wrangling an old drum machine. All four had been drawn to the city for its fertile DIY and punk scene, and the freedom it gave them to create. “It’s cultivated a very intriguing sound that Special Interest can thrive in,” Logout says. “People were ready for this.” Word soon spread, with their debut EP Spiralling and 2020 album The Passion Of finding a transatlantic home on Glasgow’s Night School Records; 2022 will bring an album on Rough Trade. In an era when even the underground is influenced by the tediously synthetic production of commercial pop, it’s refreshing to hear in Special Interest an energy that comes from pranging noise and communal experimentation. “The music-making is just really fluid,” says Logout. “Ruth will make a drum beat and we’ll play along with it and songs just come out of us. It’s a chemistry and a vibe – we don’t have to force ourselves.” Discord is a key ingredient. “I’m always trying to think about something that sounds like it’s about to break,” says Mascelli. “The speaker’s about to blow – that’s how I want things to sound.” The result is a gloriously slippery and unholy trinity of no wave, techno and – in the scratchy catchiness of tracks like All Tomorrow’s Carry and Young, Gifted, Black, in Leather – decidedly witty pop. “That’s a big part of our sound,” says Mascelli. “Smashing together all these elements reflects the chaos of the world around us, and the sounds and images that are barraging you daily. I’ve always thought of it as reflecting the insanity of the current moment.” With that in mind, Special Interest have a refreshingly complicated and unorthodox attitude to how they might be perceived as political. “Redistribution and reparations are really important to us,” Elena says, speaking about the remixes of tracks from The Passion Of released to raise money for House of Tulip, a New Orleans safe space for trans women. “Raising money is a real, concrete thing,” adds Mascelli, “a million times better than any millions of Instagram posts or stupid bullshit. None of that’s important – do something materially for the people around you.” They also resist being labelled as a queer group. “We’re all actively practising homosexuals!” Mascelli says. “‘Queer’ is reductive, vague and has been so sucked up into advertising and the horrible spectacle of consumerism. We want to be evaluated first on the music we’re making, [rather] than a label.” This refusal to be categorised, or to allow their identities to be used as a marketing tool, also comes across in how Special Interest is just one part of their collected creative output. “It isn’t the end-all be-all for any of us,” says Logout. “We all have other passions; how could this even be the main thing? We’ve got a million other ways we need to express ourselves.” For now, though, there’s that new album currently in the works and the fundraising for the House of Tulip. “When I think about DIY, it’s a life of service,” says Elena. “You do it, and you keep doing it, and you do it until you die.”January The year began with a counting up of the damage after the catastrophic extreme weather events of 2020, from fires to floods. Looking at the US alone, California more than doubled its previous annual wildfire record with more than 1.7m hectares (4.1m acres) burned and Nasa concluded that 2020 had been the joint hottest year on record. The US’s Noaa and the UK Met Office put it in close second to 2016. And 2021 – the year that would see the crucial UN climate summit held in Glasgow in November – was not showing signs of being much better. The continent of Africa had its warmest January on record, while torrential rains fell in Malaysia, leading to the evacuation of 50,000 people and the death of at least six. Meanwhile in Turkey there were fears that Istanbul would run out of water following the most severe drought in a decade. But there were small steps of progress on other fronts. Within hours of becoming president, Joe Biden announced that the US would be rejoining the Paris agreement. The Israeli company StoreDot announced that car batteries that could be fully charged in five minutes had been produced in a Chinese factory for the first time. In my view, we’ve already waited too long to deal with this climate crisis and we can’t wait any longer. We see it with our own eyes, we feel it, we know it in our bones, and it’s time to act. Joe Biden And in the UK a plan to reintroduce white-tailed eagles to the east of the country was, unusually, led by farmers, who said they wanted to “inspire people with nature and drive wider nature recovery”. February The internationally renowned scientist James Hansen waded into the UK’s row over plans for a new coalmine in Cumbria, saying it showed “contemptuous disregard for the future of young people”. A few days earlier, nine activists had announced that they were in a tunnel under London’s Euston station, dug secretly beneath a tent, in order to protest against the high-speed rail link the UK government was in the process of building. A historic wave of winter weather hit the eastern US and Texas, with nearly 10 million people without power at the storm’s peak, and millions without water after pipes burst; it was later assessed to have been the most costly winter storm event on record. In an amazing rewilding operation in Indonesia, 10 rescued orangutans were returned to the wild. Helicopters were used to ferry the critically endangered apes deep into the forest. And in Madagascar scientists found what is believed to be the smallest reptile on Earth. Brookesia nana, a nano-chameleon, has a body the size of a sunflower seed, just 13.5mm long. March New York was lit up by news that dolphins had come to play in the East River – validation of a long-term clean-up of the river which had cost the city $45m. Further north, in the Midway Atoll wildlife refuge in the North Pacific, the “oldest wild bird in history”, 70-year-old Wisdom the Laysan albatross, hatched another chick. Banded by biologist Chandler Robbins in 1956, Wisdom has outlived a number of partners (albatrosses normally mate for life). On the other side of the planet, Australia was being hit by horrendous floods, with thousands forced to flee rising waters in New South Wales, and the insurance industry facing millions of dollars in claims. The same region, meanwhile, was also battling a mouse plague, with horrifying footage showing the ground moving as the rodents took over. In the US, Deb Haaland was confirmed as the first ever indigenous cabinet secretary, as she took over the environment department. The huge surge in renewable energy around the world continued, with China announcing that it had built windfarms with a staggering total capacity of almost 100GW in 2020 – an increase of nearly 60% on 2019. But Climate Action 100, launching the first ever benchmark for tracking corporate progress on climate change, found that only a handful of the big polluters were taking serious action. April A landmark legal decision by the German supreme constitutional court found that the government’s climate protection measures were insufficient to protect future generations. The government promised it would take action on what one of the young activists who had brought the case called “a huge win for the climate movement”. In the UK meanwhile, the coroner who oversaw the sad case of a young girl, Ella Kissi-Debrah, who died after an asthma attack in 2013, published a report which called for the lowering of legally binding maximum levels of particulate air pollution in the UK. And in the US, a two-day summit on climate change was wound up with promises on all sides, including one from the US to cut its greenhouse gases by 50-52% by 2030. The country also pledged to double financial aid to help other countries with their targets. “Is it enough? No,” said John Kerry, Biden’s climate envoy, who had earlier struck a deal to cooperate with China on climate change. “But it’s the best we can do today and proves we can start to move.” The shifts came against the background of a troubling development however, as scientists concluded that the warm Atlantic current linked to severe and abrupt changes in the climate in the past was now at its weakest in at least 1,600 years. The current is known as the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (Amoc). Huge sandstorms in China turned the skies over Beijing yellow for several days, while Cyclone Seroja brought heavy rain and strong winds to Western Australia, with some locations seeing their highest ever daily rainfall. May A Dutch court ordered Royal Dutch Shell to cut its global carbon emissions by 45% by the end of 2030 in an unprecedented ruling that will have huge implications for the energy industry and other polluting multinationals. The decision came just as the International Energy Agency published Net Zero by 2050, a landmark report which stated that exploitation and development of new oil and gas fields would have to stop this year, and no new coal-fired power stations could be built if the world wanted to stay within safe limits of global heating and meet the goal of net zero emissions by 2050. Meanwhile in Australia the federal court found that the environment minister, Sussan Ley, had a duty of care to protect young people from the climate crisis, in what lawyers said was “the first time in the world” such a duty of care had been recognised. In France, the minister for ecological transition delighted and appalled people in equal measure with the announcement that the new climate law would take meat off the menu once a week in schools. Turkey was hit by “sea snot” – a blanket of mucus-like stuff that was silting up the coasts, created as a result of warm temperatures and agricultural run-off that encouraged phytoplankton to grow. But in California, after a short and late rainy season, the governor was declaring an impending drought emergency in 41 of 58 counties. June One of the most extraordinary and powerful heatwaves ever experienced by North America hit the west coast in June and did not go away. Caused by what meteorologists called a “dome of high pressure”, the heatwave extended from California – worsening the drought even as the first wildfires of the season began – all the way up to Canada, where temperatures rose up to 121.28F (49.6C), shattering all previous records. “This is the beginning of a permanent emergency,” the governor of Washington state said. Other parts of the world also saw scorching temperatures. Both Europe and Asia had their second warmest Junes on record, while Africa and New Zealand had the warmest June ever recorded. But efforts to fight back continued too. Poland announced it would shut down Bełchatów, Europe’s most polluting power plant (although only in 2036). The City of London said it would be creating a heat network and digging boreholes for one of the UK’s largest low-carbon heating systems. Sri Lanka braced itself for disaster after the MV X-Press Pearl, a ship carrying toxic chemicals, caught fire off the coast and sank. Meanwhile China was fixating on a herd of elephants that had trekked 300 miles into the city of Kunming. July The average global surface temperature for July was the hottest since records began in 1880, with Death Valley in California registering 54.4C (130F). As the US heatwaves and droughts worsened, India, China and Europe were being hit by catastrophic floods. Torrential downpours on India’s west coast led to 115 deaths, while Henan province in China saw a year’s worth of rain – 604mm – in a single day. Horrifying videos showed the waters rising in subways, while hundreds of thousands were forced to evacuate. And in Germany rows broke out when it emerged that a flood early-warning system had failed to work, after torrents of rainwater tore through villages and towns, leaving more than a hundred people dead. Meanwhile the Australian government continued to fight attempts to have the Great Barrier Reef declared “in danger”, with local politicians saying they feared for the impact the declaration would have on jobs. In the UK, the water company Southern Water was fined a record £90m after a six-year investigation found evidence that it had deliberately poured untreated sewage into the sea in order to avoid the cost of upgrading infrastructure. And, to top off a gloomy month for the planet, new data showed that the melting of Greenland was surging, with the amount of ice vanishing in a single day enough to cover the whole of Florida in 5cm of water, according to researchers. August The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change delivered its starkest warning to the world yet, concluding that climate change was unequivocally caused by human activities, and warning that some of the impacts were now inevitable and “irreversible”. As the heat continued, wildfires broke out in the Mediterranean, where the Greek prime minister described them as the country’s “greatest ecological disaster in decades”, and across more than 9m hectares of forests in Siberia. Meanwhile floods and landslides hit Japan, where more than a million people were evacuated from their homes, and also Turkey, Colombia, and Tennessee in the US, where a record-breaking deluge swept through homes and roads. Rain fell on the highest point of the Greenland ice sheet for the first time on record. A Swedish company shipped the world’s first customer delivery of “green steel” – made without using coal – as solar power outstripped coal in Australia for the first time when, for a fleeting moment, more electricity was generated by solar power. In the UK, Extinction Rebellion swung back into action, blocking London Bridge and Oxford Circus, pouring red paint in entrances at the City of London and locking on outside the Science Museum over its sponsorship deal with the oil giant Shell. September “Blah blah blah” was what Greta Thunberg called the promises from global leaders around the world to tackle climate change, pointing out that carbon emissions were still on track to rise 16% by 2030. As Cop26 drew nearer, and following the summer of record-breaking fires, heatwaves and floods, politicians everywhere were under increasing pressure to improve their offers. A US/EU deal to reduce methane emissions felt like a good contribution. A new protest movement launched in the UK, as Insulate Britain demonstrators began sitting on motorways to demand climate action in the form of insulation for the country’s housing stock. In Scotland, as preparations sped up, one man built an ark on a hillside, telling the planning committee when it asked if it was a permanent structure: “It’s not permanent in the same way that humanity won’t be if we don’t take action on the climate.” In a painful irony, new data revealed that the wildfires were themselves releasing record-breaking amounts of carbon dioxide. Meanwhile, an energy crisis was breaking across the world, with sky-high gas prices in Europe and pressure on electricity and coal supplies in China. October China hosted the Kunming conference on biodiversity and announced a $233m (£170m) fund to protect biodiversity in developing countries. We shall take the development of an ecological civilisation as our guide to coordinate the relationship between man and nature. Xi Jinping With just days to go before Cop26, Australia, one of the countries most notorious for holding out against climate action, published its plan for how it would reduce carbon emissions, but it was called “a scam” containing no detail and no modelling. Elsewhere, however, signs of change were palpable, with a series of plans announced at the Middle East Green Initiative Summit, organised by Saudi Arabia. Their neighbours, the United Arab Emirates, will be hosting Cop28 in two years’ time. A Tesla became the first ever battery-powered car to top Europe’s sales chart. And in the UK, the government was forced by a near rebellion to U-turn and place a duty on water companies to reduce sewage discharges. In the US, one senator gained global notoriety: Joe Manchin, a conservative Democrat, was holding out against his own party for huge cuts to President Biden’s climate change plans. For a brief moment, it looked as if Biden would have to go to Cop26 with no legislative progress at home. November Cop26 was under way at last, after two years of pandemic, delays, worries, criticisms and negotiations. World leaders gathered for the first two days and were exhorted by David Attenborough to be “motivated by hope rather than fear”. Biden had finally got his infrastructure bill passed, but the UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, put a dampener on events by making his speech and then hopping into a private jet to make the short journey to London. The first week saw an onslaught of deals on methane, deforestation, coal, the ambition to stick to 1.5C of warming and finance, with hundreds of the world’s biggest banks and pension funds with assets worth $130tn committing themselves to limiting greenhouse gas emissions. By the end of the second week of hard negotiation, the summit’s president, Alok Sharma, had cajoled countries into a deal including a ratchet mechanism that asked every country to upgrade its emission reduction plans in time for the next Cop in Egypt in a year’s time, and each year thereafter. However, many were dismayed that the deal did not include the loss and damage facility that most of the world had asked for, to help developing countries in particular pay for the impacts of the climate crisis already being felt. Beyond the summit, rain storms hit British Columbia in Canada, earlier battered by the summer’s heatwaves, broke up roads and led to a state of emergency. Out in the oceans one of the rarest animals in the world was glimpsed: the mythical white sperm whale, seen surfacing for a moment, from the waters off Jamaica. December The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) announced in the middle of the month that it had recognised a new Arctic temperature record: the summer of 2020 had seen the Russian town of Verkhoyansk hit with an all-time high of 38°C (100.4°F). Floods swept Queensland, Australia, with up to 180mm of rain falling in 24 hours in some parts of the state. The UK was hit by Storm Arwen and Storm Barra. Heavy rains fell in Iraq, leading to serious flooding and displacement. And tornadoes ripped through North America, with at least 70 deaths in Kentucky in what was described as the “most devastating tornado event” in the state’s history, only to be followed, by the end of the month, by record-breaking temperatures and snowfall. EO Wilson, who died on 26 December, had warned many times that humans could not continue to use the land and resources of the planet in the way they did. The biologist was caught up in controversies at times during his career. Nevertheless, his warning that “we live in a delusional state” if we do not understand the burden that the western way of life imposes on Earth, rings true even now. If all mankind were to disappear, the world would regenerate back to the rich state of equilibrium that existed 10,000 years ago. If insects were to vanish, the environment would collapse into chaos. EO Wilson, biologist • This article was amended on 6 January 2022. The Middle East Green Initiative was organised by Saudi Arabia, not the United Arab Emirates as an earlier version said.Watford attempt to arrest their alarming slump buoyed by the news Emmanuel Dennis will not be playing at the Africa Cup of Nations. The Nigeria forward scored his eighth goal of the season in Watford’s 4-1 defeat against West Ham on Tuesday – their fifth successive loss. His availability in January offers hope but their problems remain in defence. Watford’s inability to keep a clean sheet is likely to be exposed again by a rejuvenated Tottenham. Antonio Conte remains unbeaten in the league and his arrival has reinvigorated Harry Kane after a forgettable autumn. Simon Mail Saturday 3pm Venue Vicarage Road Last season n/a Referee Robert Jones This season G5 Y18 R0 3.6 cards/game Odds H 9-2 A 4-6 D 3-1 WATFORD Subs from Elliot, Fletcher, Gosling, Tufan, Hernández, Angelini, Conteh, Morris, Cleverley Doubtful Foster (groin) Injured Kabasele (calf, 15 Jan), Etebo (quadriceps, Mar), Nkoulou (hamstring, unknown), Sarr (knee, Feb), Baah (ankle, unknown), Rose (knee, unknown), Femenía (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y34 R1 Form WLLLLL Leading scorer Dennis 8 TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Doherty, Gil, Rodon, Alli, Tanganga, Ndombele, Skipp, Clarke, White Doubtful None Injured Sessegnon (hamstring, 9 Jan), Bergwin (calf, 16 Jan), Lo Celso (calf, 16 Jan), Romero (hamstring, 16 Jan) Suspended None Discipline Y31 R1 Form WWWDWD Leading scorer Son 8As dawn broke on the first morning of 2021, dark storm clouds hung over Britain’s economic landscape. Hospitality, aviation and tourism had been at a standstill for much of the previous year, while high street retail had fared only a little better. A winter Covid-19 surge heralded yet another punishing lockdown and, as if that wasn’t enough, Brexit was crimping Britain’s international trade. Consumer confidence languished at rock bottom with no end to the pandemic in sight. Twelve months on, the world of business and finance has been on a rollercoaster ride, flitting from summer optimism to autumn supply chain chaos, before the Omicron variant of Covid-19 brought us back down to earth with a chastening bump. In some respects, things are looking up. In others, it feels like we’re right back where we started. As Britain battles to recover from the pandemic body blow, here’s how the year unfolded. Pings, petrol panic and supply chain pandemonium The neologism of 2021 was surely “pingdemic”. Covid-19 restrictions were fully lifted on 19 July, unshackling large swathes of the economy in readiness for a summer rebound. But already workers who had been near to someone who later tested positive were being “pinged” with alerts from the NHS Covid-19 app, forcing tens of thousands to self-isolate. The trend caused massive disruption, affecting everyone from independent restaurants and shops to the likes of Asos, Rolls-Royce and Nissan. The relaxation of self-isolation rules eased the problem somewhat, but it was far from the last setback to the UK’s recovery. Ping or no ping, labour supply issues persisted, due partly to the pandemic and partly to a dearth of overseas workers caused by Brexit. Sectors from farming to hospitality struggled with staff shortages, but nowhere were the effects more visible than in the deficit of HGV drivers. New rules for EU hauliers, coupled with poor working conditions, red tape and a backlog at driving test centres, left the UK with a stark deficit of people qualified to get behind the wheel of delivery lorries. Supermarket shelves began to look sparse and stores including Tesco and Sainsbury’s even resorted to hiding the gaps with pictures of asparagus, carrots, oranges and grapes. Perhaps the most striking consequence was the chaos at the petrol pumps. After BP warned in September that it didn’t have enough tanker drivers to deliver fuel to some forecourts, its concerns became a self-fulfilling prophecy as panic-buying caused many forecourts to run dry for days at a time. The crisis soon subsided but underlying supply chain problems remain an ever-present threat. Gas prices, energy suppliers coal and Cop26 Alongside the fuel panic, the UK experienced a second autumn energy crisis, one made all the more poignant by the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow. Wholesale gas and electricity prices began a prolonged surge from September on the back of a mix of factors including increased demand as countries unlocked, Russian restrictions on pipeline flows to Europe and low renewable power generation. Energy suppliers collapsed like dominos as the market price for gas far outstripped what customers were paying under the government-imposed energy price cap. Between August and December, 25 went under: the largest was the “too good to be true” green supplier Bulb Energy, with 1.6 million customers, which became the first to enter the government’s “special administration” scheme for energy providers. The chain of failures has led to widespread calls for a rethink of the regulatory system that aimed to encourage competition by allowing smaller players to enter the market. It wasn’t just suppliers that were hit. Sectors that use a lot of energy, such as steel, glass and chemicals, were brought to the brink of shutting down by the high cost of gas and electricity. Two fertiliser plants did stop operations, forcing the government to step in to help their owner, CF Fertiliser. Its two plants supply about 60% of the UK’s carbon dioxide, which is vital for the food and drink supply chain. Luckily, the Cop26 summit was on hand to map out a path towards decreased reliance on fossil fuels. Opinion was divided on its success. Boris Johnson hailed a “big step forward”, but commitments from China and India on coal phase-out didn’t go far enough for many. Cop26’s biggest winner was surely AG Barr, the owner of Irn-Bru, which seemed to garner as many mentions as climate change. Rows, trials and scandals One of the year’s most acrimonious disputes came at the very start, as the European Union and AstraZeneca clashed over claims that the Anglo-Swedish pharmaceutical giant had reneged on its promise to deliver jabs. The row went to court before being settled in September after the firm agreed to deliver 200m doses by March 2022. Also crying foul were politicians and campaigners who had hoped that the northern leg of HS2 would help boost economic growth in part of the country hampered by poor connectivity. In the end, the government’s scaled-back Integrated Rail Plan published in November ditched the proposed spur from Birmingham to Leeds, prompting accusations that the plan was not so much rail as betrayal. The return of international travel in the summer was great news for tour operators and airlines but there was frustration among holidaymakers at the service offered by the host of firms that sprang up selling the required PCR testing kits. Many appeared to have been incorporated hurriedly to cash in on new market. After many tales of poor service and withheld refunds, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, vowed to crack down on “cowboy” firms. Two of the year’s biggest scandals starkly illustrated the gulf between the powerful and the voiceless. One was the Greensill affair, in which it emerged that the Australian financier Lex Greensill had been ushered into the heart of David Cameron’s government, where he appeared to have enjoyed carte blanche to insert his company into government procurement contracts, with lucrative results. After Cameron left office, he lobbied for Greensill Capital to receive government emergency support as it hurtled towards collapse. The affair’s fallout includes a Serious Fraud Office investigation into the links between Greensill and Sanjeev Gupta, the man who owns much of the UK steel industry. Rather less powerful than Cameron and Greensill were the hundreds of postmasters wrongfully convicted of offences including theft on the basis of software errors in the Post Office’s IT system. Many had their names belatedly cleared in court this year, and the government has set aside up to £233m to compensate those forced to cover imaginary shortfalls. Many died before their names could be cleared, having had their reputations dragged through the mud by their employer’s aggressive pursuit on incorrect evidence. As the year drew to a close, a jury was deliberating in the trial of Elizabeth Holmes, the founder of the US blood testing company Theranos. She denies 11 criminal charges alleging that she duped investors and patients by hailing her company’s technology as a medical breakthrough when results were actually error-strewn. The case has attracted worldwide attention, in part due to the incredible rise-and-fall narrative of Holmes, who started Theranos as a 19-year-old college dropout and became a paper billionaire before the company’s collapse. Digital currency and meme stocks At the very start of the year, the Tesla boss, Elon Musk, became the world’s richest man, overtaking Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, as shares in the electric vehicle-maker soared on the back of hopes that a Democrat-controlled US Senate would lead to better conditions for green technology. The increase pushed Musk’s net worth to £136bn. Musk displayed an uncanny ability to move markets with a comment on Twitter. When the billionaire space-botherer said Tesla would resume accepting payment in bitcoin, the value of the currency moved past $40,000. Even without Musk’s rocket fuel, bitcoin continued its rise, soaring above an all-time high of $68,000 in November. Even Dogecoin, a cryptocurrency invented as a joke, offered the promise of major returns, surging 14,000% between January and May. The Bank of England has since warned that bitcoin could end up worthless, but in truth its future is anybody’s guess. The growing influence of social media on markets was further evidenced by the emergence of “meme stocks” – shares that attract investment purely thanks to online hype. The archetypal example was GameStop, a bricks-and-mortar video games outlet that offered little as an investment prospect until small traders latched on to it in January in a vigilante effort to squeeze hedge funds that had bet against it. The trend has caused wild fluctuations in GameStop and other meme stocks. One London-based hedge fund, White Square, was even driven under. The phenomenon was fuelled by web forums such as Reddit and the growing trend for small investors to dabble in securities via trading apps such as Robinhood and eToro. Deals, takeovers and market moves As new technology flexed its muscles, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, sought to make Britain more attractive for innovative companies to float in London by loosening listing rules. Deliveroo was a poster child for the policy but its float duly flopped. More established UK names proved more attractive, attracting the attention of deep-pocketed private equity buyers. The supermarket chain Morrisons succumbed to a £6.9bn takeover by the US firm Clayton, Dubilier &amp; Rice (CD&amp;R). American buyout houses also took aim at the outsourcer G4S, the infrastructure builder John Laing and the defence companies Meggitt and Ultra Electronics. Perhaps the most controversial takeover had nothing to do with private equity. The asthma inhaler maker Vectura was snapped up for £1.1bn by the cigarette company Philip Morris International. The tobacco firm claimed the deal was part of its switch to a “smoke-free future” but anti-smoking groups were up in arms and several medical conferences cut ties with Vectura after the deal. For the FTSE100 it was a year of recovery. An initial slump was followed by gains that saw the blue-chip index finally return to its pre-pandemic crash level in the year’s final week. Politics and economics Rarely has the cosy nexus between business and politics been under more scrutiny than in 2021. The PCR test supplier Randox found itself at the centre of a row over lobbying done on its behalf by its adviser, the Conservative MP Owen Paterson, which was first revealed by the Guardian. Meanwhile, it emerged that firms who had MPs on speed dial had been moved into “VIP lanes” for Covid contracts. But for much of the business community, relations with government were strained, raising question marks over the Tories’ claim to be the “party of business”. First there was a Brexit-related plunge in trade during January, then the announcement of an upcoming rise in corporation tax to 25% and a national insurance hike to fund health and social care, which has been condemned as a tax on workers. The economy grew sharply from the depths plumbed in 2020 but the recovery remains fragile. What the business community needed was a strong signal from government that there was a plan, a firm hand at the tiller, some certainty to cling to. What they got, courtesy of Boris Johnson’s address to the annual CBI dinner, was a semi-incoherent “car crash” of a speech that had journalists asking if the prime minister was OK. He rambled about the children’s TV character Peppa Pig for several minutes, impersonated a car – complete with “vroom vroom” noises – and at one stage lost his place, leaving the audience to squirm at the uncomfortable dead air punctuated by the occasional “erm” and “forgive me”. Some things have gone better. Unemployment has remained surprisingly low at 4.2% despite the end of the furlough scheme. But as 2021 draws to a close, major concerns remain. Inflation is at a 10-year high of 5.1%, well above the Bank of England’s target, with little sign of abatement. Brexit remains a drag, with an Institute of Directors survey finding one-third of affected members saying they aren’t ready for stricter customs checks that come into effect on 1 January 2022. Meanwhile, the surge in Omicron cases means that pubs, bars and restaurants are ending 2021 more or less where they started it, unable to trade profitably, if at all. Here’s to a happier 2022.Ireland has become the latest EU country to cut the isolation period for many people who contract Covid-19, as record infection numbers spark fears of crippling staff shortages in essential public services, as well as retail and hospitality venues. Spain, Portugal and Greece reduced isolation times this week while others, such as Germany and France, are considering doing so and Italy cut its quarantine for fully vaccinated people who come into contact with someone who has tested positive. The moves follow a similar decision by the US and reflect early research suggesting the highly transmissible Omicron variant fuelling the pandemic’s latest surge generally causes milder illness than earlier versions of the virus. However, the sheer number of people becoming infected – and thus having to self-isolate if they contract the virus, or quarantine if they are a contact of someone who tests positive – threatens to cause chaos in hospitals and on public transport. “Many Omicron cases are going to be asymptomatic,” Rochelle Walensky, the director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said on Monday after halving the recommended isolation time for asymptomatic people to five from 10 days. “We want to make sure there is a mechanism by which we can safely continue to keep society functioning, while following the science.” The UK’s Health Security Agency (UKHSA) on Wednesday cut the 10-day self-isolation period for vaccinated and unvaccinated people in England who have tested positive for coronavirus from 10 days to seven if they get the all-clear from lateral flow tests. The World Health Organization has described the decisions to cut isolation and quarantine periods as part of a delicate balancing act between controlling the transmission of the virus and keeping national economies up and running. “It is a trade-off between the science and being absolutely perfect in what you try to do, but then having the minimal disruption you can possibly have,” Michael Ryan, the WHO emergencies director, said. “Governments are struggling to find that balance.” The Irish government on Friday cut the isolation period to seven days from 10 for people who have tested positive but received a booster vaccine or been infected within the previous three months. With the Omicron variant accounting for 92% of all infections in Ireland, now running at more than double their previous record, the country’s chief medical officer also urged people to keep social contacts as low as possible before New Year’s Eve. Spain, where infection numbers have increased fivefold in a month, cut its isolation period for people who have tested positive to seven days from 10 on Wednesday after a meeting between the health minister, Carolina Darias, and regional health chiefs. The quarantine period for close contacts of people who have tested positive was also reduced to seven days. The prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, said the country needed to strike “a balance” between public health, mental health and economic growth. Portugal followed suit on Thursday, cutting its mandatory isolation period for people who test positive but are asymptomatic from 10 days to seven, after health experts urged the government to rethink amid concerns the country could become paralysed. “This decision is aligned with guidelines from other countries and is a result of a technical and weighted consideration, given the incubation period of the now predominant variant, Omicron,” the DGS health authority said in a statement. Greece reduced its isolation period for coronavirus patients further, to five days from 10, after the country set a fourth consecutive daily record of new infections. “The evidence we have from Omicron is encouraging,” said the health minister, Thanos Plevris. Members of the public who come into contact with a confirmed Covid case will have to quarantine for five days and then get a test, but quarantine will not be required for those who have already received a booster shot. Italy chose a different course, leaving its isolation period untouched but scrapping quarantine for those coming into contact with someone who has tested positive providing they have had a booster shot, recently recovered or been vaccinated. They will have to wear a more protective FFP2 (equivalent to KN95 or N95 in other regions) mask for 10 days and take a test within five days since the contact with the positive person – but only if they are showing symptoms. “I think it is reasonable to apply different rules to those citizens who have followed the government’s indications, taking two doses and then the booster,” said the health secretary, Andrea Costa. Italy, too, has registered record infection numbers this week. Germany’s Der Spiegel reported this week that the health minister, Karl Lauterbach, favoured shortening quarantine periods amid fears the country would soon grind to a halt given how many people are having to self-isolate protectively. The Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious diseases recommends that infected people and their contacts in Germany, where case numbers have recently started to rise, quarantine for 14 days, even if they are fully vaccinated or recovered. In France, which this week set a new European record for daily infections, media have reported that the government’s HAS health advisory body is due to make a formal recommendation on the question on Friday. France operates a seven-day isolation period, and a 17-day quarantine for people living in the same household as someone who has tested positive. The health minister, Olivier Véran, due to announce any change on 2 January.“I was coming down Mount Snowdon and in the far distance I thought I could see brown people, and I thought my eyes were kidding me. Then, as I descended and got closer, I realised they were women in hijabs. I was like ‘wow Muslim women on the mountain’, like ‘am I dreaming?’” Haroon Mota, the founder of Muslim Hikers, is remembering a walk he did around 15 years ago and, if you look at the statistics, his shock at seeing members of his own community out on the trails makes sense. Only 1% of national park visitors come from black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) backgrounds. A 2021 report by the countryside charity CPRE reported data showing ethnic minorities have, on average, 11 times less access to green space than their white counterparts, and that only 20% of BAME children who visit natural environments go to the countryside, compared with 40% of white children. The reasons for the racial imbalance outdoors is complicated, and Mota has his own opinions on what the major barriers are, but a diversity review commissioned by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) highlighted that despite people from ethnic minority backgrounds valuing the natural environment and pace of life in the countryside, they felt excluded and hyper-visible in what they see as an “exclusively English environment”. Muslim Hikers is a community group set up by Mota to encourage Muslims to get outside, though anyone is welcome. Since launching the group in 2020, he’s received criticism from trolls for being “exclusionary” and “creating divisions”. Mota brushes those comments off, confident in his values and purpose. “It is what it says on the tin. There is a very clear under-representation and to overcome that, you’ve got to cater for that community. Everybody’s welcome. But our focus is to try and help the Muslim community and I think there’s nothing wrong with that.” The group’s most recent walk was on Christmas day. One hundred walkers came from around the UK to hike up Mam Tor in the Peak District. After the hike, some of them excitedly shared photos of the trip to the Derbyshire and Peak District Walks Facebook group. It wasn’t long until some members of the group left “vile, racist comments”, says Mota. “It’s like the migration of the wildebeests in the Serengeti, they just keep coming,” one white woman wrote underneath the images. While another said: “And I bet not 1 of the 100s help to repair the paths when they become damaged …absolute disgrace.” Responding to the comments, Mota said: “It was such a shame seeing hateful comments ... It’s only a small minority of people who act like this but it sure does provide justification for calls to make the outdoors more diverse and inclusive. It won’t deter us one single bit.” Mota says he has never experienced racism when he’s been hiking and finds the outdoors “a very welcoming space”, however he adds that many people within his hiking group have experienced racist remarks, staring and patronising comments. The CPRE report echoed these attitudes when looking at the key barriers: “One barrier identified was a perception of rural communities as close-knit, white, privileged, older and more conservative than city people, and resistant to change. The associated feeling with this … is that of being unwelcome.” When Mota saw the Muslim women on Snowdon, he excitedly chatted with the group who had travelled from Birmingham for the Islamic Relief charity hike. He exchanged details with the group’s leader and continued his descent. In years of hiking, this was the first time he’d seen brown people out on the hills. “I thought, our people just don’t go outside … I want to do something to try and maybe inspire and empower Muslim communities to get involved.” Mota, who was the European kickboxing champion at 17, has a long history in sport and fitness. “It’s in my DNA,” he says. In his final year at Coventry University studying sport and exercise science, Mota began volunteering for Islamic Relief and his first charity hike was to Everest base camp where he raised £10,000. His passion and flair for fundraising quickly became apparent. “For me, charity is a huge part of my faith,” he says. He has volunteered as the leader on many of Islamic Relief’s charity hikes over the following years, including one to Peru. Now Mota works for the Muslim charity Penny Appeal, arranging and leading charity treks around the world. Three years ago he took 18 British Muslim women to hike to Everest base camp. Shortly afterwards he ran the Berlin Marathon, led a group on a hike to Peru’s Machu Picchu, and another to climb Mount Kilimanjaro. He had many more plans in the pipeline but then Covid struck. With a fundraising pledge to run four of the world’s six major marathons scuppered by lockdown, he chose to run the length of six marathons (260km) in his local area of Coventry instead. Not only did he run 10k a day, but he did it while fasting with no food or drink for 18 hours of the day during Ramadan. He raised over £50,000 for Penny Appeal which helps people in poverty around the world. “I ran voluntarily, but refugees are fleeing war and extreme poverty every day and I ran for them,” Mota explains. After seeing his inspirational resolve, Canadian outdoor brand Arc’teryx asked him to become an ambassador. With the backing of the brand, Mota’s first instinct was to try to invest in his own community and so in 2020, Muslim Hikers was born. Now at nearly 9,000 followers, the group has done three official hikes and is planning more, potentially abroad. Many participants have said the events have been the best thing they’ve ever done, creating friendships for life and a sense of “safety in numbers” in the British outdoors. Muslim Hikers’ second event, called High Chai, was similarly successful selling out in two hours – the group hiked through the Peak District and some of them stopped for afternoon tea at the only independent halal tea room in the area- Millies Tea Rooms, Chocolatier and Bed &amp; Breakfast in Hayfield. A big factor for wanting to get his community outdoors is for health reasons, Mota says. “It’s South Asian communities that suffer the greatest sort of health inequalities. We’re the ones that are dying of diabetes, heart disease and obesity. And then it’s not a coincidence that our physical activity levels are also the lowest - it’s so important for us to encourage our communities to be more healthy.” Mota’s hopes for the future are firmly rooted in community and creating a cultural shift. “We want to help other grassroots initiatives build infrastructure, so we can do more and create long, lasting, sustainable change.” He is already working with national parks to help them increase the diversity of visitors. “When I started running marathons, I automatically became the ‘Muslim marathon man’. When I started climbing mountains, I automatically became the ‘Muslim mountain man’,” he says. Mota wants to change the underrepresentation so that Muslim people doing physical activities becomes the new norm.One hundred and 41 containers filled with rotting plastic waste have been on a journey for more than a year. Scattered between Turkey, Greece and Vietnam, far from their origins in Germany, the containers’ voyage sheds light on the hidden global trade in plastic waste. Arriving in Turkey in late 2020, shortly before a ban on mixed plastic waste imports came into force, the containers quickly became the centre of a battle between traders, a shipping line, multiple governments and environmental campaigners demanding their return. Turkish authorities refused entry to the containers, leaving them in limbo. As they languished in ports across the country, the contents began to rot. “After a couple of months, all the dirty waste inside was disrupted, and some had fermented due to the presence of micro-organisms. It smelled really bad and it was covered in rats and mice,” said Sedat Gündoğdu, a plastics pollution researcher based in the southern city of Adana. The year-long saga of the 141 containers is a small slice of the international trade in plastic waste, the ugly underbelly of recycling in the global north. Plastic waste, especially mixed plastic from households, is frequently sent overseas to countries with lax environmental regulations, where it is melted into plastic pellets, dumped, or simply burned. Mixed plastics are the dirtiest and least desirable waste in the trade, as they typically contain household rubbish such as bottles or packaging, meaning a jumble of recyclable plastics with non-recyclable items. As many countries move to ban mixed plastic imports, observers say some traders have taken to hiding bales of banned mixed plastics behind others that pass regulation to sneak them past inspectors. The containers remained stuck after a company involved in their initial journey lost its import licence and disappeared. “The consignee delayed us saying there were some things to sort out with customs. But then we found out their import licence was cancelled, and they were blacklisted by Turkey. Lab tests showed some loads in the containers are hazardous city waste,” said Omer Bulduk of Monax, a Turkish freight company assigned to receive the containers. “It’s simply garbage,” he added. Some of the countries listed among the world’s top recyclers are also the biggest plastic waste exporters: Germany was named the world’s top recycler by the World Economic Forum three years ago, but exports an average of 1m tonnes of plastic waste annually, more than any other nation in the EU. The UK is little better, exporting 61% of its plastic waste according to recent data from the British Plastics Foundation. “When you continue to consume more plastic there are only two ways to tackle the waste. One is incineration, the second is dumping. If you don’t have dumping in your country then you should incinerate. But this has a carbon footprint, and many countries trying to cut carbon emissions don’t want to incinerate their own waste,” said Gündoğdu. “Some of the top waste producers in Europe, like the UK, France and Germany have to find ways to deal with this issue. And the way they’ve found is exporting to poorer countries without effective waste management systems or environmental legislation and regulations. This is waste colonialism,” he said. In May, the Turkish foreign ministry contacted their counterparts in Germany to demand the containers’ return. According to Bulduk, the German side “claimed that too much time had passed and they cannot accept them”. Angela Griesbach, a spokesperson for the waste management authority in the state of Baden-Württemberg, now in charge of overseeing the containers, said this was “probably a misunderstanding”, adding that the containers contained waste that was legal when it arrived in Turkey. When some of the containers of German waste were suddenly re-exported to Vietnam, campaigners sprung into action. Activists believe that the 16 containers sent last July to the port of Hai Phong were a test, to see if others could later follow the same route in order to dispose of the rotting containers entirely. But who authorised their onward travel remains a mystery, especially as sending waste directly from an EU country to those outside the OECD is banned, and new controls on mixed plastic exports introduced last January require express consent from the Vietnamese authorities to import the containers. Vietnam’s own ban on plastic waste imports is due to go into force in 2025, but it remains a popular destination for the global plastic recycling trade. There, workers are paid less than £5 a day to sort plastic into recyclable elements and non-recyclable. The former are melted down, exposing those nearby to toxic fumes. Jim Puckett of the Basel Action Network, a group that campaigns against plastic-related pollution, tracked 37 of the German containers heading towards Piraeus port near Athens in November, and grew suspicious they were also headed to Vietnam. “I dropped what I was doing and sent a strong message to the Greek authorities, saying that they couldn’t allow that waste to get on a ship and go to Vietnam. It’s illegal and it should be returned to Germany,” he said. The Greek authorities took note, and cordoned off the containers on the dock in Piraeus, where they remain. “There’s also almost a hundred containers sitting in Turkey, and we’re very worried they will be bound for countries like Vietnam,” he added. In an open letter to Germany’s newly inaugurated environment ministry, a coalition of green groups including BAN demanded they “take moral and political leadership” and reclaim the 141 containers. When contacted by the Guardian, the environment ministry referred questions to Griesbach. “The campaigners are right in saying that there are many legal questions and legal grey areas,” she said. She stressed that “a voluntary return shipment by a German company involved is intended but has not yet been possible,” and said the German authorities were unaware that some containers had been re-exported to Vietnam. If certain conditions were met, she added, the containers in Turkey could be returned. “If the problem is not an internal Turkish enforcement problem, the German authorities, as well as the German company voluntarily, are willing to take back this waste in accordance with the law. However, this requires the corresponding cooperation and information from the Turkish side.” The Turkish environment ministry did not respond when contacted for comment on the issue. Vietnam and Turkey are two of a growing number of countries that have reported a sudden spike in plastic waste, after China’s decision to ban waste imports in 2018 proved to be a watershed for the global trade. The decision “reverberated around the world”, according to the United Nations, which added that nations in the global north “will, at last, have to face up to the true cost of their plastic addiction instead of shipping the problem to China, which has taken nearly half the world’s waste since 1992”. “We’ve been sold a notion of ‘don’t worry, we’ll recycle it’ – and no one looked at what recycling was like in China until three years ago,” said Puckett. “We’re putting out more plastic waste into the world, every day more than the day before, and there’s no destination for it. It’s now become a game of who will take it because there are mountains of plastic waste and it’s not stopped.” The result is a frantic hunt for new destinations for an estimated 111m metric tonnes of plastic waste displaced by the ban between now and 2030. While China has banned imports, it continues to profit from the global trade in plastics through its domination of the shipping trade. Cosco shipping, the company that transported all 141 containers, is a Chinese state-owned company. Cosco did not respond when contacted for comment on the issue. Matthew Gordon, an environmental researcher at Yale University who is part of a team compiling an “atlas of plastic waste” to show new plastic dumping sites across the world, said he was surprised by the number of countries represented in their initial findings, including Bosnia, Thailand, Romania, Malaysia and Turkey. “South-east Asia clearly seems to be a hotspot, especially in the aftermath of the China import ban,” he said. “One of the reasons for this seems to be that when container ships travel from places like China to the US carrying manufactured goods, they offer extremely low freight on the return trip – otherwise they would be going back empty. So exporters in the US often find it cheaper to send plastics abroad than to deal with them at home.” Turkey has increasingly found itself on the frontline of the struggle between local plastic importers’ desire to stay in the global recycling trade and rising environmental concerns. After an investigation by Greenpeace found plastic products from British and German supermarket chains intended for recycling dumped by the roadside, Turkey briefly banned all plastic imports last May before rescinding the law soon afterwards. Gündoğdu said new dumping grounds for plastic waste were springing up again after a brief lull. In Adana, a hub for plastic waste imports, a coalition of local plastics traders wrote their own open letter to the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, imploring him to allow the industry to continue. The letter was part of a campaign to rebrand plastic waste imports, under the slogan “It’s not waste, it’s raw material.” The plastic waste industry, they said, employs 300,000 Turkish people. Traders described themselves as “the ones cleaning the environment, not polluting it”. Many Turkish citizens disagree. When asked how they felt about the 800,000 tonnes of plastic waste that Turkey imported last year from the EU, a majority said “very bad”, while others cited a slogan that is rapidly becoming a rallying cry against plastic imports in their country: “Turkey is not a garbage bin.” Additional reporting by Gökçe SaraçoğluButterflies, hedgehogs and bats are at risk as the unseasonably mild weather has disrupted hibernation in the UK and is causing spring flowers to bloom in January. Climate change is disrupting the seasons, and this year the winter has been especially mild, with trees not dropping their autumn leaves and others bursting into fresh leaf and bloom months early. This New Year’s Eve is expected to be the mildest on record, with temperatures predicted to hit 15C in some parts of the country – double the average temperature for this time of year. This could have devastating effects for creatures that depend on the rhythm of the seasons for survival. While a low-pressure system is behind the unseasonal warmth, experts say background temperature rises caused by climate change are exacerbating the issue. Grahame Madge, a climate spokesperson for the Met Office, said: “The unseasonal warmth that will be a feature of the new year period is caused by a low-pressure system drawing up warm air from further south in the Atlantic. Although this would have always created relatively much warmer conditions compared with average, with around 1C of background warming, it is possible that climate change will bring the event to a point that challenges previously held records.” He said this could cause butterflies to be killed off as they emerge from hibernation too early before sufficient food is available, especially as a deadly later cold snap could hit. Madge said: “Abnormal warm spells during winter can encourage species out of hibernation. Butterflies such as red admirals and small tortoiseshells and other insects can be particularly challenged as they can emerge largely without access to life-saving food sources like nectar. If the warm spell is followed by a return to colder conditions, the hibernating individuals will have used up valuable energy reserves without being able to replace them, possibly with disastrous consequences.” The unseasonably warm weather has been confusing for hibernating mammals, which have been emerging from their slumber early. This could be fatal for creatures including hedgehogs, which are waking without sufficient food to sustain them until spring. Kathryn Brown, the director for climate action for The Wildlife Trusts, said: “Our climate is changing, which is having an impact on whole ecosystems as well as individual species. The warming climate is affecting breeding cycles, the availability of food, and behaviours including hibernation. Unusually mild temperatures mean that some species can temporarily emerge from hibernation more often in winter, which is problematic if there is insufficient food to make up for the extra energy used. We know that hedgehogs are at increased risk, and we need more research to understand the effects on other hibernating species such as bats and dormice.” Horticulturalists have noticed that roses have been in bloom all winter, much like in more Mediterranean climes, and colourful spring flowers are already bursting into bloom across British gardens. Matthew Pottage, the curator of the Royal Horticultural Society’s Wisley garden, said: “There are both pros and cons related to the current mild weather for plants and gardens. Out-of-season plants such as roses will, for example, continue to flower, and spring plants like magnolia will likely begin to bloom earlier than normal, which will bring a welcome bit of colour into gardens from early next year if the mild weather continues.” Gardeners and farmers have greatly missed the frosts that kill off pests. Certain fungi and insects now thrive all year round. Pottage said: “The lack of a cold snap will enable exotic plant varieties to continue to flourish but the downside is gardeners will continue to experience some garden pests until significant frosts arrive to kill them off.” Experts at the Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland (BSBI) are asking gardeners to chronicle unusually early blooms in their garden. This has become a growing phenomenon as the seasons become more muddled. Louise Marsh, from the BSBI, said: “We have seen reports on social media of plants in bloom at the moment that have raised a few eyebrows … I expect we will see a similar pattern to previous years – hundreds of species in bloom.” “It isn’t, however, a straightforward story of everything coming into bloom early. We usually find that about half the species in bloom are ‘autumn stragglers’ that have managed to keep on flowering because they haven’t been knocked back by hard frosts; around a quarter are all-year-rounders (typical urban “weeds” such as groundsel, shepherd’s purse, dandelion and daisy) and a few winter specialists such as winter heliotrope; around a quarter are those spring flowers, such as primrose and lesser celandine, blooming early.” There are concerns about the impacts on pollinators if the flowers bloom before they have a chance to take advantage of the nectar, and on migratory birds that feed on fruit and have not yet arrived.My fashion new year resolution is to cut myself some slack. To quit trying to be someone I’m not. So I am going to stop wearing things that make me feel bad about myself. As of today, it’s goodbye to clothes bought on their promise that they would transform me into a shinier, sleeker, optimised version of myself. It’s time to breathe a sigh of relief and get back to wearing what I feel comfortable in. So I am breaking up with athleisure. I am throwing off the shackles of compression leggings. Burning the racer-back long-line sports bra with its modish charcoal-and-terracotta colour palette. Breaking free of the breathable mesh tanks with empowering slogans in Yale University-adjacent font across the front. Unzipping the cropped hoodie and unlacing my trainers. Athleisure is supposed to be comfortable, but as a fancy urban uniform it has begun to feel a lot like peer pressure. High heels rightly get a bad press for showcasing physical sexuality, exaggerating the sway of hips, emphasising breasts and bottoms. But athleisure also puts your body front and centre of who you are – and not just because leggings and crop tops put your musculature and body fat percentage on display. Athleisure doesn’t have to be skin-tight to put the spotlight on your appearance. Even if it is a tracksuit, modern coordinated workout gear tells the world that exercise and fitness are of paramount importance to you, that the physical shape of your body is a core value. Athleisure is power dressing for narcissists. This is absolutely not about giving up exercise, by the way. That’s not the point, and anyway for me it’s not an option, because like a lot of people I start to lose the plot if I go more than a couple of days without a run or a class. But that doesn’t mean I have to parade around in the kit all day. Exercise is great, but we don’t need to shove our workout schedules down each other’s throats, right? I mean, I cook dinner most nights but I don’t go to work in my apron. So I plan to embrace old-school gym clothes. The stuff we used to wear to work out before the advent of public-facing yoga gear and running tops that come with matching scrunchies. To be clear, I’m not intending to burn sports bras, or anything else. But I still have a drawer full of promotional T-shirts whose provenance has been lost in the mists of time, and tracksuit bottoms whose best days date to a world pre-selfies, and I’m going back to wearing those. It is not so many years ago that wearing flat shoes to a cocktail party was a bold and brave wardrobe choice. These days, comfortable shoes are the norm and no one is wearing high heels unless they happen to feel like doing so that evening. So it is, now, that in a queue for an oat latte and a sourdough loaf on a Saturday morning, the shiniest, most living-their-best-life people will be in athleisure, and wearing jeans feels a bit beta. If fancy athleisure could be just a little less visible all around us, it might help us de-escalate a situation in which body image takes up way too much headspace. Like, I love going to pilates, but I don’t think it’s the meaning of life, you know? Lycra gives plenty of stretch, but the mindset of wearing athleisure doesn’t cut you a lot of slack. Athleisure is the whalebone corset of the 21st century. I’m off to slip into something more comfortable.It was never my intention to hide in the toilet. There was lots going on outside: highbrow small talk and top-tier networking; free drinks, air kisses, and cold canapés that – I’d quickly discovered, following glances – were very much, like my fellow attenders, there only for show. The gallery was filled, I’d been assured, with fashion figures and media leaders. I was lucky to have been invited to this salon, one of the hosts had informed me, generously. Exactly what a “salon” is, I’m still unsure. Deep down, I just didn’t want to be there. Only 90 minutes previously I’d been watching Gogglebox and scoffing Pringles in bed. But I went along out of some sense of duty. Perhaps a desire to broaden my horizons, or a compulsion to step outside my comfort zone, where I had become too safe and snug. Now here I was, sitting in a locked cubicle counting down the minutes before I could leave without seeming rude. All too often I’d go through this same, stupid motion. Preoccupied by getting older, and worrying that I was wasting my finite time on Earth lying on the sofa, I’d panic that before I knew it, I’d be staring down death, full of regret. Put bluntly, I’d get a serious case of Fomo (fear of missing out). This feeling tends to peak in Januarys when, rather than hibernate, as would be eminently sensible, I cajole myself into believing exposure therapy will somehow improve me. I say yes to park jogs, parties and once, a ceilidh. But this year, I’m refusing to be sucked in again – I’m determined to embrace saying yes to saying no to things I simply don’t want to do. For most of my young adult life, I latched on to the idea that – generally speaking – I was quite boring, fairly lazy, a healthy dose of dull. I’d be mortified if anyone gave me those labels; after all, I’m pretty good value at weddings, funerals and barmitzvahs (and I do attend most of the ones I’m invited to) – but I still had a growing feeling that I wasn’t making enough of life’s precious moments. When did the Fomo start? At school, reports often featured the words “must try harder” – and I suppose the idea stuck. There’d been a relationship, my first of substance, where circumstances meant I internalised the idea that I was dreary and unexciting. Friends would flock to underground parties and dance until mid-morning and I’d drag myself out to join them, moving miserably around the darkness until I was too exhausted to continue, or too drunk to care. It’s not that there were rules over what I did or didn’t enjoy; it’s more that I’d force myself to go out, and stay out – whether or not I actually wanted to – out of obligation to my future, dying self. In short, a pattern developed. Life was punctuated by me doing things I didn’t really want to, because otherwise I’d berate myself for doing just enough, sometimes too little, and almost never too much. That’s precisely how I’d ended up at this art show. Arriving alone, I started talking, reluctantly, to a serious man named Simon. He told me his opinions; we stared at some art. As soon as was not unkind, I excused myself, and beelined to the bathrooms. I sat there for a while, staring at the wall. Maybe 10 minutes later, I returned to the action. There was a discussion about poetry, or was it pottery? The bar ran out of white wine. It felt like everyone was there for the same reason as me – because they felt as if they should be. I’m sure I wasn’t the only one having a godawful time. Recently, I’ve spent a lot of time thinking about that evening. I’m coming to realise, slowly but surely, that I’d like to reimagine how I spend my time. All sorts of things have contributed to this contrition: dead grandparents; new nephews; approaching 30. Growing a little older has made me less inclined to do anything that feels void of all pleasure and joy. Then there are the complications of Covid. I’m lucky to be fit and healthy, but now each event – birthday, work breakfast, day trip – comes with a complex new set of calculations related to my health and safety: is it worth the risk? I’m trying to apply the same thinking to whether I’ll actually enjoy something, too. That means accepting invitations, but also politely declining – and making these decisions based on what I want to do, not what I feel I should. I’m still open to new experiences, people and places. Only now I admit defeat calmly, rather than feeling shameful if I throw in the towel. I might not always know what I’ll love or what will feel soul-destroying. But I’m trying to ignore the pressure to be proactive, and instead listen to my gut. It’s harder than it sounds. In his 2012 book Missing Out, psychoanalyst Adam Phillips questions what it means to consider the life unlived. “The myth of our potential,” he writes, “can make of our lives a perpetual falling-short … Now someone is asking us not only to survive but to flourish, not simply or solely to be good but to make the most of our lives.” The premise of Phillips’ position has never been truer. Ours is a society consumed and fixated by the effective use of time. Social media platforms often face blame for turning their users into sad, anxious scrollers, and for good reason. But the fact these sites also demand that we are constantly productive is often overlooked. Instagram insists we have something to show; Twitter requires us to always think something. We live in the “experience economy”, where value is derived from doing. The pandemic has taught us that we don’t know what’s around the corner; to make the most of now. It feels as if some teenagers plough more effort into their TikToks than I have into my entire career. It feels something of an obsession, to be efficient not only in our work, but with our leisure time, too. Because Yolo, far from being a harmless catchphrase, – made famous by Drake in 2011’s The Motto – is actually an insidious idiom; another iteration of the toxic “do one thing that scares you” and “make every moment count” nonsense which has slowly come to poison our daily lives. I’m by no means advocating for total abstinence from ambition. Climb mountains! Learn languages! Tell me your fascinating stories about doing so over wine. It’s just that maybe making the most of every moment can also come from giving up rather than grinning and bearing it. It’s all well and good to try new things, but I’m trying to regularly remind myself that MasterChef is pretty great (as is watching YouTube compilations in my pants and scrolling through Scottish homes on Rightmove). It’s early days, but I’ve already noticed I’m feeling calmer, more comfortable. Of course, this is all a reflection of the stage of life I find myself at: with no kids or caring responsibilities. No doubt there will come a day when I would make a deal with the devil to once again have the chance to pay £8 for a can of Red Stripe to drink while bopping about on sticky floors. But for now, at least, I’m free to make this opting-out choice. One weekend late last year, my friends, my boyfriend and I rented a place by the seaside. On the Friday, we merrily trotted between quaint country pubs. Our Saturday, it had been mutually agreed by all attending, was to be spent walking. A proper hike. Through battering winds, we’d march for six to seven hours across the coastal cliffs of Sussex. Ninety minutes later, we’d barely made a dent in our proposed path and I was exhausted. I checked my phone, and realised that 30 minutes inland we’d get to a bus stop which would take us home. Usually, I’d have marched on, metaphorically sat in that toilet. Instead, I announced I quite fancied taking the bus. A look of relief spread across everyone’s faces. Turns out we all wanted to throw in the towel. And so we did.The mother of a teenager who was stabbed to death in 2018 has demanded an apology from police after learning that an officer kept pictures he took of himself lying down at the scene of the killing. Mandy Jamieson, whose son Daniel Gee-Jamieson was killed aged 16, accused the officer, Ryan Connolly, of sullying the memory of her child. It came after the Guardian revealed Connolly had been caught with that picture and another of a man suffering a mental health crisis, as well as having sent “appalling” racist, homophobic and offensive images via WhatsApp. “What he did was disgusting and heartless, especially as a police officer who is supposed to protect people. He has trampled on the memory of my son as far as I am concerned,” Jamieson said. “I want an apology from the police – I think I deserve one. They did not even tell me and I only found out about it from the press. “I had to speak to the mayor about it and she got a CID detective to ring me. I am so angry about it but not surprised. It is shocking the way victims and their families are treated in this country,” she told MailOnline. Connolly’s case echoes that of the two Metropolitan police officers who used their mobile phones to take pictures at the scene where two sisters lay murdered. The pair were convicted in court after admitting misconduct in public office. He had already resigned from Merseyside police by the time a gross misconduct hearing was held in November. The discipline tribunal found Connolly guilty after deciding he had committed a litany of disciplinary offences over a six-year period while a serving officer. He was formally sacked after the hearing. The force has been criticised this week for its handling of the case. Vinny Tomlinson, the former chair of Merseyside’s Black Police Association, who attended the tribunal hearing, said: “In all of my time working at Merseyside police, Connolly’s conduct is the worst example of one person’s misconduct of this type I can recall. He transgressed on an almost industrial scale, over a number of years, most of which was carried out whilst he was on duty. “Why has Connolly not faced criminal charges for misconduct in a public office and data protection breaches? Have all of the individuals abused by Connolly been contacted by Merseyside police and aware? Have the family … been informed of Connolly’s behaviour at the scene? “Why has Merseyside police still not published the outcome of Connolly’s hearing within 28 days as it is required to do?” On Wednesday, Merseyside police’s deputy chief constable, Ian Critchley, said: “I am appalled by Connolly’s actions, they are beyond comprehension and are not in keeping with the high standards and values that we expect here.” He added: “Our officers carry out exceptionally brave selfless acts every single day, protecting the most vulnerable people in our communities, yet here we see the despicable acts of a very selfish individual who has no place in our police service.” Critchley called Connolly’s behaviour “deplorable”, saying it served to “undermine the public’s confidence and trust in the police”.The ABC’s relationship with the Howard government was never easy, and the 2001 cabinet papers, released by the National Archives on Saturday, reveal tensions between the government’s desire for budget cuts and fear of alienating its supporters who valued the national broadcaster. Despite having promised during the 1996 election campaign that the ABC’s budget was safe, within four months of coming to office John Howard’s government cut it by 2% and announced a review of the role and scope of ABC services by Bob Mansfield, the founding chief executive of Optus. Howard’s senior adviser, Grahame Morris, characterised the ABC as “our enemy talking to our friends” and Howard himself had accused the broadcaster of being left-leaning. But the dilemma for the Coalition was the ABC was valued by its supporters, particularly in the bush, and cuts to the ABC often played badly in the regions. The cabinet papers released by the National Archives provide more evidence of the uneasy relationship. The ABC responded to the 1996 cuts by announcing it would dispose of its international television service – seen as an important part of Australia’s soft power efforts in the Asia Pacific region. Much to the Howard government’s delight, the international service was taken over by the Kerry Stokes-owned Seven Network in 1998, which hoped to use it to expand into Asia. But by 2000 Stokes was losing money and sought a $15m-a-year subsidy from the government. The cabinet papers record the frustrations of the cabinet in trying to keep the Seven-owned service alive. In March 2001 it approved Seven’s request for $15m, noting this was “not optimal” – only for Seven to pull out anyway. At that point the foreign affairs minister, Alexander Downer, intervened. Downer had been unhappy with the cuts to Radio Australia and wanted to restore Australia’s broadcasting presence in the region. Cabinet ministers also complained about the Stokes service, having turned it on in hotel rooms to find it screening Humphrey B Bear. Downer successfully pushed for funding to revive Radio Australia from near-death and for a new television service, to be tendered by his department. The process drew an array of would-be broadcasters, including a start-up led by the former ABC chief executive David Hill. Seven and the ABC initially declined to take part, until the government persuaded the ABC’s managing director, Jonathan Shier, to join in. The ABC’s bid won and the government reluctantly signed up, agreeing to its demand for editorial independence. The papers show the cabinet musing over whether the decision to grant the service to the ABC would be seen as “a backflip”. But there were also concerns about going with Hill’s private proposal, and the risks of going with “an untried company”. Relations between the ABC and the Howard government did not improve, however, as the 2002 cabinet papers may show. That was the year the communications minister, Richard Alston, lodged 67 complaints about bias with the national broadcaster.The 2001 cabinet papers provide more evidence of how John Howard wanted to use welfare and Indigenous policy to shape national attitudes over coming decades. Howard began his term as prime minister in 1996 pledging to create an Australia that was “comfortable and relaxed”. The papers, released by the National Archives on Saturday, show how Howard, inherently a social conservative, concentrated his efforts on policies he believed would appeal to the “battlers”. In March 2001 the cabinet turned its attention to a report on welfare reform by the chief executive of Mission Australia, Patrick McClure. A joint cabinet submission from ministers Amanda Vanstone (family and community services) and Tony Abbott (employment and workplace relations) said the report offered an opportunity to tackle the social and economic issues of welfare dependency and that a “level of compulsion [was] desirable in moving individuals towards economic participation”. While they acknowledged that a social safety net was a key component of a civilised society, Vanstone and Abbott proposed “targeted interventions” for people on unemployment benefits, older person allowances and parenting payments. “More needs to be done to ensure that people stay constantly ‘on the radar screen’,” the submission said. It proposed a series of targeted interventions, including regular reporting by recipients, literacy programs and a work-for-the-dole scheme. The submission sought extra funds – up to $1bn over four years – to implement the plan, but promised big savings and social change down the track. This concept of mutual obligation would shape the political discourse on social security for the next two decades – including the Abbott government’s 2014 budget, which drew howls of protest from the welfare sector. Academics such as Shaun Wilson and Nick Turnbull at the University of New South Wales have explored whether Howard’s welfare reforms were an exercise in wedge politics – “a calculated political tactic aimed at using divisive social issues to gain political support, weaken opponents and strengthen control over the political agenda”. “The election of the Howard government marked a paradigm shift in welfare policy with the implementation of far reaching reforms around the concept of mutual obligation,” they wrote. “Howard’s new welfare paradigm defined welfare as a problem associated with ‘dependency culture’ and linked reforms to specific social groups (single mothers, young unemployed, new migrants).” ‘Guided towards independence’ The Vanstone/Abbott submission show particular concern about single parents. “Australia has one of the highest incidences of children living in families without work. The need for reform is urgent. We should seize the opportunity provided by the McClure report and broader community support for these directions, to tackle the future of welfare dependency and entitlement that is driving welfare outlays.” The submission proposed requiring single parents with children over 13 to work, while those with children between six and 13 would have annual interventions. The result was a major shift in the welfare system from “passive” income support to the “expectation that all income support recipients of workforce age will be actively engaged so that, wherever possible, they are guided towards independence and away from social exclusion and welfare dependence”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The increased interactions required with Centrelink as a result of the Howard government’s reforms were not without controversy. In September 2001, Vanstone asked for extra Centrelink call centre funding, given the serious problem clients had getting their calls answered, with “around 25,000 customers being unable to reach an operator on some days”, equating to “85% of callers receiving a busy signal”. The department of the prime minister and cabinet noted that: “Ready access to Centrelink services is essential to maintain the fairness of the social support system, particularly as income support recipients can be penalised (‘breached’) for failing to contact Centrelink.” The cabinet decided Centrelink could have a short-term loan to increase its call centre capacity and Vanstone should come back with a demand management strategy for consideration. No treaty, no apology In 1988, Galarrwuy Yunupingu and Wenten Rubuntja presented the Barunga Statement to then prime minister, Bob Hawke, who promised to progress a treaty by 1990. He was unable to fulfil his promise to First Nations, but lobbying for a treaty continued. In March 2001 the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (Atsic) proposed directing $4m of its budget to a Treaty Advisory Committee, but met with staunch opposition. The government confirmed in a March cabinet minute its “clearly expressed opposition to a treaty”. The cabinet opposed the additional funds and suggested the “first priority for ATSIC funds should be used to address key areas of indigenous disadvantage (including health and housing)”. The same month, in response to the 1997 Bringing Them Home report into the stolen generations, the cabinet decided against a formal apology to Indigenous Australians “affected by family separation”. The cabinet judged it was “not appropriate given that the practices were at the time believed to be in the best interests of the children concerned and were sanctioned by the laws at the time”. Financial compensation was also judged “neither [an] appropriate nor practical response to assist in healing the trauma caused by family separations, nor could it be equitably applied”. Atsic was instead granted an additional $4.9 m over two years for a Link Up family reunion program, on top of $63m that had earlier been allocated for the response. The cabinet also proposed asking Atsic to consider undertaking consultations on a national memorial to Indigenous people separated from their families. This was superseded by a cabinet decision in June, upon oral submission from Howard, that “Reconciliation Place is to be constructed in the Parliamentary Zone, Canberra and will include national recognition of the issue of indigenous children separated from their families”.John Howard still describes himself as “climate change agnostic” even though his government proposed an emissions trading scheme before the 2007 election. How different Australia’s response to climate change might have been if he had not lost the election. The 2001 cabinet papers, released by the National Archives of Australia on Saturday, supply further evidence of serious concerns and active ministerial work on climate change inside the Howard government, the archive’s historian, Chris Wallace said. There were fierce battles, but the cabinet often proved “a moderating force”, she said, forcing ministers to work together on policy solutions. “This can only have happened with John Howard’s assent and it reflects well on him. It arguably reflects, too, Howard’s greater capacity to manage internal policy differences and personnel than his successors possessed,” Wallace said. The faultline within the cabinet was on display in 2001 as it attempted to finalise its stance for a national energy policy to be negotiated with the states through the Council of Australian Governments. Senator Nick Minchin, one the leading climate change sceptics, brought the paper to cabinet in March. “We will continue to be heavily dependent on fossil fuels for the foreseeable future,” it said. It made almost no mention of climate change or renewables, particularly in the energy generation sector. Instead Minchin’s paper put the emphasis on consumer prices, a national energy market and sustained improvements in energy efficiency. Then as now, gas was privileged in the energy mix. There were a number of measures to promote the use and export of natural gas and the development of resources off north-western Australia and the Northern Territory. Robert Hill’s environment department was highly critical of Minchin’s proposal. “[The] cursory treatment of climate change and other environmental issues is not proportionate with their significance for energy policy and for key stakeholders in this sector. Nor is it consistent with the Coag communique of November 2000, which specifically called for the environmental impacts of energy supply and use to be encompassed within this strategy. “We note that the independent inquiry into energy market development and prospects overlooks climate change and other environmental issues. Given that energy market reform has (unwittingly) contributed to rapid and significant emissions growth in what is Australia’s single largest emissions source, we request that the terms of reference for this inquiry encompass options for reducing the greenhouse and adverse environmental impacts of the reform process.” The cabinet decision directed Hill and Minchin to come back “as matter of urgency” with a joint negotiating position on energy policy. Wallace said the papers confirmed that Hill was not alone in those concerns, and that the balance of cabinet opinion was with him. Meanwhile Australia was trying to balance its commitment to work with the international community on climate change against its relationship with its most important ally, the United States. Under President George W Bush, the US had opposed the Kyoto agreement, and ordered a review of its policy led by the vice-president, Dick Cheney, a former executive at the oil services company Halliburton. Howard had already written to Bush saying he shared Bush’s concerns about having a cost-effective outcome from Kyoto but believed an international agreement was the right path. A cabinet memo in May shows Australia was uncertain about where the Cheney review was heading. It noted that the Bush administration’s new energy policy focused “heavily on the supply side and will accelerate growth in United States emissions”, which did not bode well. What to do next? They decided that Howard should write another letter. It would suggest that an effective global framework to address climate change needed to include commitments from all major emitters; unrestricted market-based mechanisms, including emissions trading; an approach to carbon sinks that captured both economic and environmental opportunities; and a facilitative, rather than punitive, compliance system. Howard told Bush US leadership was essential if efforts to address climate change were to be successful. In February 2002, Bush announced his alternative to the Kyoto protocol, with a plan to reduce the intensity of greenhouse gases by 18% over 10 years – that meant emissions would still continue to grow, but more slowly. Because of the US position, getting agreement of other nations on Kyoto was difficult but eventually 192 parties signed the treaty. Australia was permitted to take account of changes in land-clearing policy, which allowed it to achieve its target. Water, salinity and land clearing were important environmental issues for cabinet in 2001. In March the cabinet agreed on a detailed offer to the Queensland premier, Peter Beattie, for commonwealth support to reduce land clearing in Queensland to help meet the nation’s Kyoto targets. Up to $50m would be made available on a 50:50 basis with the state to buy back land and reduce land clearing from 200,000 hectares a year to 50,000 by 2006.In 2001 John Howard’s government was forced to confront two major corporate collapses: HIH Insurance and Ansett Airlines, which at the time had roughly half the domestic airline market. The release of the 2001 cabinet papers by the National Archives of Australia reveals the government was initially reluctant to intervene in either collapse, but quickly realised that was politically unsustainable and economically dangerous. HIH, valued at $8bn, was one of Australia’s leading insurers. Its collapse was the largest in Australia’s history. On 15 March 2001 Tony McGrath announced his appointment as provisional liquidator and estimated HIH had lost more than $800m over the six months to 31 December 2000. He attributed the failure to reckless management, incompetence, fraud, greed and self-dealing, among other things. The impacts were immediate. HIH operated in many sectors vital to the economy: workers’ compensation, builders’ warranty insurance, small business insurance and compulsory third party vehicle insurance. On 18 April cabinet met to consider the unfolding catastrophe, noting that the collapse raised “serious and complex issues” about HIH’s corporate governance, market disclosure and possible insolvent trading. It also raised questions about the supervision of the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority and protection of policyholders. The cabinet agreed the government “should reject any suggestion that the Commonwealth fund any uncovered claims” and “reject any responsibility in relation to insurance claims of HIH policyholders where state governments have statutory responsibility”. The government instead resolved to set up a taskforce to look into what had gone wrong, particularly in relation to the role of Apra and the Australian Securities and Investment Commission. But by 11 May, that position was no longer sustainable. Stories of personal hardship emerged almost immediately. Sick and disabled policyholders claiming on salary continuance policies with HIH stopped receiving payments (which they often relied on for day-to-day living expenses). In Queensland alone, car accident victims insured with HIH were left waiting for operations and other medical procedures worth $190m. The Australian Rugby Union had to cancel games until replacement cover could be procured. The building industry was threatening to grind to a halt. The cabinet was told “the HIH collapse is likely to be one of the largest ever insurance industry collapses worldwide”. “Net outstanding liabilities could amount to $4bn worldwide including $1.3bn in Australia and a further $1.1bn relating to compulsory third party motor vehicle insurance and workers compensation.” They were in fact higher. Within 10 days, the cabinet was considering a bailout package and had set up a company, HIH Claims Support, which would cover 100c in the dollar for claims relating to injury, income support and household policies for permanent Australian residents and citizens. Small businesses would receive 90c in the dollar. The scheme would also cover the local government sector but would exclude non-citizens, non-residents and reinsurance. On 4 June the cabinet decided a royal commission into the collapse was required. Investigations into the cause of the collapse led to the conviction and imprisonment of an HIH director, Rodney Adler, director and executive Ray Williams and businessman Brad Cooper. More corporate trouble loomed in September. The 9/11 attacks rocked the aviation industry, and came at a bad time for Australia’s second airline, Ansett, which had been losing $1.3m a day. On 12 September the government refused to bail out the carrier, despite their counterparts across the Tasman saving Air New Zealand, Ansett’s major shareholder. On 14 September Ansett and its subsidiaries had their fleets grounded and administrators appointed. This put about 16,000 employees out of work, the largest mass job loss in Australian history. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A cabinet minute from 14 September records the cabinet’s sense of urgency as it realised how devastating a collapse of this magnitude could be just weeks from a federal election. Many Ansett employees had been with the airline all their lives, and were owed very significant entitlements, which they stood to lose. Worse still, many regional areas depended on Ansett for their only air services. The cabinet’s first priorities were to continue services and to address “stranded communities” urgently. The cabinet noted it was “uncertain what Air New Zealand’s obligations were in relation to employee entitlements” and that “the government will pursue all available avenues in an effort to ensure that Air NZ meets its obligations”. But in the meantime it resolved to implement a special employee entitlements scheme, funded through a levy on airline tickets. There were several meetings over the coming days and weeks as the Howard government tried desperately to restore services. On 17 September, the deputy prime minister, John Anderson, reported to the cabinet that 22 of the 32 regional routes serviced exclusively by Ansett had alternative services, and another five would be serviced by the end of the day. Attempts to revive Ansett in some form continued into 2002 before being abandoned. For a while the administrators operated a pared back airline. Ansett’s last flight took off on 4 March 2002, nearly 70 years after the airline was founded by Sir Reg Ansett. The twin collapses in 2002 may have served as useful lessons for future governments. Even where private enterprise may be to blame, the failure of companies providing critical services can hit governments just as hard.Twenty years on from the Tampa affair, which prompted the offshore detention of hundreds of asylum seekers – sometimes for years – John Howard remains unapologetic. In an interview with the Guardian ahead of the release of the 2001 cabinet papers by the National Archives of Australia, the former prime minister said his tough policies had “saved lives” and that European nations were now facing a similar dilemma about how to avoid asylum seekers drowning at sea. “I thought the Australian public supported what we did over Tampa and generally supported what we did on offshore processing – quite strongly,” Howard said. “The Australian public’s position on migration has always been they are supportive of it provided it’s properly controlled. But once they think it’s getting out of control they reduce their level of support, and when it’s again under control they go back to supporting.” In August 2001 the Norwegian freighter Tampa answered a mayday call from Australian authorities to rescue a boatload of 433 asylum seekers sinking in international waters off Christmas Island. But once the Tampa had rescued them, it was refused permission to enter Australian waters. As the stalemate continued over several days, the asylum seekers, many of whom were in poor health, became agitated. Captain Arne Rinnan decided to sail towards Christmas Island, prompting the Australian government to send 45 SAS troops to board the vessel and prevent it coming any closer. The event drew international attention. Howard said he did not recall any substantial concerns from his ministers about whether Australia was breaching its international obligations under the law of the sea. “In something like that you would always have a few concerns from the department, but I never had any concerns about the legality of it,” he said. Asked whether it was “a big move” to put Australian troops on to a civilian maritime vessel, Howard said: “It was a big move by them to defy a request by us not to enter our territorial waters. I would call it a proportionate response.” The Norwegians, however, were very upset. “I had a discussion with [the then Norwegian prime minister, Jens] Stoltenberg, who is now head of Nato, and he thought it was all our problem,” Howard said. “That was before the action. He was under no illusion, and [Australia’s foreign minister at the time] Alexander Downer warned their foreign minister we would take action.” What happened over coming days would define Australia’s treatment of people arriving by boat for years to come. It would begin what became known as the “Pacific solution”, with offshore processing and detention used explicitly to dissuade people smugglers from offering Australia as a destination. The 2001 cabinet papers provide very little insight into the thinking of the government during the immediate crisis, but they show the government had been worried about a wave of arrivals before then. In July 2001, the cabinet considered a submission from the immigration minister, Philip Ruddock, warning that intelligence suggested there was a pool of 6,000 asylum seekers looking to enter Australia and “uncorroborated reports” of a vessel being prepared that could carry 3,000 people. The cabinet was told that a further 1,600 arrivals would exhaust Australia’s available detention capacity. Ruddock was given the go-ahead to begin contingency planning for more facilities in Darwin and South Australia. By August he was informing the cabinet that there were a high number of arrivals on Ashmore and Christmas Island, despite efforts to thwart people smugglers in Indonesia, and “interventions” and surveillance at sea. The Tampa crisis in August prompted a dramatic response from the government. First it moved to excise Ashmore reef and Christmas Island from Australia’s migration zone. The government then decided to take the asylum seekers to Nauru. Howard explained that the decision to opt for offshore processing was “for legal reasons” – to ensure that those transferred from the Tampa would be unable to avail themselves of the Australian legal system. On 7 October the cabinet agreed to provide $45m for a new processing centre on Nauru. The decision, made without a submission, does not provide any insights into why Nauru was chosen. Howard denied that the policy of requiring refugees to stay on Nauru was harsh. “Quite the opposite. It had a remarkable demonstration effect. It stopped the boats, and, as it turned out, saved lives,” he told the Guardian. The handling of the Tampa affair and implementation of the Pacific solution attracted international criticism. Most of the people on the Tampa were Hazaras fleeing persecution in Afghanistan and were settled in New Zealand and Australia, having been found to be refugees deserving of resettlement. However, the policy did have a deterrent effect. In the six years from 2002, only 23 boats arrived in Australia compared with 43 carrying more than 5,000 asylum seekers in 2001 alone. Siev X and ‘children overboard’ Two more important events unfolded in 2001 that would shape the debate over asylum seekers and the policies both sides took to election. On 19 October an Indonesian fishing boat carrying more than 400 asylum seekers en route to Christmas Island capsized in international waters with the loss of all on board. The Siev X, as it was designated, prompted a fierce debate about the new policy. “It was terrible,” Howard said. “I can’t remember where I was. It was a tragic incident, but I don’t think it was because of something we had done. We tried to stop people starting out. “I don’t accept that you can draw a direct link between that tragic incident and the action we took on the Tampa. I would not accept that. “This is a very fraught area and we are seeing that play out now in the English Channel and in Europe. “It requires us not just to think of the immediate responses of countries who people are trying reach, but also the countries and circumstances that causes them to flee. In a perfect world, benign interventions and sanctions by everybody would prevent a lot of these things from occurring. “I think the Australian policy we introduced in 2001 did save lives. It was controversial. I think the consequences of Kevin Rudd’s relaxation of it were there for all to see. I think you can draw a direct link between that change and some of the tragic incidents that followed.” The other case was the “children overboard” affair, which occurred the day before the election was called but surfaced during the campaign. The immigration minister and other senior ministers, including Howard, claimed incorrectly that a Defence photo showed asylum seekers throwing children overboard in an attempt to secure rescue and passage to Australia. Doubt was cast on the accuracy of this claim by the Australian and it was subsequently found to be untrue by a Senate committee. But during the campaign the false narrative became potent political fuel in the debate over migration policy. Howard said he did not regret making the claims. “It was the advice we had at the time. I mentioned it myself a couple of times and then it dropped out of public consciousness until right at the end of the campaign when a couple of people made some comments to the Australian,” he said. “It wasn’t a big issue in the campaign. Our critics said we won the election based on children overboard, but that was nonsense.” ‘New securitised mindset’ The Tampa crisis was swiftly followed by the 11 September attacks in the US. Howard was in Washington and saw one of the hijacked planes strike the Pentagon from his hotel window. The archives historian, Assoc Prof Chris Wallace, argues in her essay accompanying the release of the 2001 papers that the threat of terrorism became fused in popular perception with the asylum seeker issue by political design as well as chronological proximity. “2001 is the year when Australia pivoted into this new securitised mindset, partly driven by events but to a significant extent by political choice,” she wrote. “This pivot is evident in the 2001 cabinet papers release in which domestic submissions, free from a securitisation mindset, dominate until Tampa and the September 11 attacks occur,” she said. The papers themselves provide little insight into cabinet discussions about 11 September. On 14 September the government invoked the Anzus treaty – one of the few times Howard preempted cabinet, he said. A cabinet minute of that date records a short period of silence was observed and notes that 90 Australians were still unaccounted for. Sunday 16 September was declared a day of mourning. But there was also early sensitivity to the potential divisions that a focus on terrorism and the Islamic backgrounds of those involved in the attacks could provoke. “Cabinet also noted the importance of ensuring that no member of the Australian community should feel vulnerable because of their ethnic or cultural heritage in the aftermath of the attacks,” the minute says. On 10 December the national security committee turned down a request for Australia to provide a protective escort to US naval vessels in the straits of Malacca, ahead of a visit to Indonesia by the prime minister scheduled for February 2002. Howard said at the archives briefing he was “always mindful of Indonesia, being our neighbour and the largest Muslim country in the world, particularly after 9/11 and the focus on Islamist extremism”. The committee also said it would wait for a formal request from the US before committing more than the 100 SAS troops already deployed in Afghanistan on counter-terrorism duties. A week later, however, the cabinet agreed to engage in further discussions with the UK government over joining a multinational stabilisation force, but said it would be “limited to no more than two infantry companies”. Over the next 20 years Australia’s commitment would be much greater, leading to our longest conflict to date. At the archives briefing, Howard denied that the government’s responses to the two events were exploited to win the election. He said the polls were already improving for him and domestic policies dominated the campaign. But the twin issues eroded support for Labor’s Kim Beazley, as domestic security became a dominant issue. In November that year Howard won a third term with an increased majority, setting him on a path to becoming Australia’s second-longest-serving prime minister. “It’s a year I will not forget,” said Howard, the master of the understatement.With hibernating mammals emerging from slumber early, warmer winters and seasonal changes we would like to know about any early signs of spring you have spotted near you. From joy at seeing beautiful scenes to concern about what it means for the environment, you can see what Guardian readers told us last year. If you are sharing pictures please tell us where and when you took them. We would also be interested in seeing any older photos you have for comparison, or can describe how things were in previous years. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. This callout is aimed at readers in the northern hemisphere, but if you have seen anything notable where you are in the southern hemisphere you can still tell us about it. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Arsenal are undoubtedly in much better shape than when they received an ugly 5-0 thrashing at the Etihad in September, and hopefully will actually give Manchester City some form of test now the young guns are well and truly firing, but Mikel Arteta may still have received a small mercy in having to stay at home as a result of a positive Covid test. Pep Guardiola’s side look almost unstoppable and Arsenal’s much-improved defence will still be highly overmatched, with Phil Foden, Kevin De Bruyne, Riyad Mahrez and Raheem Sterling (you get the idea) flexing their considerable creative prowess. An inexplicable off-day and Arsenal just might avoid a 10th straight league defeat against City. Graham Searles Saturday 12.30pm BT Sport 1 Venue Emirates Stadium Last season Arsenal 0 Manchester City 1 Referee Stuart Attwell This season G10 Y32 R0 3.2 cards/game Odds H 5-1 A 4-7 D 15-4 ARSENAL Subs from Leno, Okonkwo, Maitland-Niles, Pépé, Tavares, Elneny, Balogun, Nketiah, Aubameyang, Marí, Lokonga, Martinelli Doubtful None Injured Chambers (Covid, unknown), Tomiyasu (Covid, unknown), Kolasinac (ankle, 22 Jan) Suspended None Discipline Y27 R1 Form LLWWWW Leading scorer Smith Rowe 8 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Palmer, Fernandinho, Jesus, Aké, Mbete, Delap, Grealish, Stones, Egan-Riley, Wilson-Ebrand, Lavia, McAtee, Gündogan, Cancelo Doubtful Delap (match fitness), Stones, (match fitness), Cancelo (personal reasons) Injured None Suspended None Discipline Y28 R1 Form WWWWWW Leading scorers Silva, Sterling 7January Boris Johnson comes out of hiding to announce that the government’s ‘sensible and cautious approach’ of letting people do exactly what they liked over New Year’s Eve has paid off as Covid cases have declined to zero. The newly knighted Sir Chris Whitty later admits this may be due to there being no LFTs or PCR tests available to determine whether people are ill or not. All hospitals are now officially full. Jonathan Van-Tam refuses to take part in any further Downing Street press conferences until he too is also knighted. Prince Andrew takes up residence in the Ecuadorian embassy after the Queen kicks him out of Windsor Castle. Lord Geidt announces that the Downing Street refurb was far too complicated to investigate properly so he is going to exonerate everyone because he doesn’t want to upset anyone. Johnson immediately invites him to take over the investigation into the Downing Street parties. February The coldest spell since the last coldest spell grips the country. Boris Johnson comes out of hiding to say that no one could possibly have predicted extreme bad weather in February and urges everyone to wrap up warm. Mainly because no one can afford to keep their central heating on as fuel bills have quadrupled in the last six months. Johnson insists that no one could have possibly predicted that gas prices would rise so rapidly, despite everyone having done just that. The worst floods since the last worst floods devastate many towns and villages as the weather turns milder. Boris Johnson comes out of hiding to put a sandbag in the wrong place. March Coronavirus cases reach their highest recorded figure yet. Boris Johnson comes out of hiding to claim that the government is a victim of its own success. With LFTs and PCRs once again available, people have been testing themselves too frequently. To bring the numbers down, everyone will now only be entitled to take one test every three weeks. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, describes this as a masterstroke. Patrick Vallance, now Lord Vallance after also having a hissy fit over Chris Whitty’s knighthood, suggests that everyone needs a fourth jab to manage the ongoing pandemic. Steve Baker, Mark Francois and Julia Hartley-Brewer set up an online petition calling for an end to the nanny state of vaccine passports. It is time for the weak and vulnerable to stop being so selfish. Boris Johnson comes out of hiding to say he would never dream of implementing another booster programme. April With tax rises coming into effect and inflation now running at close to 6%, most people have never felt quite so broke. Boris Johnson comes out of hiding to declare that he knows how badly the country is hurting as he is struggling to pay for seven or eight children and that the Labour government of 1977 is to blame for the current crisis. Carrie Johnson announces that she and Boris are expecting twins late on in the year. Dilyn the Dog makes history by becoming the first mutt ever to officially request he be taken away from his current owners and be rehoused elsewhere. Boris Johnson opens a new door, to replace one that was broken, at St George’s hospital and declares the government has now delivered on its promise to build 40 new hospitals. He also announces yet another booster vaccination programme. May Much to his surprise, as he has spent the past few weeks campaigning against perfectly sensible public health measures, Sir Graham Brady, chair or the 1922 Committee, discovers that he has been sitting on the necessary 54 letters to trigger a leadership election for at least two months. Boris Johnson comes out of hiding to declare he intends to prorogue parliament and that the leadership challenge is all a cunning plot by EU member states to discredit the UK. Keir Starmer points out Boris has managed to do all that on his own. Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss briefly suspend their leadership election campaigns that have been running all year to pay tribute to Johnson’s immense contribution to screwing up the country and making their lives so much easier. Lord Geidt hints that he may soon be ready to publish his report on parties in Downing Street. June To everyone’s amazement, Matt Hancock nominates himself a second time for Tory leader, saying it is time for a proper “Sex God” to be running the country. He releases two publicity photos, one of him in a black roll-neck sweater and the other of him stripped to the waist. “It’s time to turn the country back on” is his catchy slogan. Rishi Sunak takes on a punishing series of Q&amp;As in his trademark sliders, insisting that it had been an entirely different Dishi Rishi who had been the chancellor responsible for hiking the tax take to its highest levels since the 1940s. July The Tory leadership election comes down to a two-horse race between Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss, after Michael Gove yet again fails to get any support from his fellow MPs. Proving that they do have a sense of humour after all, the Tory party chooses Truss to be the new prime minister. Her first speech outside Downing Street, in which she promises to level up the driveways of peers and Tory donors, has to be delayed after it is revealed that Boris Johnson is refusing to leave No 10 on the grounds that he doesn’t have anywhere to go. Friendly billionaires are unwilling to let Boris and Carrie stay in their private villas now they are all washed up, and it is the unfortunate Lord Brownlow who is again strong-armed into helping the couple find a room in a refuge centre. Lord Geidt gives his strongest hint yet that he is almost ready to publish his report. August Twitter crashes for a couple of days as news leaks that the fourth series of Succession will be filmed in real real time. Not pretend real time, like 24. Any mistakes just become part of the script. Jeremy Strong is said to have been doing intensive method preparation for Kendall’s 10-minute lavatory break, which is set to be the pivotal moment of episode four. Brian Cox’s lines have been reduced to a minimalist “Fuck the lot of you, you fucking fucks.” Cricket writers herald a golden dawn for English Test cricket after Joe Root and Jos Buttler put together a 50-run partnership, England’s highest stand for more than three years. Root goes on to make a cultured 37, before playing at a ball he could easily leave and being caught at slip, an innings some older cricket supporters compare to Len Hutton in his prime. September Boris Johnson comes out of hiding to announce that he has been deselected by his constituency and is now broke. “I have been morally bankrupt for years,” he sobs, “but now I am also financially bankrupt. Even Lord Brownlow won’t lend me a tenner.” HarperCollins have cancelled his delayed biography of Shakespeare on the grounds they have just realised Johnson doesn’t have anything to say about him that you couldn’t find in Wikipedia. And none of the usual agencies that specialise in $250K-a-pop after-dinner speaking for ex-prime ministers and failed heads of states have been able to get Boris any gigs, as everyone has already heard all the gags and are bored of the lies. Even the Daily Telegraph won’t give him his columns back as the editor has belatedly realised he always writes the same thing over and over again. Charles Moore calls it “a national tragedy that Britain’s finest ever leader since Owen Paterson has been deserted in his time of need”, before going hunting for the rest of the day. October At the Tory party conference, Liz Truss insists that from now on she be called “Gloriana, Empress of the United Kingdom and all her Colonies.” Rishi Sunak announces that enough is enough. The tax take is too high for even someone with a wife with a billionaire father to get by on, so he is leaving politics and going back to Goldman Sachs to offshore more of his loot. Truss barely bothers to hide her lack of disappointment and says she will be taking over his job. As she never got round to replacing either herself at the Foreign Office or Priti Patel, whom she sacked as home secretary, this is the first time the four great offices of state have been held by the same person. Opinion polls also show Truss to be now even less popular than Johnson had been. She responds by banning anyone – not just civil servants – from using the word “Brexit”. It is now to be replaced by “The Great Success”, as UK trade with the EU and the rest of the world tumbles to an all-time low. November Liz Truss says that nothing is going to stop the UK having the best Christmas ever. A day later the World Health Organization reports the existence of the Pi coronavirus variant, which is four times as transmissible as Omicron. Lord Vallance and Sir Chris Whitty suggest an immediate fifth booster vaccine programme and a circuit-breaker. Truss conducts a solo press conference from a golden throne in which she insists that the British DNA is now resistant to Covid and that the England football team will still be going to Qatar to play in the World Cup. The first 1,000-page volume of Dominic Cummings’s memoir, Why I was Right about Everything, covering the first seven years of his life, becomes the first book to be remaindered within a week of publication. December With the Pi variant now seemingly out of control, Liz Truss waits until three days before Christmas before imposing a lockdown. No one is too bothered as they had already cancelled their arrangements on the grounds they didn’t trust the government to come to a sensible decision. Piers Corbyn, Toby Young and three-quarters of the Tory party write an open letter to the Daily Telegraph saying they alone understand the science and calling for someone to do something clinically insane. Despite the entire team getting Covid, England win the World Cup by default as no other country bothers to turn up to the tournament. Truss proclaims them all to be heroes. Sir Chris Whitty rounds off a perfect year by winning Strictly Come Dancing – his salsa is a sensation – and is elevated to a peerage. Lord Vallance and Sir Jonathan Van-Tam are gutted. Lord Geidt says he is nearly, nearly ready to publish his report. A Farewell to Calm by John Crace is published by Guardian Faber, price £9.99. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyHundreds of mourners queued outside Saint George’s cathedral in Cape Town, waiting to pay their respects before the plain wooden casket bearing the remains of Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who died six days ago aged 90. Clerics, family members, close friends and dignitaries will attend a requiem mass for Tutu, the icon of the fight for freedom in South Africa, on Saturday morning. Their numbers will be restricted due to Covid regulations. President Cyril Ramaphosa is expected to read a eulogy. Though the former archbishop of Cape Town had largely retreated from public life in recent years, Tutu had continued his lifelong fight for causes he believed in, forcefully supporting LGBT rights, equal access to education and the assisted dying movement. Tributes from world leaders poured in after Tutu’s death was announced on Sunday, and within South Africa, many have been deeply moved by the passing of the last great hero of the struggle against the repressive, racist apartheid regime. In a national address earlier this week, Ramaphosa called Tutu a man of “extraordinary intellect, integrity and invincibility against the forces of apartheid”. Church bells have been rung at noon across South Africa every day and flags flown at half-mast for the man often described as the “moral compass” of his country. There have been dozens of memorial services, South Africa’s cricket team wore black armbands on day one of the first Test against India in South Africa, and Cape Town’s Table Mountain was lit up in purple in Tutu’s honour. Tutu, who requested a funeral without lavish expense or ostentation, would be cremated and his ashes interred beneath the floor of St George’s behind the cathedral pulpit, church officials said. Since Thursday morning, mourners have filed through the cathedral to light candles. Many sat in the pews to pray and reflect. The cathedral, the Anglican church’s oldest in southern Africa, dating back to 1847, was converted by Tutu into a centre of anti-apartheid activity during the 1980s. When the apartheid regime banned political gatherings, Tutu held meetings in the cathedral where participants bowed their heads ostensibly in prayer and heard political speeches. Nelson Mandela, a close friend of the cleric, called it the “People’s Cathedral”. Among the mourners were young activists who said they had been inspired by “The Arch”, as Tutu was known locally. “We believe the Arch stood for the same values that we want to aspire to in society,” Irfaan Mangera, a pro-Palestinian South African activist, told Reuters as he waited in the long queue, draped in the Palestinian keffiyeh. “[Tutu] was one of the figures who continuously united us … and we want to continue in that path as young South African activists who emulate the values of non-racialism and non-sexism.” Others remembered Tutu’s modesty. “He was a very humble man but to sit in the same room with him, you could feel the strength of his presence, of his convictions,” said Rev Maria Claassen, an Anglican priest in Cape Town’s Durbanville area. “He inspired us and now we celebrate his life.” Amanda Mbikwana, 29 and born shortly before the end of apartheid, said she had come to remember Tutu for “all he has done for us as Africans”. Tutu’s career in the church began after he resigned a sought-after teaching post in protest against South Africa’s discriminatory laws in 1958. By the late 1970s, the diminutive cleric was one of the leaders of the freedom struggle best known overseas and played a leading role in forcing western leaders to confront the moral cost of cold war calculations that led to tacit support for white-minority rule in South Africa. In recent years, Tutu did not shy away from criticism of the African National Congress party, in power in South Africa for 27 years, attacking the party’s failures and alleged corruption. The service will be an Anglican requiem mass led by Michael Nuttall, the retired bishop of Natal, who was known as “number two to Tutu”, church officials said. After the viewing on Friday, Tutu’s body will remain alone in the cathedral, “a place that he loved”, according to a statement from Archbishop of Cape Town, Thabo Makgoba.He is idolised as one of the greatest footballers on earth, with his number seven shirt treasured by millions of youngsters dreaming of superstardom. But Cristiano Ronaldo’s astonishing success has not been matched by those seeking to immortalise his image. A statue of Ronaldo in action unveiled this week in Goa has triggered protests by some locals who say Indian players should be honoured ahead of one from the country that was Goa’s colonial ruler until 60 years ago. The 400kg statue of the Manchester United and Portugal forward was intended to honour “the love of football” and “inspire our youngsters to take football to greater heights”, tweeted a local politician, Michael Lobo. But some people waved black flags at the statue’s inauguration. “Very disappointed to hear of the statue of Ronaldo being erected. Learn to take pride in our own icons like Samir Naik and Bruno Coutinho,” one protester told the IANS news agency. The Portugal team is popular in Goa, where many people have links with the European country as a result of its colonial history. But some argued that the statue, unveiled a few days after the 60th anniversary of the day Goa was freed from Portuguese rule, was insensitive and inappropriate. Lobo later said: “When people talk about football, they talk about Cristiano Ronaldo. So we have installed this statue here so boys and girls at a very, very young age get inspiration, they feel inspired, and the love and passion for this game will grow.” He accused the protesters of hating football. It is not the first time a statue of Ronaldo has had a less than enthusiastic reception. In March 2017 a bronze bust of the player unveiled to mark the renaming of Madeira’s main airport in his honour was ridiculed by fans who said it bore little resemblance to their hero. The sculptor Emanuel Santos said his work was just “a matter of taste”. But the following year it was replaced with a new bust, reportedly after a request from Ronaldo’s family. In 2014 a 10ft bronze statue of the player outside his museum in Funchal, Madeira, raised eyebrows for its accentuation of his physique. Ronaldo said the image made him “feel so proud”. Ronaldo, who grew up in poverty with an alcoholic father, went on to become the first footballer to earn $1bn in his career. Statues of other public figures have been criticised for failing to capture the person’s likeness. This year a bronze of Diana, Princess of Wales with three children had a “hint of Theresa May” about it, according to some social media commentators. And in March, Cork county council demanded that a €33,000 grant be repaid after a statue of the Hollywood actor Maureen O’Hara was deemed “unacceptable” and “not suitable for installation”.Born in South Africa, educated privately in the UK, settled with his wife and three children in the hipster heart of east London but speaking today from Rome, Johnny Flynn gets around. The actor-musician (half-brother to Jerome Flynn of the chart-topping acting-singing duo Robson and Jerome) is currently shooting a new TV version of Patricia Highsmith’s The Talented Mr Ripley. This one is being adapted and directed by Steven Zaillian, who wrote Schindler’s List and The Irishman, and stars Andrew Scott as the amoral antihero. Flynn, who has long forks of blond hair, as well as a scar in the shape of a question mark rising from the bridge of his nose (the result of a dog attack when he was three), plays Ripley’s idol-cum-quarry, Dickie Greenleaf. It is the role for which Jude Law was Oscar-nominated in Anthony Minghella’s highly regarded 1999 film version. Daunting? “I won’t lie,” he grins when we talk via Zoom. “It’s definitely something I’m trying not to think about, which is an effort because I love that film.” This new spin, he says, is “quite beautiful and quite noir. It’s in the Fellini zone.” The shoes he fills in the new wartime yarn Operation Mincemeat are even more illustrious than Jude Law’s loafers. The film concerns a real-life bit of second world war deception involving fake papers planted on a corpse to convince Hitler that the Allies were heading for Greece rather than Sicily. As a pre-James Bond Lt Cmdr Ian Fleming, Flynn is on the outskirts of the action, tapping away at his typewriter and amassing ideas for his future novels. Matthew Macfadyen – toadying Tom from Succession – is one of his fellow goodies. “Matthew is the sweetest, loveliest guy,” he says. “It’s quite a leap for me when I watch him as Tom. He’s really silly on set, loves giggling. We got told off a few times.” Flynn goes wide-eyed as he considers his other co-stars: “Colin Firth. Simon Russell Beale. Oh, Kelly Macdonald! I had such a crush on her when I was growing up, from Trainspotting.” He wrinkles his brow. “Sorry, that’s kind of creepy.” Then a rethink: “I’m sure it’s OK, lots of people did who were a certain age when that film came out.” Now 38, he would have been 13 at the time: I think he’s in the clear. Do he and Fleming have similar backgrounds? “I suppose so. The private school thing.” His memories of those years – first at the Pilgrims’ school in Winchester, then Bedales – are not entirely happy ones. “I was sent off to boarding school at the age of eight on a music scholarship, which was quite traumatic. Now my kids are around that age, it’s really poignant to me. It’s definitely something I think about.” He looks suddenly downcast. Talk of Fleming leads to Bond. Would he care to throw his hat in the ring? “I don’t think I’m hard enough,” he says, practically retreating into his cosy brown pullover. “I literally don’t think I could hack the training. It’s potentially a poisoned chalice. It can be so defining, and I do like the freedom to do lots of different projects.” In the past decade, this has included everything from the Netflix romcom Lovesick and a featherweight film of Jane Austen’s Emma (he was Mr Knightley) to the arthouse gem Clouds of Sils Maria, in which he shared a scene with Kristen Stewart, Juliette Binoche and Chloë Grace Moretz. If he has a brand, it’s rustic: he was an archaeologist in the Sutton Hoo drama The Dig and a charismatic poacher and possible serial killer in the Jersey-set thriller Beast, as well as popping up in the plangent BBC comedy Detectorists, for which he provided the lilting theme song. He has done a fine job of balancing acting with albums: his latest folk collection, Lost in the Cedar Wood, was co-written with the nature writer Robert Macfarlane, inspired by The Epic of Gilgamesh, and characterised, as Flynn himself is, by an earthy, rough-hewn beauty. One blip last year was Bowie. Playing him in Stardust, set during the singer’s pre-Ziggy days, Flynn was in the firing line before so much as a frame of the film had been seen. Bowie’s son, Duncan Jones, threw shade at the movie on Twitter; fan fury and bad reviews followed. It was all very much not hunky dory. “I didn’t go into it with my eyes closed,” he says now. “But I hoped people would take it for how it was intended. It was supposed to be this tiny independent film about a young artist, who just happened to be David Bowie, trying to find his voice, which I thought was a valid story to tell. It got judged for what it wasn’t rather than what it was. I was unhappy with some of the marketing around it. As the trailers were coming out, I could see mistakes being made and I felt sad that it wasn’t going to be seen. I’m still proud of it. These things are your babies. You put everything into them, and you want people to see the best in them.” There are always other babies. On its way is The Outfit, a period crime drama with Mark Rylance, his stage co-star from plays including Jerusalem. Then there is The Score, a heist movie with Will Poulter in which the characters burst into song. Flynn’s own songs, to be precise. He’s thrilled with that one, he says, and generally happy to watch himself. “I’m always interested to see how it turns out. You think: ‘I was sure that bit was gonna be shit but it’s good.’ Or: ‘My hair looks better than I thought it would.’” Operation Mincemeat is released 22 April.In 1979, the Stasi entered Ralf Winkler’s Dresden studio and trashed the place. It was the culmination of a harassment campaign against the artist, who found fame under the pseudonym AR Penck, for refusing to make social-realist propaganda. Instead, his paintings featured oft-repeated hieroglyphs, odd symbols and signs, seemingly child-like naive scrawls and simple stick men (often with outsized penises). The authorities were right to be suspicious of this new painterly style: Penck sought the construction of a new language, one that mixed the linguistic and pictorial, that was both “universal” and “democratic”. It was a wish born of the trauma of the second world war, particularly witnessing the destruction of Dresden as a child, and the ensuing dystopia of the German Democratic Republic. Penck’s visual language, which he termed “standart” is, on the surface at least, one that could be mastered by anyone. There is a “building block system”, as he once said; a glossary of motifs to be picked out and played with on a whim. In fact, few would bring the rhythm and lyricism that Penck, a jazz fan, brought to the canvas. With their profusion of wide eyes, humanoid forms, beasts and birds, his paintings are suggestive of the real world, but they also lean on theories of abstraction, in which noughts, crosses and other symbols flirt across a work’s surface with a pride in pure painterly gesture. Escaping his censors, Penck smuggled paintings to the west with the help of Cologne gallerist Michael Werner, whose gallery the artist worked with until his death in 2017, and who now represents the Penck estate. A new show at Werner’s London townhouse gallery traces the artist’s career, from his beginning to the international stardom he eventually found. Most accounts note it was the Stasi raid that catalysed his defection in 1980 but, more likely, the East Berlin regime sold the artist to their counterparts across the wall as part of the lucrative and highly secret Häftlingsfreikauf programme, which allowed the GDR to bring in much-needed foreign currency and rid itself of intellectual troublemakers. Either way, for Penck, it came as a relief. Settling in Cologne, the artist hung out with Georg Baselitz, Jörg Immendorff, Anselm Kiefer and Sigmar Polke, a gang the press dubbed the Neue Wilde – the Young Savages. More formally, throughout the 1980s these artists developed neo-expressionism between them, a form of painting characterised by its rough emotional pull. While Penck’s importance to this new genre was confirmed by his appearance in key survey shows, Zeitgeist at the Gropius Bau, Berlin, in 1982, and New Art at the Tate, London, a year later, the artist’s source material reveals a more nuanced set of references. The science fiction Penck read as a child while the RAF carpet-bombed Dresden remained an enduring influence, while a set of rarely seen textile sculptures, included in the new Werner exhibition, underline his interests in genetics, ecology, systems theory and cybernetics. With his work, Penck sought to understand how people, objects and ideas rubbed up against each other, how thoughts could be expressed beyond words and how a path out of the inherent conflict of the world might be mapped. Go figure: four works by AR Penck Untitled, 1966 In one of the earliest works in the exhibition, the artist’s interest in systems are on show. A man is seen picking a fruit, before he is shown eating and lastly defecating. Far from demonstrating man’s divine supremacy over nature, his internal organs are reduced to nodes in a natural ecosystem. tskrie VIII, 1984 Penck also spent time in London. The title of the largest work in the show is an anagram of “strike”, and is a homage to the miners’ struggle. Despite the harassment he received in East Germany, Penck was sympathetic to socialism. “Everything is paradox and schizophrenic … reactionary and progressive, decadent and fascistic,” he said of his work’s politics. “So am I! So are you!” Y, 1978 We can assume this is a self-portrait, even though the stick man has no features. “Y” was one of a number of names Penck exhibited under (others include “Mickey Spilane” and “Theodor Marx”). Werner would arrive at his studio, dropping off forbidden music, books and, as Penck became successful, bags of West German marks. In return he would smuggle out paintings signed under the fictitious guises. Reaktor, 1990 Penck wanted children to enjoy his work, despite its intellectual underpinnings. His felt sculptures are playful, but dozens of sketches included in this new show reveal that he designed the interconnecting tubes and balls with a molecular understanding of how humans have altered the very building blocks of nature. This work was made four years after the Chernobyl disaster. AR Penck: Systems – Felt Works and Paintings is at the Michael Werner gallery, London, to 19 February.New year resolutions in relation to booze almost always involve self-denial, but let me suggest an alternative: drink less but better. The problem with giving up for an extended period is that at some point you have to adjust to drinking again. Having just one drink a day in January (my preferred strategy), or taking two to three days off a week (and maybe even four, at least for this month), creates a more healthy drinking pattern. Combine that with an emphasis on quality over quantity, and it becomes a sustainable lifestyle. You may quite reasonably point out that you haven’t got cash to splash at this time of year, but I’m not advocating increasing your booze budget, rather reallocating it. Add up what you spend on alcohol in the average week (average perhaps not being the run-up to Christmas), and spend it on something better – you could pick up a more than decent bottle for the cost of a couple of cocktails, for example. Plus, you should still be able to take advantage of Christmas offers this weekend, as well as bin-end and sale reductions during the coming month. Drinking better doesn’t just mean spending more, however; it also means drinking with a spirit of adventure. Explore a new country, wine region or grape variety each month. Overcome your prejudices. I’ve never been much of a fan of vouvray, for example, which I generally find too sweet, but I recently had a glass of Huet’s 2016 Demi-Sec at Noble Rot in London and was blown away by it. (Incidentally, Noble Rot’s list is available in cutback-friendly 75ml glasses.) You could also think of buying your wine in alternative formats – half-bottles, say, or even cans. (The Banks Brothers’ canned wine range from South Africa, fronted by chef Tommy Banks and his brother James, is an unusually good one.) Buying in bigger quantities such as wine boxes, meanwhile, may seem counterintuitive, but if you’ve got the self-discipline to pour yourself just one small glass, a box could last the best part of a month. Wine boxes aside, there is also the issue of how to keep your wine fresh if you don’t drink the whole bottle. Air is the enemy of wine, so once a bottle is only half full, decant it into a smaller bottle and keep it in the fridge. There’s also a nifty little gadget called Sayv (£4.95 slurp.co.uk) that sprays a layer of argon gas over the wine to keep it fresh, which is especially useful when you want to open more than one bottle at once. Five bottles to save your units for Yerevan 782 BC Kangun Rkatsiteli 2019 £8 (on offer until 2 January when it reverts to £9.50) Armenia Wine Co, 12.5%. Deliciously fresh, floral, almost summery Armenian white: would go with canapes or meze. Wildeberg ‘Wonder Horse’ Palomino 2020 £14.50 The Wine Society, 12.5%. Really interesting, South African dry white made from the same grape as sherry but bright, fresh and fruity. Utterly delicious. Specially Selected Lebanese Red 2019 £7.99 Aldi, 14.5%. Wonderfully warming blend of cabernet sauvignon, cinsault, syrah and carignan from the Bekaa Valley. Perfect January drinking. Viento de Invierno Mencia 2020 £8.25 selected Co-ops, 13.5%. If you’re a beaujolais fan, you’ll love Spanish mencia – this one’s a lovely, bright, juicy red. RedHeads Coco Rôtie 2019 £13.99 (or £12.59 for 12) Averys or Laithwaites, 14.5%. This gloriously lush shiraz/viognier is a tribute to côte rôtie. Well worth the extra over what you might normally pay for an Australian red. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comMy husband and I and our two children (aged six and two) recently moved into a bigger house so my mum could come and live with us. She is in her late 70s and was recently diagnosed with Alzheimer’s. We work part-time and share childcare, and agreed to have my mum with us so we could provide a stable home as she was no longer able to live alone. I am keen that, where possible, I am not her carer – we have two assistants who help with personal care, medication and medical appointments. However, we often end up “caring” for her in terms of cooking, washing, taking her on days out and so on. One thing we struggle with is when we ask her what she needs or would like, and she turns the question round to ask what we need, or how she can help us. In reality, there is little she can do, though we are happy for her to wash up or hang laundry, even if this takes a long time and ends up incomplete. When she persistently tries to offer help, it becomes a flashpoint for my husband and me, and makes what should be a simple interaction stressful and upsetting. This behaviour predates the dementia – she was a wonderful and kind single mother who has always gone out of her way to look after others. We want so much to look after her, but it would be so much easier for us if she could accept the help with a simple “thank you!”. It’s wonderful that you’ve brought your mother to live with you, but you’ve taken on a lot, with work and young children. I wonder if you’ve let yourself acknowledge that? I used to think looking after older relatives was about the physical impact, but the psychological one is far greater. There’s also a shift between you and your mum, with you taking on a more parental role. And that’s really hard: for both, there’s often an unspoken loss at its core. I suspect this has become a flashpoint not because of what she says, but because of what it triggers in you. I wonder if next time she says it, you could consider how it really makes you feel? Because I do think there’s an unvoiced emotion here. I contacted Julie Green of Dementia UK: “You’ve done a fantastic thing, but you are a carer for your mum and a mother. When there’s no time for self, that’s when people can get resentful.” She also pointed out something vital, which is that “every one of us has the need for meaningful activities; we need to feel valued, [and] that we are here for a reason.” Your mum wanting to help is what defines her, and she may be suffering a loss of self-confidence and self-esteem. You may not be able to stop her saying it, but you may be able to handle it differently. Green suggested looking at chores and writing a list so your mum could tick off what she’s done, and you could also give her feedback. This will save not only time in the long run, but frustration, too. Then when your mum asks how she can help, you can say, “You’ve already done this. How about doing something for fun?”. Here Green suggests looking at what your mum likes to do: knitting, singing, anything she usually enjoys. A vital piece of advice I want to pass on is not to get caught up in what is or isn’t happening, but concentrate on your mum’s feelings. Your mum may forget things, but facts don’t matter here; feelings, however, do. How you make someone feel is crucial. But how you feel is also really important, so please get support. If things get too much, please don’t feel bad about looking into short-term (a few days’) respite care at a local residential home for your mum. • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.The crisis engulfing the Chinese property sector appears certain to intensify in 2022 as companies face debt repayments in the new year that are double those of the final months of 2021, risking what one China expert calls a systemic crisis for the world’s second-biggest economy. Although concerns about the stricken giant China Evergrande have receded in recent weeks behind a massive state-led restructuring operation, it missed a bond repayment of $255m (£190m) on Thursday and the debt problems that have pushed the second biggest developer in the country into default are blighting many other firms. In total, China’s developers owe $19.8bn in dollar-denominated offshore debt in the first three months of 2022, analysts at Nomura said. That is almost twice as much as the $10.2bn they were faced with in the final quarter of 2021 – a burden that caused default at Evergrande and the threat of default at several other developers such as Kaisa. Nor is there any respite in the second quarter of 2022, when they must find another $18.5bn. The bond repayment burden threatens to worsen the crisis for developers, who have ridden a 30-year boom in the Chinese housing market on a business model based on cheap credit and never-ending demand from the country’s huge, upwardly mobile population. But Xi Jinping’s anger at the sector’s excesses and his pursuit of “common prosperity” led to a crackdown that removed access to unlimited funding, and now key metrics are spelling the end of the good times. Prices fell 0.3% in November, the biggest fall since 2015, while the value of home sales plunged by 16.31% and new construction starts as measured by floor area fell 21.03%. Crucially, China’s population is shrinking with the number of marriages – and therefore demand for new properties from young couples – down 31% in the six years to 2019. ‘Everyone made the same bet’ Michael Pettis, professor of finance at Peking University, says the situation could morph into a systemic crisis that undermines the whole debt-ridden economy – the stuff of nightmares for Beijing’s political class, who are desperate to prevent contagion from the property crisis hurting ordinary Chinese. “Everyone made the same bet on inexorably rising property prices, especially the developers, who levered to the hilt, overpaid for land at auctions, and scooped up as much real estate risk as they could take on,” he said. “The problem of course is if property prices ever stop rising, because everyone has made the same bet everyone’s balance sheet starts unravelling at the same time, and it immediately becomes a systemic problem. That is what has happened in China.” Debt to foreign investors are not the only problem. Developers owe billions of yuan to Chinese bondholders but, in addition, Nomura says they must also find 1.1tn yuan ($172bn) in backdated pay owed to construction workers before the lunar new year starts at the beginning of February. There were also reports that workers at subsidiaries of Evergrande in states such as Guangxi and Shanxi have gone on strike over unpaid wages. “Failing to pay deferred wages could be severely punished by both the central government and related local governments,” the Nomura analysts said. “There is tremendous reputational risk for those developers and constructors that could not pay deferred wages in a timely manner, especially if social protests are triggered.” Evergrande’s woes become apparent in September when it admitted it could not meet the most pressing of its mammoth $300bn debts or even complete the 1.6m homes it had already taken payment for. After much brinkmanship, it made some of its payments but eventually slipped into default in early December – later confirmed by rating agency downgrades. The prospect of civil unrest over unpaid wages, unfinished houses, and uncertain return from wealth management products set up by developers is front and centre in Beijing’s battle to contain the fallout from the property sector’s problems. ‘This is a test case for China’ Although the Evergrande chairman and founder, Xu Jiayin, pledged this week that the company was going “full steam ahead” to finish homes that customers had paid for, Shasha Dai, managing editor at credit intelligence, data and analytics provider Reorg in New York, said the Chinese government was “deeply involved” in Evergrande’s restructuring and that the number one priority was to maintain “social stability”. The government was “putting a mould around Evergrande” to make sure its troubles didn’t spill over to other developers, she said. The goal was for someone “reputable” to come in with access to finance, complete the buildings Evergrande has not finished, and get people into homes that they have paid for. “Maintaining social stability is the government’s number one priority. They can’t have protests with people going round to offices demanding money back – it’s a bad image. Homebuyers have to get what they paid for.” However, the spiralling nature of the problem might make it impossible even for Beijing, with all its levers of control, to contain given that so many developers could run into trouble. A report in October by S&amp;P, for example, said that one-third of China’s listed developers could experience liquidity problems in the next 12 months. As Prof Pettis says, the crisis has deep-seated roots and will not be easily solved. “This isn’t about ‘bad apples’ or even bad policies,” he says, “so it cannot be fixed by firing the right people, putting some in jail and improving policy responses.” The impact will be felt far and wide if the contagion spreads, not least to China’s reputation for sound economic management. Tim Symes, a partner at the international law firm Stewarts in London and a specialist in insolvency and asset recovery, said the Evergrande restructuring could go on for years. But the wider question for China was important. “This is a test case for China and could shape risk appetite globally, affecting inward investment. “This is going to run and run and the fear is that China may favour its local creditors. Offshore bondholders will feel the loss and that will ripple through the world. It brings home the risks in lending to China.”A victory against Norwich in the absence of Patrick Vieira was most welcome for Crystal Palace but it is unlikely West Ham will give them such an easy ride. David Moyes’ side won a five-goal thriller in the corresponding fixture last year and will be eager to build some momentum against opponents who they have scored against in 15 successive league meetings. Ed Aarons Saturday 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Selhurst Park Last season Crystal Palace 2 West Ham 3 Referee Michael Oliver This season G15 Y46 R1 3.13 cards/game Odds H 23-10 A 15-11 D 5-2 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Guaita, Matthews, Milivojevic, Mateta, Benteke, Kelly, Banks, Hannam, Riedewald, Street, Rak-Sakyi, Tomkins, Eze, Olise, Clyne Doubtful Gallagher (match fitness) Injured Ferguson (match fitness, unknown), McArthur (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y35 R1 Form LLWDLW Leading scorer Gallagher 6 WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Randolph, Ashby, Oko-Flex, Baptiste, Alese, Longelo, Masuaku, Fredericks, Alese, Noble, Yarmolenko, Kral, Vlasic, Perkins Doubtful None Injured Zouma (hamstring, unknown), Cresswell (back, unknown), Ogbonna (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y22 R2 Form DWDLLW Leading scorer Antonio 7The photographer Sabine Weiss, who has died aged 97, established her considerable reputation within the French “humanist” school of black-and-white photography, which aimed to capture the universal human experience through images of everyday street life. Images such as that of a horse kicking up its heels, tethered on snowy wasteland by the Paris flea market at the Porte de Vanves, or of a child illuminated only by a sparkler, are seen on a par with those created by her friends and near-contemporaries Willy Ronis, Brassaï, Izis Bidermanas and Robert Doisneau, the last of whom introduced her to his photo agency, Rapho, in 1952. Yet throughout her long career, Weiss worked across the medium, including in advertising, travel and journalism. She opened her studio on the Boulevard Murat in Paris in 1950, across from a fellow Swiss artist who had relocated to the city, Alberto Giacometti. Weiss always insisted that she was an artisan rather than an artist. Primarily, this was because, she said: “From the start I had to make a living from photography. It was never just about the art.” However, she demonstrated artistry even in advertising. Her images of products such as cognac and perfume explored themes of evanescence and flight: scent vaporises from a well; a centaur flees the flames of ignited brandy. Weiss also documented avant-garde creatives, many of whom became her friends. In music they included Benjamin Britten, Stan Getz and Igor Stravinsky; in fine art, Jean Dubuffet, Fernand Léger, Robert Rauschenberg and Giacometti; the writers F Scott Fitzgerald, André Breton and Françoise Sagan; and actors such as Brigitte Bardot (whom she photographed in exceptional colour) and Jeanne Moreau. The Rapho agency became the perfect outlet for her photojournalism and personal work; she started as one of only two women working for them. Her stories were published in Vogue, Life, Paris Match and the New York Times magazine, and she was included in the Postwar European Photography exhibition (1953) at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. She participated in Edward Steichen’s groundbreaking exhibition The Family of Man, which began at MoMA in 1955 and toured for eight years to 38 different countries. Above all, Weiss loved photographing children, with whom she had a special rapport, as shown in the books Poussettes, Charrettes et Roulettes (2000), Intimes Convictions (1989) and Des Enfants (2000). Their capacity for play fascinated her, a favourite image being Enfants sur Arbre (Children in a Tree). Shot in 1951, it depicts three boys struggling to balance atop a thin wintry tree; a younger boy attempts to prop a metal bedstead against the spindly trunk. Born Sabine Weber in St-Gingolph, Switzerland, she fell in love with photography early, buying her first Bakelite camera with her pocket money at the age of eight, and “printing” her images by exposing contact sheets to sunlight on her windowsill. Her first mentor was her father, a chemical engineer, who gave her, she told me in an interview for the Independent in 1987, “a very practical liking for the subject”, which was “something of a salvation as I was always more visual than intellectual”. The Weber family moved to Geneva and, aged 15, Sabine took the first opportunity to exchange formal schooling for a photography apprenticeship with the 80-year-old François-Frédéric Boissonnas. Boissonnas, whose family had owned a photo-studio almost since the camera’s invention, taught her composition, and encouraged stylistic experimentation. In Geneva, Sabine came to know members of a French-Jewish community in exile from nazism. When survivors returned to Paris in 1946, she made her home there too. A contact introduced her to the fashion photographer Willy Maywald, whose studio assistant she became: “I worked in conditions unimaginable today – no water or telephone – but with him I understood the importance of natural light. Natural light as a source of emotion.” She remained with him for four years, using his studio to devise commercial jobs and his darkroom to start developing her own work. Fashion gave her access to “le tout Paris”, including Christian Dior’s 1947 launch of his New Look. In 1949 she met the American painter Hugh Weiss, who encouraged her in the use of colour. Then, too, her fascination with line and form emerged, both in visually framing her images and in the rearrangements that could be subsequently achieved with the application of darkroom processes. They married in 1950, and adopted a daughter, Marion. Weiss recalled it as a happy period, personally and creatively, when “a kind of national optimism” overcame the humiliation caused by the German occupation. That year she also began working with the Armenian-Egyptian-French photographer Alban, travelling between studios in Brussels and Cairo, where the light inspired her to properly begin working in colour. During this time she published a mix of reportage and travel features from around the world in Vogue, Life, Holiday, Time and Picture Post. Across a further 60-plus years of photographic work, Weiss’s international reputation steadily grew. More than 40 books and exhibition catalogues document her diverse interests, from grassroots theatre companies to artists’ monographs; Paris street markets and fairs to rural musicians; country profiles from Bulgaria to Burkina Faso. In 2017, she donated her entire archive to the Musée de l’Ēlysée in Lausanne. In 2020, she won Kering’s Women in Motion photography award. When I interviewed her, I met a warm, conversational woman, happily at home in the same studio that she had moved into when it was a hovel without electricity or an indoor toilet. Recalling how she was so poor that she traded her portraits for vegetables on the local market, Weiss still looked back with gratitude and affection. She said it was the people she came to know through her photography that pleased her most, “whether on street markets, in famous galleries, or working at Printemps”. Yet when I asked why she thought her most-reproduced non-commercial image was of the horse bucking itself free of its tether, she said: “That one, to me, is a portrait of solitude. My world, as a photographer, has to be about loneliness. And so it is I’ve learned to love solitude as well as all the rest.” Hugh died in 2007. Weiss is survived by Marion. • Sabine Weiss, photographer, born 23 June 1924; died 28 December 2021Thousands of flights within the United States and internationally were delayed and hundreds were canceled early on New Year’s Eve, adding to the tally of delays and cancellations during the holiday week due to adverse weather conditions and rising cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant. Over 2,400 flights were canceled globally as of early Friday, including over 1,100 flights within the United States or entering or departing it, according to a running tally on flight-tracking website FlightAware.com. There were nearly 4,000 global flight delays in total. The Christmas holidays are typically a peak time for air travel, but the rapid spread of the highly transmissible Omicron variant has led to a sharp increase in Covid-19 infections, forcing airlines to cancel flights as pilots and crew need to be quarantined. The sudden arrival of Omicron has brought record-setting case counts to countries around the world. Transportation agencies across the United States are suspending or reducing service due to Covid-19 staff shortages as the Omicron variant surges nationwide. On Thursday, for the second day in a row, the United States had a record number of new reported cases based on the seven-day average, with more than 290,000 new infections reported each day, a Reuters tally showed, as US officials weigh the impact of the Omicron variant. US airline cabin crew, pilots and support staff are reluctant to work overtime during the holiday travel season despite offers of hefty financial incentives. Many workers fear contracting Covid-19 and do not welcome the prospect of dealing with unruly passengers, some airline unions have said. In the months preceding the holidays, airlines were wooing employees to ensure solid staffing, after furloughing or laying off thousands over the last 18 months as the pandemic crippled the industry. Reuters contributed to this reportThe number of NHS staff in England off work or isolating due to Covid has doubled over the last two weeks amid Omicron’s rapid spread, figures reveal. On Boxing Day, a total of 24,632 personnel in acute NHS trusts were absent because they were sick or quarantining as a direct result of either the Delta or Omicron variant. That was more than double the 12,240 who could not work for that reason on Sunday 12 December and 31% up on the 18,829 recorded on the Sunday before Christmas, 19 December. The total number of NHS staff days lost because of Covid-related absence also increased sharply in the runup to the Christmas weekend – rising from 124,855 days in the week up until 19 December, to 176,914 in the seven days that ended on Boxing Day, the figures released on Friday show. The Liberal Democrats said that staff absence because of Covid at a time when the NHS is under such huge pressure was so worrying that Boris Johnson should convene a Cobra meeting to look into possible solutions. “Today’s figures confirm the worst: hospital and ambulance services are stretched to breaking point under the weight of devastating Covid staff absences, just as the government was warned”, said Daisy Cooper, the party’s health spokesperson. “It really is now or never for the government to get a handle on a crisis that is quickly spiralling beyond their control. Boris Johnson must call a Cobra meeting without delay to thrash out a comprehensive rescue plan.” The surge in staff sickness led Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, to warn that “the NHS is facing a perfect storm of Covid hospital admissions and illness rising at a very alarming rate alongside increasing numbers of frontline workers being off sick”. On Sunday, the Midlands had the largest number of staff off as a result of Covid (4,812), followed by London (4,580), the north-east and Yorkshire (4,179) and the north-west (3,966). NHS England’s latest “winter sitreps” data also showed that in all, 68,082 staff were off work at acute trusts on Boxing Day for sickness of any kind, which includes colds, flu and mental health problems as well as Covid. That was up 6% on the week before and 20% on two weeks earlier. Manchester University hospitals NHS trust had the most all-cause absences (2,407), followed by Sheffield teaching hospitals (2,093) and Nottingham University hospitals (1,982). Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, said the “worrying spike” in staff absence “is the biggest immediate challenge for trusts as they deal with the surge in micron cases together with continuing pressures on emergency care, urgent planned care that cannot be delayed any longer and the ongoing vaccination programme”. Taylor urged the public to behave responsibly, pointing to the 189,213 new cases of Covid across the UK and 2,082 new hospital admissions in England announced on Thursday. “While the government seems determined not to increase restrictions in England it is vital we all behave in ways that will not exacerbate an already dangerous situation”, he said. The British Medical Association renewed its plea to the prime minister to introduce new curbs in England to minimise Omicron’s impact, including cancellation of large social gatherings, limits on social mixing and reduced contact between households. “With Omicron now spreading so rapidly in the community, and daily cases nearing 200,000, the pressure this is placing on the NHS, through staff absences and rising hospitalisations, is becoming unsustainable”, said Dr Chaand Nagpaul, the BMA’s chair of council. “Further public health measures are needed urgently to prevent the health service becoming completely overwhelmed, and today’s figures are further evidence why this is needed now”. Almost one in eight frontline ambulance staff in Wales are off sick or isolating because of Covid, with the numbers expected to continue to grow over the next week or so. Jason Killens, the chief executive of the Welsh ambulance services NHS trust, said that 322 people were off because of Covid – about 12% of frontline staff. Adding in “normal” sickness absenteeism, the number off rises to around 17%. Killens said: “We are starting to feel the pinch because of the absence rate. We are expecting that to grow over the next 10 days.” More armed services personnel are joining the ambulance service in January, bringing the number driving on the frontline up to around 250, with more doing backroom roles. Killens said the service had its highest numbers of referrals from the NHS 111 service on Monday and Tuesday. The pressure iwas increased by delays in patients being admitted, leading to queues of ambulances at hospital A&amp;E departments. “We expect it to get very challenging in the next 10-14 days,” Killens said. “Some patients are waiting much longer than we would like.” Hopson added: “It will be particularly important in the coming days to look out for evidence of severe Covid-19 symptoms affecting older, vulnerable patients and impacting on critical care, as we saw earlier in the year. We haven’t seen that on a major scale yet but it still could arrive.” He and the BMA asked ministers to ensure that NHS staff have easy access to tests to diagnose if they have Covid or not amid ongoing shortages of both PCR and lateral flow tests. The BMA and Royal College of Nursing are also demanding that frontline personnel have access to the best possible personal protective equipment, including FFP3 masks.More than 6.5 million people in working families had no savings when the Covid pandemic began, analysis from Labour has shown, as the party warned a looming tax rise would hit those already hard up and mark a “miserable” start to 2022. According to the latest figures released by the government, many people had little or no money to fall back on just before the coronavirus struck. There were 6,644,281 people in families where at least one adult was working who had no savings, the Labour analysis found, rising to 22,455,726 for those who had less than £1,500. The number of those whose savings only reached £3,000 was 26,680,605. However, there were 8,728,847 people who said their savings outstripped £20,000. The figures for those who declared no savings in 2019-20 were difficult to compare with the previous year, because the government had changed the definition of “no savings” in the latest set of data. The Department for Work and Pensions said it now counted those who declared “no savings” and those with less than £1,500 in the same category. With the energy price cap set to be raised next April and the rise in national insurance rise due to come into effect in April, the shadow work and pensions secretary, Jon Ashworth, claimed working families struggling to stay afloat faced a cost of living crisis – even before inflation. Seeking to blame people’s hardship on the government’s record, he said: “Eleven years of the Tories has seen family finances hammered and now it’s shaping up to be a miserable January with heating bills rocketing, prices going up and punishing tax rises on the way. This is a crisis made in Downing Street. “The simple truth is people are skint with little if any savings to fall back on. Ordinary working families shouldn’t be forced to pay the price for Boris Johnson’s economic failure. “Unlike the Conservatives, Labour wouldn’t be hitting working people with a tax hike, and as heating bills rise, we’d help ease the burden on households by cutting VAT on domestic energy bills now for the winter months” Ashworth said the problem would be exacerbated by a freeze in the income tax personal allowance, the universal credit uplift having ended and a rise in council taxes. A government spokesperson said: “We recognise people are facing pressures, which is why we’re taking £4.2bn of decisive action to help. “We are providing extensive support to those on the lowest incomes – including putting an average of £1,000 more per year into the pockets of working families on universal credit, increasing the minimum wage and helping with the cost of fuel bills. “Our £500m household support fund is also giving more help to the most vulnerable, and councils have been given an extra £65m to support low income households with rent arrears.”Russia’s top diplomat has warned the west that its “aggressive” approach to Ukraine and threat of sanctions could force Moscow to “eliminate unacceptable threats to our security”, after a high-stakes conversation between Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden failed to deescalate the crisis. The remarks by the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, were published shortly after the Russian and US presidents held a 50-minute telephone call in which the two sides traded threats regarding tensions over Ukraine. During the phone call, Biden told Putin that the US would impose serious sanctions on Moscow in the event that Russian forces, which include tanks, artillery and even short-range ballistic missiles, launched an attack on Ukrainian forces. Yuri Ushakov, a Kremlin aide, said Putin responded that fresh sanctions could lead to a “complete breakdown in ties between our countries”. “Our president also mentioned that it would be a mistake that our descendants would see as a huge error,” Ushakov told reporters late on Thursday evening. The US and other western countries have said Russia is massing military equipment on Ukraine’s border for what could be a potential invasion force. Thousands of Ukrainian civilians have taken part in combat training in preparation for a potential Russian assault, although the situation in the country is largely normal ahead of the new year holiday. Earlier this week, the secretary of Ukraine’s national security council, Oleksiy Danilov, said Kyiv was concerned about Russian troops on the border but added that there was no panic. He said: “As for the troop buildup near our borders reported by foreign media – we do not see that. There is a certain increase of [Russian] military and we closely monitor what’s happening at our borders.” Ukrainian military intelligence had previously warned of a massive buildup of Russian military equipment on the border and the potential of a large-scale Russian offensive by mid-January. Russian delegations are set to meet then with US, Nato, and Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) officials for a series of high-stakes talks on European security. Lavrov, in an interview with the news agency RIA Novosti, said Russia insisted on US and Nato military officials taking part in the negotiations next month. Moscow would not allow the talks to be dragged out by western nations, he said. “If there is no constructive response within a reasonable time and the west continues its aggressive line, then Russia will be forced to take all necessary measures to ensure strategic balance and eliminate unacceptable threats to our security,” Lavrov added. An analysis by the Conflict Intelligence Team, a group of bloggers and analysts who collect open-source intelligence on Russian military movements, showed that Russian military equipment had continued to arrive in the area to the north-east of Ukraine and to Crimea in the past month. The group concluded that “by the new year the concentration of vehicles near Ukraine’s borders and in Crimea has reached an unprecedented scale, most likely surpassing the April figures”. Russia held a massive buildup of troops earlier this year, leading to a summit between Putin and Biden in Geneva in June. However, Moscow is not yet ready to launch the operation, the group noted, adding that a limited strike on the Ukrainian military was more likely than a large-scale operation to seize and hold territory.With the release of Matt Reeves’ The Batman now just three months away, and the debut of yet another (this-time Catwoman-focused) trailer this week, we’re starting to get a pretty decent picture of how the new dark knight will return to multiplexes. Reeves promised us a vision of the caped crusader re-engaging with the traditional role of “world’s greatest detective” in which he’s often seen in the comics (not to mention the bravura 90s Batman: The Animated Series TV show), and it seems Bruce Wayne will be plunged into a Seven-esque race against time to stop Paul Dano’s Riddler from completing a murderous spree. It’s a fascinating proposition for those of us who love the character first introduced by Bob Kane and Bill Finger in 1939 so much that we would happily sit through just about any Batman movie (provided it isn’t one in which our hero starts wielding guns and trying to take down Superman). The problem for Reeves is that he needs to do better than this. Why? Because Jon Watts’s Spider-Man trilogy has just shown everyone exactly how to bring back a superhero nobody was that impatient to see again. Only seven years ago, after the anticlimactic events of 2014’s The Amazing Spider-Man 2, the idea of the masked wallcrawler once again being top of the superhero tree for Christmas was almost impossible to imagine. After the events of Spider-Man: No Way Home, Peter Parker is the coolest thing in comic book movies since Samuel L Jackson was cast as Nick Fury. But Watts got pretty lucky. Peter Parker’s introduction to the Marvel Cinematic Universe via his startling cameo in 2016’s Captain America: Civil War allowed the film-maker to completely avoid the tired old Spidey origins story played out in Sam Raimi’s original 2002 Spider-Man and The Amazing Spider-Man. Spider-Man: Homecoming in 2017 then took advantage of the character’s newly confident position within the MCU by teaming him up with Robert Downey Jr’s Iron Man for what turned out to be an inspired, odd-couple pairing. Furthermore, Watts gave us a completely new take on Aunt May, banished both Spidey’s regular comic book squeezes (Mary Jane Watson and Gwen Stacy) and delivered a much sillier, far more charming and insouciant (not to mention suitably diverse) take on Midtown High School. The question now is quite how Reeves is going to freshen up Batman without having any of the same tools at his disposal. The film-maker has already confirmed that his take on Gotham’s dark knight will not be living in the DC extended universe, so is unlikely to ever meet Gal Gadot’s Wonder Woman, Jason Momoa’s Aquaman or Ray Fisher’s Cyborg. Nobody will be taking bets just now on Ezra Miller’s The Flash showing up at some point, given his film, due in November, will dive deep into the DC multiverse and could theoretically end up meeting Adam West’s version of Bats if Warner Bros really feel like making it happen. But the chances are that this Robert Pattinson’s Gotham City will be one in which the caped crusader is going to be working on his own. So where exactly is the excuse going to come from for bringing Batman back for his sixth incarnation in three decades? It can’t just be that nobody could possibly be as bad in the cape and cowl as Ben Affleck, surely? A look at the latest trailer certainly suggests Dano’s Riddler will bear little resemblance to Jim Carrey’s irritating emerald-suited puzzler-poser. But will the challenge he presents to Bruce Wayne really be so different from the anarchic, unhinged threat of Heath Ledger’s Joker in Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight? We’ve already witnessed Catwoman in two Batman live action movies, 1992’s Batman Returns and 2012’s The Dark Knight Rises, so how will Zoë Kravitz’s differ? She certainly has more feline-related japes up her sleeve than the relatively reserved Anne Hathaway in Nolan’s film, but are wisecracks about having nine lives really so different to Michelle Pfeiffer’s PVC-coated, pun-wielding turn all those years ago? For those of us who are Batman obsessives, these little details probably don’t matter. But for the wider cinemagoing public, Reeves will need to prove he’s giving us a Gotham City we haven’t seen many times before. Could the Riddler’s campaign against Batman be something to do with the sins of his father, as has been heavily hinted in previous trailers? Oops, we’ve already seen evil Thomas Wayne in the recent Joker. No doubt Reeves will find a fresh way to dig into the Wayne family’s past. He will certainly need to do so if The Batman is to escape the geek ghetto and find its way to the kind of wider audience that Nolan’s Dark Knight trilogy secured. Let’s hope we’re in for some shocking Bat-twists – for despite what we hardcore caped crusader fanboys might like to think, there are only so many filmgoers ready to lap up new movies about Batman and Catwoman every few years, like bowls of increasingly tepid milk.Mikel Arteta has admitted frustration at being forced to watch Arsenal’s meeting with Manchester City in isolation as he recovers from Covid but is still hoping to have an influence from afar on New Year’s Day against the runaway Premier League leaders. With Arteta recovering after what he described as “a couple of rough days” with the virus, his assistant Albert Stuivenberg will take charge at the Emirates as Arsenal attempt to record their first Premier League victory over City since Pep Guardiola’s arrival in 2016. Who will be alongside the Dutchman, an assistant to Louis van Gaal at Manchester United and Ryan Giggs with Wales before joining Arsenal in 2019, remains uncertain given the large number of cases within the coaching staff. Arteta will watch at home via a feed provided by the club but intends to leave most of the instructions to his trusted deputy. “I will need a big room so I can walk and move a little bit because I won’t be able to just sit on my sofa,” he said. “We will be in touch but as well I want to give them the responsibility and freedom to make decisions on the pitch and express themselves. It’s totally different being on the touchline close to the players and the action so I’m going to be there to support in certain moments but they have to get the momentum of the game and communicate with the players themselves.” Arteta added: “It’s not going to be easy – it will feel frustrating and like I have a lack of options. I haven’t been in training sessions or been able to prepare the players but we have to adapt to it.” The Arsenal manager – who confirmed that Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang had been allowed to report early for Africa Cup of Nations duty with Gabon after being stripped of the captaincy – spent more than three years working under Guardiola at City as an assistant. He revealed that he had spoken with his compatriot on Thursday “because we have that relationship” and believes Arsenal have improved immeasurably since their 5-0 thrashing at the Etihad in August when Granit Xhaka was sent off in the first half. “It was a real challenge and we suffered,” said Arteta. “But sometimes that helps you to become a better team. You need to stick together to understand what the level is and the mistakes that you cannot make against this type of opposition. We know the opposition that we are facing but I’m focused on trying to compete in every moment. The most important thing is that we have the belief that we can go and win the game.”With the pandemic, workers have been saying “I quit!” in their droves. In the US, employees packed in their jobs at such pace that a new term was coined – the Great Resignation – and alongside it, countless newspaper articles appeared about career-switching. But in the UK, are as many people quitting as we think? And would the greatest new year’s resolution be to join in? I asked Tony Wilson, director of the Institute for Employment Studies. Is the Great British Resignation under way? We’ve seen more people resign from their jobs than at any point before: it was roughly 400,000 in the three months from July to September 2021, up from 270,000 in the same period in 2019 – the last non-pandemic year. The UK has a dynamic labour market, with a high turnover, particularly in low-paying work. And when large parts of the economy reopened, more jobs were created. What does this mean for the record-breaking 1m open vacancies we heard about last September? It means we’re now at 1.3m. Why can’t we fill all these vacancies? In the UK, we don’t have an unemployment crisis, we have a participation crisis. There are about a million fewer people in the labour market than there would have been had the previous trend of more people entering the labour market continued. That trend was partly driven by immigration, but also by having more women in work and an ageing population working for longer. Last year was the first time since the 90s that the workforce got smaller, partly due to people stopping work through ill health, but mainly as a result of older people retiring, particularly women. These people weren’t working during the pandemic, due to job loss or being furloughed, and thought: “I don’t want to go back to that. The conditions aren’t great.” So for all the headlines about young professionals leaving the rat race for a higher calling of luxury candles or whatever, it’s actually older people driving the seismic change? Pity, because I was enjoying blaming labour shortages on Brexit. We can’t blame all of it on that. Yes, we have a lot of low-paid and insecure work, but of the 4m jobs created in the past decade, more than 90% were in relatively high-skilled work. We’ve talked a lot about job creation and destruction. Is there such a thing as a job for life any more? If you want a job for life, then join the royal family. But it’s a pretty hard club to get into. Otherwise, no, there isn’t. You don’t sound fazed by that. What about the romance of “I’m a carpenter. My father was, too”? It’s an important issue. Many communities have been defined by industries, and there can be psychological scarring when their identities are disrupted, such as during the deindustrialisation of the 1980s and 90s. But throughout history, we have always dealt with massive changes, even when they have been imperceptibly slow. It is important we train people for the jobs that exist and the ones that don’t yet, and support people so that no one is left behind. It’s what we call inclusive growth. One last question, Tony – is this a good time to quit our jobs? It might be a good time to ask for that pay rise – telling your boss you’ve seen there are 1.3m vacancies, and that the Institute for Employment Studies says there are loads of high-skilled, well-paid jobs out there.The picture is a joyful one. Laure, a midwife at a health facility in Ndu, a village in the Democratic Republic of Congo, holds a healthy newborn girl. The baby’s mother, Ester, was at the health centre for a postnatal appointment after giving birth to twin daughters. A couple of weeks earlier, when she was heavily pregnant and due to go into labour at any moment, Ester was forced to leave her home in Bangassou, on the other side of a river, in the neighbouring Central African Republic. In January, a coalition of armed groups attacked the city seeking to overturn December’s presidential vote, forcing thousands of people to flee their homes. When rebels moved on the capital Bangui, 10,000 refugees arrived on a single day in the Democratic Republic of Congo across the Ubangui River. Others went to Cameroon, Chad and the Republic of Congo. Ester and her eldest daughter, Princia, reached Ndu, about 4km (2.5 miles) away, where she went into labour. She sought medical attention from the village’s health facility but there were complications and she needed more specialist help, which was only available at the hospital in Bangassou. Mid-labour, she was taken on a canoe back across the river to Bangassou regional hospital, which has been supported by Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) since 2014. There she had an emergency caesarean section to deliver the twins. Alexis Huguet, a French photojournalist who has been based in central Africa since 2017, was covering the humanitarian crisis along the border for Agence France-Presse and MSF. “When [people] fled in early January, they were really scared,” he remembers. “[The forces] attacked with heavy weapons. There was bombing in Bangassou. People heard the bombing and gunshots and ran to the river to cross to Congo. Some tried to find canoes, some swam. Some of them were pregnant. It was a mess, it was crazy.” This wasn’t the first time Huguet had been to Bangassou and Ndu. He was in the area covering a similar situation in 2017. “It was almost the same,” he says. “Back then, Bangassou was attacked by an armed group and tens of thousands of people had to flee their homes.” In 2018, the situation improved and people returned home, only for more unrest and conflict to unfold three years later. “It’s a symbol of what happened in Central African Republic over the last years. Authorities, with the support of donors, tried to rebuild the country. In a few weeks they lost almost everything,” says Huguet. He met some of the same people who fled three years before. “I asked what they were doing here. They told me they had to flee again because the situation deteriorated really quickly.” He saw them return to rebuild the former makeshift shelters that they had used three years before. He adds: “It was really sad.” When Huguet met Ester at her postnatal appointment, she told him that she hoped that the situation would calm down enough to return safely to Bangassou with Princia and the twins Rhode and Laure, named after the midwife who helped Ester. He has no idea where she and her daughters are now, or what they are doing. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:For the past 20 years there have been a handful of constants in my life: my family, my best friend and Neighbours. Not neighbours like the people you borrow a cup of sugar from, but rather that sunshine-filled Australian soap you probably stopped watching once you left university. When I graduated, I carried on. First, out of habit (I needed to know the fate of Toadie’s mullet), but later for its nostalgic continuity and reassurance. As my personal life began to get busier and more complicated, this saccharine and simple soap provided me with a 30-minute retreat every weekday, where my mind could empty as familiar faces filled the screen, offering up plotlines in which the moral good always prevails and the sun always shines. I hadn’t realised how committed I was to the show until we were thrust into lockdown. With my dad self-isolating on the other side of London and my brother in his own flat, I was alone. As the world outside spiralled, I turned to the TV for normality. Alan Fletcher, who plays Dr Karl Kennedy, began his stint on Neighbours only seven months after I was born. As I have grown up with the show, he has been a constant patriarchal presence, albeit one with multiple affairs, divorces and galahs. And throughout 2021, whether I was in lockdown or adapting to the uncertainty of London reopening, Dr Karl was a parasocial stand-in for the family I wasn’t able to see – and a man playing a character that got me through the loneliness and anxiety of 2021. “Neighbours is my happy place,” Fletcher says on a video call from his home in Melbourne in October, only hours before the city is due to come out of the world’s longest Covid-19 lockdown. “No matter what’s going on in my life, the minute I arrive at Neighbours I’m back in my bubble.” Neighbours only took a month off production in 2020 due to Covid and was one of the first shows to resume filming with a new Covid safety plan. It has been onscreen ever since. Such consistency has been as much a saving grace for Fletcher as it has been for viewers like me. “We know it’s really bad out there, but when we get to Neighbours, I’ve got my old friends in the cast and crew, and we focus on making joy and good drama because we know that people out there want to see it,” he says. Chuckling through his lockdown goatee, Fletcher seems genuinely honoured that he is the person that got me through this year. It turns out I’m not the only fan. “A lot of people have gotten in touch over the course of the pandemic to find out how I’ve been getting on,” he says. “They’ve also said how Neighbours helped to sustain them, which is really flattering.” As well as having Neighbours and his family to comfort him through 2021, Fletcher turned to another of his loves: music. A country and Americana aficionado, he was spurred on by the recent death of the singer-songwriter John Prine to take his craft more seriously. Under the tutelage of the musicians Lachlan Bryan and Damian Cafarella, he spent the year recording an album, due for release in 2022. “I think Covid has helped a lot of people to focus more on what’s important to them,” he says. “Those two guys really helped me and got me through 2021.” Country stardom notwithstanding, Neighbours is, thankfully, still Fletcher’s priority. “I have a lot of contact with my fans and it’s very sustaining to know that you’re part of a community,” he says. “Shows like Neighbours will always be there – it’s not like other dramas that come and go. I know that, at the end of the day, I can turn on the telly and that theme will play and we’ll be there for everyone.” As we continue to live in the flux of Covid, I will keep watching the show for its hammy storylines and soapy performances. After all, Neighbours should be there for one another.Robert Garry, a professor of microbiology and immunology at Tulane medical school in Louisiana, got a call from his university management telling him that agents from the FBI and CIA had requested a chat about his research into the origins of Covid-19. Garry agreed and on 30 July three agents flew down to Louisiana to talk to him in person. The meeting, held at a university conference room, began at 9am and ended at about 5pm. “I presented my evidence to the agents, who were properly trained scientists themselves. They asked all the right questions,” Garry told the Guardian. “I told them: there is no way this virus could have been a manufactured weapon. There is also no evidence to suggest it was a lab leak. But I’m also conscious there are people out there who will always disagree.” Their conversation came two months after Joe Biden ordered US intelligence to investigate how the pandemic began. In normal circumstances, investigating an emerging infectious disease outbreak is a purely scientific inquiry, as was the case with Sars in 2003 and with Mers a decade later. But the search for the origin of the Covid pandemic has come in the middle of a global controversy that has mixed public health, domestic politics and international diplomacy. It has also coincided with the west’s growing distrust in the Chinese government and Beijing’s “wolf warrior” style of aggressive public diplomacy, which has resulted in many western capitals recalibrating their relationship with China. “It takes two to tango,” said Prof Yanzhong Huang, a senior fellow in global health at the Council on Foreign Relations, a thinktank in New York. “At the beginning Beijing seemed to acquiesce to being the country of origin of the outbreak,” he said. Chinese officials seemed to acknowledge that the Huanan seafood market in Wuhan was where Sars-CoV-2 first emerged. “What happened after was that all kinds of wild theories began to pop up from both the US and China,” said Huang. Some of the those sprung up on Twitter. They included tweets from the Republican senator Tom Cotton on 30 January that linked the virus to a laboratory in Wuhan, and another on 12 March from the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, that promoted the theory that the US military brought coronavirus to Wuhan. “That’s how things began to go [in a] downward spiral,” said Huang. WHO inquiry questioned Despite the tit-for-tat rhetoric, there has been some progress. Almost a year after the pandemic was declared, a team of scientists from the World Health Organization was in January finally allowed to enter China to carry out an investigation. It was a politically charged mission from the start, with every single interaction between the scientists and the Chinese authorities heavily scrutinised by the world’s media. The team concluded it was “extremely unlikely” Covid had leaked from a lab and said the virus may have jumped from animals to humans. However, the WHO scientists presented little in the way of proof to dismiss the first hypothesis or back the second one after the trip. And the conclusion did not convince those who have long cast doubt on the WHO’s credibility. Referring to the investigation, Dr Alina Chan, a molecular biologist at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University, told a British parliamentary committee in December: “Let us be clear that this was not a scientific process.” She suggested the WHO had been incompetent in organising the investigation and was too credulous in trusting the Chinese authorities. Richard Horton, the editor-in-chief of the Lancet medical journal defended the organisation during the same hearing. “There was no silencing of the WHO; there was no silencing of the investigation team that went to Wuhan,” he said. The credibility of the investigation did seem to be dented by the fall from grace of the British scientist Dr Peter Daszak, a leading figure in the mission. In June, he was accused of conflict of interest owing, primarily, to his “close relationship” with the Wuhan Institute of Virology, the laboratory at the centre of the leak theory, and the person in charge of it, Dr Shi Zhengli – widely known as China’s “bat woman”. The plot thickened further in July, when the head of the WHO, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, urged China to be transparent and said it was premature to rule out the lab-leak theory. A month later, the WHO said again that all theories on the origins of the Covid-19 outbreak were “on the table”, and urged Chinese scientists to carry out their own investigations. Later in August, the US Office of the Director of National Intelligence said in a summary report that the investigation ordered by Biden in May was inconclusive about the virus’s origins. A full report was released in late October said the virus was not weaponised and was unlikely to have been genetically engineered, but the US intelligence community remained divided over its most probable origins. “All agencies assess that two hypotheses are plausible: natural exposure to an infected animal and a laboratory-associated incident,” the report said. China dismissed the report as “political and false”. Beijing has also threatened proponents of efforts to trace the origin of the virus from the start, with Australia among those to feel its displeasure. China regards the calls from the international community as “politicisation” of science, but critics say Beijing’s response has been just as political, if not more so. Others, including the US infectious diseases expert Dr Anthony Fauci think the way China responded is typical of how its vast bureaucracy deals with matters of this nature. “Even when they’re not hiding anything, they act that way,” he told the New York Times in June, referring to China’s initial response to the Sars outbreak in 2003. “Yet if you look at the way they acted early on, that’s the nature of the way the Chinese, when they have something that goes on in their own country, they just act in a very put-offish way. They’re not forthcoming with information. Does that mean that they’re really lying and hiding something? I don’t know,” Fauci said. ‘Last chance’ In early October, the WHO announced it had assembled a group of 26 experts to revive the stalled inquiry into the origins of the pandemic. One senior official said it may be the “last chance to understand the origins of this virus” in a collegiate manner. Garry welcomed this development. He noted that despite the political rows, substantial progress had been made in the last few months. In September, for example, scientists found three viruses in bats in Laos were more similar to Sars-CoV-2 than any previously known ones. “This is a huge breakthrough, and adds further evidence to a nature origin hypothesis,” he said, adding that he was “100% certain” the Huanan seafood market was where the virus first emerged. “We are now seeing more evidence of that after investigations into stall owners, some of whom were believed to be selling wild animals such as raccoon dogs.” Huang said Garry’s interpretation was one of the many theories on which the global science community needed to reach a consensus. “But what’s unfortunate is that China and the west are entering an impasse. China is not forthcoming and the west does not trust China,” Huang said. “In the process of the tit for tat, the window of opportunity for scientists to find the real origin of the virus is closing. The state of affairs is making the origin-tracing even more difficult.”The BBC has faced further complaints over its coverage of Ghislaine Maxwell’s conviction for recruiting and grooming teenage girls after an interview with her brother on Radio 4’s flagship news programme. Ian Maxwell made the case for his sister’s innocence on the Today programme, casting doubt on the testimony from victims and detailing plans for an appeal while Ghislaine awaits sentencing for trafficking young girls for Jeffrey Epstein to sexually abuse between 1994 and 2004. On Thursday, the corporation was forced to admit it had not met its own editorial standards during a BBC News interview with Alan Dershowitz, Epstein’s former lawyer who has also been accused of the sexual abuse of a minor. It was inundated with complaints after Dershowitz was introduced simply as a “constitutional lawyer”, and was then allowed to attack the credibility of Virginia Roberts Giuffre. Viewers were not told Giuffre and Dershowitz were engaged in a legal battle over the veracity of her claims that he was part of a group of powerful men to whom Epstein offered her for sex. She has also made similar claims against Prince Andrew. Both men strenuously deny the allegations. During a five-minute interview, Ian Maxwell said while the trial had heard “heart-rending testimonies” his view was “that Ghislaine had nothing to do with it”. “These were Epstein’s crimes and he’s not here to pay that price, and she has been made to pay the price that he should have paid,” he added. Pressed by the interviewer Mishal Husain on whether the women who testified against Ghislaine Maxwell were lying, he replied: “Of course, the prosecution didn’t put into evidence the prior interviews they had with these accusers, which showed a completely different case. Memory is faulty, and so, in my view, the trial that has occurred was not a fair trial from Ghislaine’s perspective. And that is why she’s going to appeal, and I think she’ll be successful.” He said the appeal would be based on “legal grounds, both in terms of pre-trial process and indeed the trial process itself”. He also claimed that the months his sister had spent awaiting trial since her arrest at her luxurious 63-hectare (156-acre) property in New Hampshire in July 2020 had taken a toll. Nazir Afzal, the former chief crown prosecutor for north-west England, wrote on Twitter that those who gave character references to those convicted as part of “so-called grooming gangs”, many of which were from a British Pakistani background, were “rightly shamed”. “How is that those supporting the convicted child sex offender Ghislaine Maxwell are being given air time on national media?” The author and criminal barrister who uses the pen name Secret Barrister tweeted: “I cannot understand why #r4today is providing a platform for family and friends of Ghislaine Maxwell to proclaim her innocence and undermine the jury’s verdicts. Is this service to be made available to all convicted sex offenders?”. In the wake of his sister’s conviction, Ian Maxwell has also given interviews with Sky News and the Daily Telegraph. A spokesperson for the BBC said it had “covered the guilty verdict against Ghislaine Maxwell extensively, including interviews with her victims on multiple outlets”. “The interview on the Today Programme with Ian Maxwell was about the family’s decision to appeal the verdict; he was robustly challenged and his arguments were critiqued directly afterwards by a barrister,” it added.The FTSE 100 has recorded its best year since 2016, as UK stocks recovered from the pandemic shock of 2020. London’s leading index of blue-chip shares rallied by 14.3% during 2021, a year after falling by the same percentage in its worst drop since the 2008 financial crisis. It closed at 7384 points on Friday, having started the year at 6460 points. Stocks were lifted during the year by economic optimism as Covid-19 vaccines allowed economies to reopen, with stimulus packages from governments and central banks increasing growth. Investors largely shrugged off worries about inflation, supply chain disruption and coronavirus variants such as Omicron. The more domestically focused FTSE 250 index gained 14.6% over 2021 to end the year at 23,480 points, having hit a record high of 24,353 in September. Many other stock markets also rose strongly through the year, with the MSCI World index of global equities gaining 17%. Ashtead Group, an industrial equipment rental company, was the best-performing FTSE 100 stock. It rallied by 73%, after its revenues were boosted by the global economic rebound as major building sites reopened. The aerospace group Meggitt surged 58% after a takeover approach from US rival Parker Hannifin. The deal is being scrutinised by competition authorities. The mining company Glencore rose by more than 65%, lifted by rallying commodity prices, while Royal Mail jumped 56% thanks to strong demand for parcel deliveries. The speciality chemicals producer Croda gained 53%, after a record performance including producing ingredients used in Covid-19 vaccines. Banks and oil companies also had strong years, but some of last year’s “pandemic winners” suffered, with Ocado falling 26%. IAG, British Airways’ parent company, fell 10% during 2021 owing to concerns that Omicron would delay a travel recovery. London lagged behind some other major European indices, with France’s CAC soaring 20% and Italy’s FTSE MIB up 23%. The pan-European Stoxx 600 hit a series of record highs, lifted by technology firms and financial stocks. Luxury also did well, with LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton’s shares firmly in fashion, up more than 40%. Japan’s Nikkei 225 finished 2021 at its highest year-end level since 1989, rising almost 5%. It is still about 25% below its record peak 32 years ago, before the Japanese stock market bubble burst. Wall Street led the way, lifted by large tech companies such as Alphabet, which surged by about 66%. The S&amp;P 500 index of US stocks rallied by 27% over the year, achieving 70 record closing highs, as corporate profits were lifted by higher consumer spending, and cash flooded into equity funds. “On the whole, 2021 has been an excellent year for equity returns,” says Richard Flax, the chief investment officer at digital wealth manager Moneyfarm. “The second half of the year has seen a little more volatility than the first half – thanks largely to the Omicron variant causing uncertainty – but the likes of the US, Europe and Japan have seen strong growth.” Despite this year’s recovery, the FTSE 100 is still 6.5% below its peak of 7903 points, which was set in May 2018, while the US, German and French markets all hit record highs this year. Oil prices rebounded by about 50% during 2021, lifted by higher demand and cautious production increases by the Opec group and its allies. But gold dropped 4%, with the prospect of higher interest rates dampening the appeal of assets that do not provide income.Lawyers representing a woman who has accused Prince Andrew of sexual abuse are demanding that he hand over documents explaining why he does not sweat. Virginia Giuffre’s legal team have requested a wealth of information from Andrew’s lawyers in response to his BBC Newsnight interview in 2019 when he said he visited a Pizza Express on the day of the claimed sexual encounter. Giuffre is suing the Queen’s son for allegedly sexually assaulting her when she was a teenager. She claims she was trafficked by the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein to have sex with the duke, and was pictured with the royal and his friend Ghislaine Maxwell during the period when the alleged intercourse is said to have taken place. Andrew has denied all the allegations. In the Newsnight interview, Andrew claimed he never got sweaty on a dancefloor with Giuffre in 2001, an argument used as evidence that he had never met her. Giuffre’s lawyers said in court documents that they want Prince Andrew to give them information about his “alleged medical inability to sweat”. “If Prince Andrew truly has no documents concerning his communications with Maxwell or Epstein, his travel to Florida, New York, or various locations in London, his alleged medical inability to sweat, or anything that would support the alibis he gave during his BBC interview, then continuing with discovery will not be burdensome to him at all,” the documents state. Andrew claimed that he did not sweat because he had an “overdose of adrenaline in the Falklands war, when I was shot at … it was almost impossible for me to sweat.” In the court documents, Giuffre’s lawyers also ask for information from the royal including any documents around “allegations of sexual abuse” or “extramarital sex” made against the duke. This week, Maxwell was found guilty on five of six charges for her involvement in Epstein’s sexual abuse of teenage girls. Prosecutors said Maxwell “preyed on vulnerable young girls, manipulated them and served them up to be sexually abused.” She is expected to receive a significant prison term, and is expected to appeal. The documents filed by Giuffre’s lawyers include a list of what they want from Andrew during the process of discovery, a pre-trial procedure through which each side can obtain evidence from the other. One of the requests is for “all documents concerning your alleged medical condition of anhidrosis, hypohidrosis, or your inability to sweat”. Andrew’s lawyer, Andrew Brettler, has rejected this request on the grounds that it is “harassing and seeks confidential and private information and documents that are irrelevant, immaterial and not reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence”. Giuffre’s lawyers also want information on Andrew’s schedules and meetings in 2001, when the alleged abuse took place. Another request made is for “all documents concerning defendant’s travel to or from, or presence in or on: a) Epstein’s planes; b) Florida; c) New York; d) New Mexico; e) the United States Virgin Islands; f) a Pizza Express located in Woking, England; or g) the Club Tramp nightclub, located in London, England”. Pizza Express is where the duke said he was the night Giuffre claims they had sex in London. Another request is for communications between Andrew and Epstein or Maxwell and their lawyers concerning “sexual abuse”, a request rejected by Andrew’s lawyers as “overbroad, burdensome and oppressive”. Andrew’s legal team have rejected the requests for the documents citing various reasons including that the information is protected from disclosure by rights of privacy under the US constitution and article 8 of the European convention on human rights. His lawyers also state in papers filed to a New York court that some of the documents requested are already publicly available.With the first pick in the 2019 NBA draft, the New Orleans Pelicans made the obvious choice. Back then 19-year-old Zion Williamson, a Duke University freshman, was inarguably the most mesmerizing player in all of basketball, pro or amateur – a 6ft 7in, 285lb flying sledgehammer who dunked with disturbing power, rejected shot attempts with stunning alacrity and otherwise defied the accepted physics of the game in ways too inconceivable not to retweet about in wonder. His rivalry game debut against North Carolina, already an NBA All-Star-level happening that featured former president Barack Obama and other bold-face names among the capacity crowd at Cameron Indoor Arena, became an even bigger deal when Williamson ripped a Nike shoe and limped off the floor with a knee injury a minute into the game. These days, though, Williamson is a mixed bag. It’s not his talent that’s in doubt. (He’s rated among the league’s more productive players at both ends.) It’s his flagging durability, either a product of his unholy alloy of size and speed or the consequence of living in the fried food capital of the world. Williamson missed most of his rookie season with a torn right meniscus and has been dogged by injuries to his hands. He has yet to play a game this season because of a broken foot. All of this has made Williamson ripe for potshots from Charles Barkley and Shaquille O’Neal. Two years ago they roasted dire reports claiming Williamson had to relearn how to walk; in November they fell out laughing over footage of Williamson lumbering through a basic warm-up drill. “It’s like me and Shaq had a baby,” Barkley cracked. “You should not get hurt when you’re young.” All the while New Orleans continues to play mediocre ball. It’s enough to make you wonder if maybe the Pelicans got this wrong, if maybe instead of Williamson they should’ve taken that other South Carolina hoops phenom. Compared to Williamson, Ja Morant, an old youth travel league teammate, was a 6ft 3in, 173lb wisp jumping to the pros from Murray State – a “mid-major” school that had won just three NCAA tournament games. And yet: In his two years there, Morant lost only four games and reached the tournament both seasons, leading the 12th-seeded Racers to an upset win over Marquette. As Williamson began his rookie year recovering from surgery to repair his meniscus, Morant – who went second in the ’19 draft to the Memphis Grizzlies – tiptoed out of Williamson’s shadow to claim Rookie of the Year honors. In 2020-21, Morant quietly willed the Grizzlies to the playoff precipice, single-handedly knocked off the Steph Curry-led Golden State Warriors in the NBA’s inaugural play-in tournament – sealing the Grizzlies’ first playoff appearance in four seasons. Against the top-seeded Jazz, Morant poured in another ace scoring effort to help steal a game on the road. This season the Grizzlies floor general with the dreaded hair and handles isn’t sneaking up on anyone. Prior to 2021-22 campaign, he declared himself a top-five point guard – a boast that was met with some consternation. But all he’s done over the past week is state his case. On Monday at league-leading Phoenix, Morant capped a 33-point night with a twisting, fallaway, game-winning layup over two defenders. Two days later against the Lakers he went toe-to-toe with LeBron James from the three-point line, missing just once on the way to rallying the Grizzlies from a 14-point deficit to victory on the strength of a 41-point night. Incredibly, this all comes nine days after Morant heard Grizzlies fans call for him to return to the bench when he had an off night in a loss to Oklahoma City, his first game back from a three-week layoff with a sprained knee and a bout in the league’s health and safety protocol. For true Morant loyalists, the Lakers performance will hark to his college hot steaks against the likes of Belmont and SIU Edwardsville. For the rest of us, it’s more fodder for comparisons to Curry – the ultimate underrated small college kid who turns his sleights into cannon fodder. “Go back to LA!” was his parting shot to the spectators who dared show up to FedEx Forum dressed in purple and gold. Morant has always been a wizard with the ball, equally adept at displacing defenders off the dribble or off a glance. Now he’s applying that same sorcery in service of his greatly improved long-distance stroke. Mindful of Morant’s explosive first step, Lakers defenders had to think twice before deciding whether to pick him up at the three-point line. That moment of hesitation was often enough to guarantee Morant wide-open looks against a flailing Avery Bradley or Russell Westbrook when Morant wasn’t crashing the offensive boards, blocking shots or spinning around more lost Lakers defenders in the paint. Overall he burned them for six makes, a career best. Most impressive: the Grizzlies, who have rebounded from an 9-10 start to leading the Southwest division, have the form of a playoff shoo-in. As Morant’s scoring average (24.5 points) and his three-point accuracy (38.3%) continue to climb, it appears the 22-year-old may have sold himself short. Forget the league’s top-five point guards. Right now Morant looks like a top-five player – like a prime Derrick Rose, but with far greater judiciousness and restraint. Or, at the very least, Morant looks like he should’ve been the top pick all along. Why he wasn’t has less to do with Morant’s talent than the LeBron-level hype around Williamson. What’s more, New Orleans tried building a team around a point guard before, and Chris Paul – one of the best ever at that position – could only do so much. Still: as hard as it is for any pro talent evaluator to justify passing on a big man many were touting as the next Charles Barkley, there remained some doubt about exactly what position Williamson would play. And that was before the questions about his eating habits. Citing his league sources, ESPN hoops reporter Tim MacMahon reckoned Williamson weighed around 330lbs – and damned if that doesn’t come across in Williamson’s Mountain Dew commercials. While Williamson reaches for another beignet (allegedly), Morant seems to have stayed away from Memphis’ famed BBQ and soul food joints. That figures, given Morant’s estimable reputation as a workout warrior who owes his own early viral fame to the improvised workouts dreamed up by his father, Tee – a high school teammate of Ray Allen’s. But here’s really why Morant could’ve gone No 1: basketball is a little man’s game now. And in a league where layups and threes rule, Morant, not Williamson, is the player with the greater upside. But then again it is still early days. Williamson’s career isn’t over yet, and who knows how much time he could buy back time with a better diet and discipline. Until he gets it back together, you can’t say you didn’t see Ja Morant coming anymore. If you don’t think he’s a top player yet, at the very least you now know this: he’s hungry, too.New York City’s leaders are pushing ahead with plans for the annual New Year’s Eve party in Times Square despite record numbers of new Covid infections driven by the Omicron variant. Outgoing Mayor Bill de Blasio, who is set to step down at midnight on Saturday, told NBC’s Today show that pressing ahead with the public celebration would show “that we’re moving forward, and we want to show the world that New York City is fighting our way through this. “It’s really important to not give up in the face of this,” he added. De Blasio has already scaled back celebrations from the “full-strength” celebration he originally approved. Crowds will be limited to 15,000, down from 60,000 pre-pandemic, and everyone who enters must wear a mask. But the decision to press ahead comes in contrast to public health messaging from Washington and decisions in other large, populous cities, including San Francisco and Atlanta, to cancel their events. On Wednesday, White House health advisor Dr Anthony Fauci said he approved of small, at-home New Year’s Eve gatherings among vaccinated and boosted individuals but urged Americans to cancel plans to attend larger gatherings. “If your plans are to go to a 40- to 50-person New Year’s Eve party with all the bells and whistles and everybody hugging and kissing and wishing each other a happy new year, I would strongly recommend that this year we do not do that,” Fauci said at a Covid-19 briefing. De Blasio said Thursday: “Our health-care leadership believes this is the right way to do it.” He said his administration had not held discussions about canceling or reducing the “ball drop” event further. “We’ve got to send a message to the world. New York City is open,” he said, adding that the festivities at Times Square would “show the world that New York City is fighting our way through this”. Incoming mayor Eric Adams cancelled his inauguration party, but is still scheduled to take his oath in Times Square soon after the ball drop. He expressed hope on Thursday that 2022 would be “a new beginning of our resiliency”. New York governor Kathy Hochul released figures on Thursday showing that the city, state and country are all breaking records for newly confirmed Covid-19 infections. New York state has set a new high in the average number of daily reported cases for the last 11 days. Across the state, more than 7,700 are currently hospitalized with the virus and the number is increasing. The city reported a record number of new, confirmed cases – more than 39,590 – on Tuesday, according to New York state figures. “As we approach the New Year it is vitally important that we don’t let our guard down in our fight against the pandemic,” Hochul said. “We have the tools and we know what works – mask up, get vaccinated, get boosted, and exercise caution in large gatherings, especially this weekend.” The decision to press on with the Times Square party has received criticism from other elected officials. Mark Levine, who takes over as Manhattan borough president tonight, called for the event to be cancelled. “We are not doing enough to slow this,” he said on Twitter. “Now is the time to act. Time is of the essence.” That warning comes as one fifth of the city’s police force is out due to virus infections, according to NYPD commissioner Dermot Shea. Kelly Doran, an emergency physician with NYU Langone, tweeted: “Pretty unreal to me that NYC is still holding its big New Year’s Eve bash tomorrow when Covid cases are higher than ever, hospitals are having to call in visiting help &amp; cancel elective surgeries, and FDNY is pleading with the public not to call 911.” As many as 20% of the city’s restaurants and bars are temporarily shuttered and owners report a sharp drop in trade. On Thursday, some of the thousands of tourists visiting the city for New Year said they were not unduly inconvenienced by the sharp rise in Covid infections. “We prefer to go to places where there are less people. On New Year’s eve we will stay in our hotel,” said Antonio Palmeri, visiting from Turin with friends. “But it is our dream to be in New York so we are happy to be here.” Tourists visiting the bronze charging bull on lower Wall Street on Friday said while they were anxious about the number of cases, they wanted to continue enjoying their visits. “The reality is that everyone is fatigued by the pandemic, and at this point everyone knows they should be doing what they can to stay safe, but at this point we’re in a fuck it phase,” said Ben Martin, visiting from Boston. “If the government is telling us to be less careful by cutting quarantine times in half, and we should go back to work, we’re all in the space of like whatever…We don’t have the energy to keep stressing as much.”So, with the London stock market closing early today, it’s time to wrap up. Best wishes for the New Year. We’ll be back next week with the latest business and economic news, and the action in the markets. Happy New Year! GW James Bond has seen off a late challenge from Spider-Man to emerge as the biggest cinema hit of the year, as UK box office earnings almost double from the record lows of 2020 – but the overall popularity of cinema-going still remains well down on pre-pandemic levels. When the final ticket stubs are officially counted, it is forecast that the UK box office will reach £557m this year, almost double the £297m recorded last year, which was the lowest take since 1992. James Bond: No Time To Die provided cinema owners with the pandemic-busting blockbuster they have been waiting for as Bondmania brought film fans back to venues in numbers not seen since before the coronavirus pandemic. Daniel Craig’s final outing as the superspy 007 has made more than £96m at the UK box office this year, making it the third highest grossing film of all-time, after the franchise stablemate Skyfall, and Star Wars: The Force Awakens. The top earner at the UK box office is also the fourth biggest film of the year globally, taking $774m (£575m) to date. The emergence and rapid spread of the Omicron variant has failed to dent the popularity of the latest Hollywood blockbuster, Spider-Man: No Way Home, which has raced to more than £64m at the UK box office in its first two weeks in cinemas.... More here. Over on Wall Street, stocks are struggling to show much action on the final trading day of the year. The Dow Jones industrial average, which hit record highs this week, has slipped by 15 points to 36,383, while the broader S&amp;P 500 index is flat. Many investors have already knocked off for the year, after benefitting from the S&amp;P 500’s 27% surge during 2021. US stocks benefitted from government spending, the Federal Reserve’s stimulus package, and stronger corporate earnings as the economy rebounded. Here’s CNBC’s take: “2021 was another exceptional year for U.S. equity markets,” Wells Fargo Investment Institute’s Chris Haverland said in a note. “The markets were supported by encouraging news on the pandemic and highly accommodative fiscal and monetary policies.” Strong corporate earnings also boosted U.S. stocks, Haverland said. The estimated year-over-year earnings growth rate for 2021 is 45.1%, according to FactSet. That would mark the highest annual earnings growth rate for the index since FactSet began tracking the metric in 2008. The economic and earnings rebound that started in 2020 carried over into 2021, lifting equity markets to record highs. While returns in 2020 were driven by price-to-earnings multiple expansion, returns in 2021 were driven by earnings growth,” Haverland said. Hundreds of daily train services across England, Scotland and Wales are being removed from timetables in an attempt to improve reliability after weeks of cancellations at short notice, according to rail firms. At least eight train operators have either already reduced frequencies on many routes or will do so in the coming days in response to pandemic-related staff shortages. Passengers travelling on New Year’s Eve also face major disruption because of industrial action. The Rail, Maritime and Transport (RMT) union said a 24-hour strike by its members employed by CrossCountry was “solidly supported”, causing the majority of the operator’s services to be cancelled. More here: The more domestically-focused FTSE 250 index of medium-sized UK stocks also had a good year. It gained 14.6% to close at 23,480 points. It hit a record high of 24,353 points back in September after recovering all its pandemic losses earlier this year. British shares have underperformed international markets since the Brexit referendum five years ago, points out Ben Martin in The Times today: While there was relief this year that the UK had avoided a no-deal Brexit through the agreement struck with the European Union in late December 2020, some overseas investors are still waiting to see the long-term effects of the EU vote and have shunned UK equities. European stock markets have outpaced the UK over the last 12 months. The pan-European benchmark, the Stoxx 600, has ended the year up 22%. France’s CAC index had a stellar year, up almost 29%. Germany’s DAX gained nearly 16%, hitting a series of record highs this year. Charalambos Pissouros, head of research at JFD Group, explained that stimulus packages and record low interest rates supported the markets and the economy: “The pandemic-related rescue packages allowed European banks to absorb the shock caused by the contraction in economic activity at the start of the year. “With (ECB) President Lagarde saying that they are unlikely to start raising interest rates in 2022, European banks may continue to benefit.” Some of last year’s ‘pandemic winners’ suffered in 2021, with Ocado falling 26% during the last year. IAG, British Airways’ parent company, fell 10% during 2021 on concerns that the travel recovery will be delayed by the Omicron variant. Ashtead Group, the industrial equipment rental company, was the best-performing FTSE 100 stock this year. It rallied by 73%, after its revenues were boosted by the global economic rebound. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst, Hargreaves Lansdown, explains: Ashtead has roared back into recovery in 2021 after its business renting out construction equipment was severely dented in 2020. As major building sites whirred back into action, particularly in the US, revenue has come flooding back in, lifting shares by 68%. Increased demand from emergency services and key industries like utilities and telecoms has helped buoy results and long term contracts with the Department of Health in the UK has helped its resilience Aerospace group Meggitt surged 58%, following a takeover approach from US rival Parker-Hannifin which is being scrutinized by competition authorities. Mining giant Glencore (+62%) was lifted by rallying commodity prices, while Royal Mail jumped 56% thanks to strong demand for parcel deliveries and its modernisation programme. Specialty chemicals producer Croda gained 53%, after a record performance including producing ingredients used in Covid-19 vaccines. Banks and oil companies also rallied this year, with Lloyds Banking Group gaining 31% and BP up over 29%. Just in: Britain’s blue-chip share index has recorded its best year since 2016. The London stock market has closed for the final time in 2021, with the FTSE 100 index up 14.3% for the year. That’s its third-best year of the last decade, following a 14.34% tumble in 2020 after the pandemic caused markets to crash. Shares were lifted through the year by economic optimism, as Covid-19 vaccine rollouts allowed economies to reopen. Investors shrugged off concerns about inflation and supply chain problems, with shares recovering from their tumble in November after the Omicron variant was discovered. Oil is suffering a bit of a New Year’s Eve hangover, with Brent crude now down 2% at $78 per barrel. Brent is still up around 50% this year, though. US crude (West Texas Intermediate) is also down 2%, but still racking up very solid year, as Retuers explains: Brent is on track to end the year up nearly 52%, its biggest gain since 2016, while WTI is heading for a 56.5% gain, the strongest performance for benchmark contract since 2009, when prices soared more than 70%. Both contracts touched their 2021 peak in October with Brent at $86.70 a barrel, the highest since 2018, and WTI at $85.41 a barrel, the highest since 2014. Britons’ annual spending on ethical products and investments has surpassed £100bn for the first time, as lifestyle changes linked to Covid and the climate crisis stoked demand for plant-based foods, secondhand clothes and furniture, and greener gadgets. The value of the “green” pound surged by nearly a quarter to £122bn in 2020, according to a new Co-op report covering the most recent year for which figures are available. That total was bolstered by £57bn of ethical savings and investments. Shoppers spent £61bn on ethical products and services, which was nearly 30% more than in 2019. That equates to £2,189 a household, a £489 increase. The equivalent figure for 2010 was £1,028. More here: Back in London, the FTSE 100 is ending a good year on a low note. It’s still down this morning, off 24 points or 0.3% at 7379 points, with three-quarters of the index in the red, and an hour’s trading to go. Among sectors, utilities, healthcare, consumer goods and services firms, industrial stocks, financials, miners and tech are lower, while real estate and energy are up. Indian shares have posted in their best year since 2017, driven by an economic recovery from the pandemic-led slump and infusion of massive liquidity. Stocks rallied strongly, even as valuation concerns and a raging new coronavirus variant brought in some caution towards the year-end. The NSE Nifty 50 index of fifty large Indian companies rallied by 24% this year, finishing with a 0.87% rise today, while the benchmark S&amp;P BSE Sensex rose 22% through 2021. India’s blue-chip Nifty 50 was one of the best performer among emerging markets in Asia in 2021, outpacing global markets. Ajit Mishra, VP - Research at Religare Broking, pointed out (via Reuters) that Covid-19 variants and higher borrowing could weigh on the markets in 2022: “What we saw over the past two years was mostly a liquidity supported rally. If the U.S. Federal Reserve goes ahead with a faster than expected tapering and there is reversing of interest rate cycle, then these are definitely going to impact the market. “Almost all the sectors are trying to recover to pre-COVID levels and these kind of repeated infections (like the Omicron variant) will definitely dent the sentiments.” Global stock markets are ending the year close to record highs. The MSCI World Index has surged around 17% this year, and is just 0.5% away from the record highs set in November (before omicron caused a selloff). The flood of stimulus from central bankers and governments which started in the pandemic lifted markets through the year, along with optimism as economies reopened. But after these gains, valuations are relatively high -- which is one of several crosswinds facing markets next year. Matt Weller, global head of research at FOREX.com and City Index, says: Generally speaking, higher starting valuations tend to be associated with lower future returns, though that relationship isn’t particularly strong over short (&lt; 5 year) time horizons. Of course, bulls will argue that elevated valuation ratios are justified given the low yields on bonds, unprecedented liquidity injections, and comparatively high profit margins. Notably, we may already be past “peak stimulus” globally. Across the major developed economies, fiscal policymakers are rapidly looking to rein in deficits to improve their balance sheets and mitigate inflation fears. Meanwhile, most major central banks are similarly looking to “normalize” monetary policy after cutting interest rates to 0% (or below in some cases!) and instituting massive asset purchase programs in recent years. At the margin, government spending and interest rates will likely provide less of a tailwind for global indices in 2022 as compared to 2021 or 2020. But despite the prospect of interest rates edging higher, equities should still benefit from the TINA (“There Is No Alternative”) trade in 2022, Weller adds; Especially with inflation at multi-decade highs, the appeal of holding safe assets like cash and bonds is as low as ever; from massive financial institutions to individual mom-and-pop investors, everyone is feeling pressure to invest in stocks in order to maintain their purchasing power. This dynamic, and the attendant low discount/hurdle rate for making new investments, should support global indices in the coming year. Gold is set for its worst year since 2015, despite its traditional role as a hedge against inflation. Bullion has dropped around 4% during 2021, from $1,900 per ounce in January to $1,817/oz today, in a year when crypto assets such as bitcoin were favoured as protection against expanding money supplies. The prospect of higher interest rates has counted against gold, says Laith Khalaf, head of investment analysis at AJ Bell, as it doesn’t provide any income: The resurgence of inflation has put some pep in the step of goldbugs, though the precious metal has really failed to shine since the early days of the pandemic, when it topped $2,000 an ounce. Part of the problem may be that interest rates are also expected to rise, and as gold pays no income, it looks less attractive by comparison with interest bearing assets like bonds and cash. That dynamic can be expected to deepen in 2022, if central banks tighten policy as expected. The lack of any cash flows also makes the precious metal difficult to value and volatile – there’s a reason Bitcoin is called digital gold. Gold is known as a safe haven, but between 2011 and 2015 investors had to stomach a 40% fall, so it’s not an asset for the faint-hearted. It works best as a small bit of insurance that acts a bit differently to other assets, so it should only make up 5 to 10% of a portfolio at most. From lockdowns and ‘pingdemics’ to petrol panic and supply chain chaos, the last 12 months have been a bumpy ride... relive it all here: Back in the markets, the pound has hit its highest level against the euro since February 2020. Sterling has hit €1.1924, a 22-month high. It’s also trading at a seven-week high against the US dollar. David Madden, market analyst at Equiti Capital, says: Sterling has been trending higher since the Bank of England unexpectedly hiked rates this month. Also playing into the mix is the relatively subdued US dollar. Last month, the greenback hit a 17-month high in the immediate aftermath of the Federal Reserve meeting, but since then it has been rangebound. Although the US dollar has yet to retest the highs it set earlier this month, it hasn’t dropped that much either, in a way it seems as if it is taking a breather. Customers with Nationwide bank accounts have reported problems with delayed incoming payments. Some report they didn’t receive their wages overnight, leaving them unable to buy food, or fuel to get to work, or to pay outgoing bills. Nationwide has tweeted that there was a delay processing incoming payments overnight, and that “everything is now working normally”. But customers are understandably unhappy, especially as Nationwide also suffered system problems in the run-up to Christmas which prevented customers from sending or receiving money. European stock markets have dipped this morning (those which are open, anyway), after a strong 2021. France’s CAC index has slipped by 0.2%, but is still on track for a rollicking 29% gain this year, while the FTSE 100 is still 0.35% lower. In Amsterdam, the AEX is slightly weaker, and up 28% this year. Italy’s FTSE MIB (up 23% in 2021), Spain’s IBEX (+8%), and Germany’s DAX (+16%) are all closed, after helping drive the pan-European Stoxx 600 to a succession of record highs this year. Consumers splashed out on online shopping, takeaways, home improvements and streaming subscriptions in 2021, as ongoing Covid restrictions limited where people could spend their money. Households were more willing to splash their cash in 2021, and spending during the year was almost 6% higher than in 2019, according to a review of transactions by Barclaycard. While non-essential shops remained closed at the start of the year, consumers spent their money online instead. Online retail spending surged by almost 88% in March 2021, compared with 2019, when it accounted for over half (52%) of all retail spend. Spending on essential items rose by 11% over the 12 months, largely driven by supermarket shopping, which grew by more than 17%, as restaurants, cafes, pubs and other hospitality venues remained closed for several months of the year. Spending on takeaways and fast food climbed by 62%. Consumers also spent considerably more on home entertainment, including on digital content and subscriptions, which rose by 47%, and electronics, which saw a 10% uplift in spending. Online grocery shopping, a trend which looks set to continue beyond the pandemic, surged by over 97% during the year..... More here: Many agricultural commodity prices also rose sharply this year, driving up the cost of food. Wheat and corn have gained more than 20% in 2021, lifted by strong demand and tight supplies, and pandemic disruption. Soybean prices hit their highest level since 2012 back in May, but have since dipped back. Both Malaysian palm oil and soybean oil added more than 30%, while arabica coffee rose almost 80% and hit 10-year highs earlier this month. World food prices hit 10-year highs through the year, due to strong demand for wheat and dairy products and weather disruption (such as a severe drought in Brazil and heatwaves in the US) The final trading session is underway.... and stocks are lower in London. The FTSE 100 index has dropped by 33 points, or 0.44%, to 7370 points, away from the 22-month highs seen on Wednesday. Distribution company Bunzl are the top faller, down 2.6%, followed by gambling group Flutter (-1.7%). The blue-chip stock index is still up 14% for the year, though, which would be the best annual performance since 2016. Oil prices are set to post their biggest annual gains in 12 years. Crude prices are up over 50% this year, lifted by the economic recovery from the pandemic, and cautious supply increases by the Opec+ group. Brent crude started 2021 at around $52 per barrel, but is ending the year close to $80/barrel, having hit three-year highs over $86 in October. Energy demand picked up as lockdowns eased and travel resumed, while Opec and its allies supported prices by gradually increasing production each month. Australian brokerage firm CommSec’s Chief Economist Craig James says (via Reuters): “We’ve had Delta and Omicron and all manner of lockdowns and travel restrictions, but demand for oil has remained relatively firm. You can attribute that to the effects of stimulus supporting demand and restrictions on supply.” The jump in oil prices pushed UK petrol prices to their highest level on record this autumn, contributing to the cost of living crisis facing households, and the rising costs being juggled by businesses. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. It’s the final trading day of the year, and what a year it’s been. It began with the GameStop drama, when retail investors piled into meme stocks and battled hedge funds. It was dominated by the pandemic, with vaccines allowing economies to reopen,...and new Covid-19 variants leading to travel restrictions, lockdowns, and supply chain disruption. Equity markets rallied, as corporate profits held up. Commodities surged, pushing up firms’ costs. Central banks continued to stimulate their economies through the year, lifting markets, before persistently high inflation forced some to change tack. The upshot - Britain’s blue-chip FTSE 100 index has gained over 14% as it recovered its losses early in the pandemic, one of its best peformances in the last 20 years. Today is a half-day session, so we’ll have the final score by lunchtime. Frankfurt and Tokyo wrapped things up yesterday, with Germany’s DAX gaining 16% and Japan’s Nikkei up 4.9% to its highest year-end finish since 1989. Wall Street has had a corker of a year, with the S&amp;P 500 index up around 27%, with mega-tech companies driving gains. 2021 has been an excellent year for equity returns, says Richard Flax, CIO at digital wealth manager Moneyfarm. The second half of the year has seen a little more volatility than the first half - thanks largely to the Omicron variant causing uncertainty - but the likes of the US, Europe and Japan have seen strong growth. Butm the situation is a little different for emerging markets and the Asia-Pacific region, Flax adds: EM recorded negative performance in 2021, with the problems really starting in early summertime. The primary reason for this dip in performance is China - the two principle issues affecting the largest economy of the bunch are the resurgence of Covid-19 and some disappointing economic growth figures. The Chinese government’s crackdown on large tech companies has also had an impact on the country’s ability to perform economically. We’ll be tracking the action through the final day of the year, and looking ahead to 2022.One in 25 people in England had Covid last week, rising to one in 15 in London, official figures have revealed. According to figures from the Office for National Statistics, based on swabs collected from randomly selected households, an estimated 4% of people in the community in England had Covid in the week ending 23 December – about 2,024,700 people. The week before, about one in 35 people in England were estimated to have had Covid. The study revealed infections have increased across all regions of the UK as the Omicron variant continues to fuel record numbers. “The highest rates of infections were seen in London, where one in 15 would have tested positive, and the lowest in the north-east of England, where one in 45 would have tested positive for Covid-19,” the report notes. Infection levels also rose in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland in the most recent week, with the latest estimates suggesting that for all three countries about one in 40 people had Covid in the week ending 23 December. The study also reveals that Omicron is now the dominant variant in England and Scotland. “Infection levels have continued to increase across the UK, with England’s increase driven largely by London, which has the highest rate of infection seen in this survey,” said Sarah Crofts, the head of analytical outputs for the Covid-19 Infection Survey. “Omicron is now the dominant variant in both England and Scotland, and has been growing rapidly in Northern Ireland and Wales,” she added. “We’ve also seen infections rise in all age groups, with school-aged children and young adults seeing the highest rates.” The latest figures came as the UK Health Security Agency released an updated analysis on the risks posed by Omicron and vaccine effectiveness against the variant. The findings suggest people with Omicron are about half as likely to go to A&amp;E or be admitted to hospital compared with those with Delta, while the risk of hospital admission alone is approximately a third of that for Delta. These figures take into account a number of factors including age, sex, ethnicity and vaccination status. The report adds further insight into the protection offered by vaccines, revealing that from 20 weeks after the second jab, two doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab offer almost no protection against symptomatic infection with Omicron, with the Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna jabs offering about 10% protection at this point. However, a booster dose improved the situation regardless of the initial type of jab, increasing vaccine effectiveness against symptomatic infection with Omicron to about 65 to 75% two to four weeks later – although this was found to wane to about 40 to 50% from 10 or more weeks after the booster. The UKHSA report also reveals that vaccine effectiveness against hospitalisation with Omicron was estimated to be about 52% at 25 or more weeks after a second Covid jab, increasing to 88% two weeks after a booster dose. The team added they had also estimated, in preliminary analyses, a lower risk of hospitalisation among Omicron cases in school-aged children compared with Delta cases.Since the first cases of Omicron were reported in the UK just over a month ago it has spread rapidly across the UK, fuelling a surge of infections. But scientists have also been working at speed. Here is an overview of the expanding scientific knowledge of Omicron. Spread Soon after the variant was first detected in southern Africa, it became apparent Omicron was highly transmissible. According to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), Omicron is displaying a growth advantage over the Delta variant in the UK. “Although we now have high confidence in a substantial component of immune evasion, the very high growth rate and laboratory findings suggest that an increase in transmissibility may also be contributing,” the latest risk assessment for Omicron notes. The growth of Omicron has been reflected not only in record confirmed case numbers but also in random swab tests taken in the community. According to the latest estimates from the Office for National Statistics, about one in 25 people in England – equating to 2,024,700 – had Covid in the week ending 23 December. Vaccines A number of studies have shown that Omicron has a substantial ability to evade immune responses. According the latest data released on Friday by the UKHSA, two doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid jabs offer little protection against symptomatic infection, while 20 weeks after a second dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech or Moderna jabs, protection against Omicron is only about 10%. However booster vaccinations have been found to ramp up this protection to about 65-75% two to four weeks after the jab, falling to about 40-50% protection from 10 or more weeks after the booster. Data from the insurer Discovery Health and the South African Medical Research Council has suggested protection against severe complications after two jabs was about 70% for Omicron, compared with 90-95% for Delta. But research from Imperial College London has suggested vaccine effectiveness against hospitalisation 60 days after a booster is between 80% and 86% against Omicron, depending on how fast booster protection wanes. Such findings chime with the latest UKHSA data suggesting 88% vaccine effectiveness against hospitalisation two weeks after a booster dose. The NHS announced on Friday that more than three-quarters of adults in England had received their booster. Immune response Some experts have suggested that high levels of protection against severe disease may, in part, be down to the action of different components of the immune system. While the mutations in Omicron mean it has a high capacity to escape neutralising antibodies, research has shown it is less able to dodge the body’s T-cells. However, Prof Danny Altmann, an immunologist at Imperial College London, notes questions remain. “If Omicron has thrived by evading the most potent protection through [neutralising antibodies], it’s unsurprising that the different and numerous T-cell targets are intact, but [we] still lack proof this buys you any protection,” he said. Severe disease Recent research in the UK has backed up early suggestions that Omicron may cause less severe disease than Delta, even for those who are unvaccinated and have not previously been infected. According to the latest figures from the UKHSA, overall, people with Omicron are estimated to be about half as likely to go to A&amp;E or be admitted to hospital compared with those with Delta, while the risk of hospital admission alone is approximately a third of that for Delta. The data also reveals the importance of Covid jabs, noting there is an 81% reduction in the risk of hospitalisation after three doses compared to unvaccinated Omicron cases. Healthcare As experts have pointed out, even if only a small proportion of a very large number of infected people end up in hospital, that is still a large number. And both hospital admissions and the number of Covid patients in hospital are rising. Modelling released by researchers at the University of Warwick on Thursday, yet to be peer-reviewed, suggests that even if Omicron has 50% severity compared with the Delta variant, there could be peaks in the region of 1.4m daily infections, about 9,300-21,3000 daily hospital admissions and 1,800-4,770 deaths a day in January in England. These projections assume England remains under plan B measures only, there is a rapid rollout of booster vaccinations and an efficacy against severe disease with Omicron of 85% after boosting, although experts have cautioned they are based on data from 17 December, meaning some potential scenarios modelled in the work may since have changed. The team also note that shouldthe level of booster protection be higher, the number of individuals requiring hospital admissions would be lower. There are also other uncertainties that could affect the size of the peaks, including whether Omicron has the same generation time as Delta. Prof Christina Pagel, the director of UCL’s Clinical Operational Research Unit, said that even under the team’s optimistic scenarios, hospital admissions are likely to be higher than last January under current plan B measures. “One of the most worrying aspects of their modelling is that time to prevent these hospital pressures was last week or, latest, Boxing Day. If true, this means huge new pressures on the NHS within weeks,” she said.Germany’s leading coronavirus expert has expressed optimism that his country could expect a “relatively normal” winter in 2022-23 as Europe prepared to ring in the new year in muted fashion, with many countries limiting celebrations. As the highly transmissible Omicron variant fuels a record-breaking surge in Covid infections across the continent, many governments have curtailed mass public gatherings and either closed or imposed curfews on nightclubs. But Christian Drosten, who heads the institute of virology at Berlin’s Charité hospital, said on Friday that data from other countries suggesting Omicron infections were milder could take the pandemic into an “endemic situation” more comparable to a common cold or flu virus. “Of course, it is a good situation if you have a virus that no longer makes you ill but transmits easily so that it can seek out and find all of the immunity gaps among the population and still trigger regular updates in immunity,” Drosten said. Nonetheless, the coronavirus expert said he expected indoor mask-wearing mandates and an updated top-up dose of a vaccine to be necessary to protect vulnerable people over the course of the coming year. Germany was at a particular disadvantage because it had a higher percentage than other EU countries of people, especially over 60, who had been neither vaccinated nor infected with the virus, he said, adding: “Those are of course seriously at risk.” In his first new year’s address, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will urge those citizens who have sat out the vaccination drive to change take the jab. As of Friday, 71.2% of Germany is considered fully vaccinated, the lowest vaccination rate in western Europe other than the UK and Switzerland. “It’s clear to all of us: the pandemic is not over”, Scholz said in a pre-released transcript of a speech that will be televised on Friday evening. “I appeal to all of you: let yourself be vaccinated.” After days of sinking infection rates, Germany’s disease control agency reported an increased seven-day incidence of 214.9 for every 100,000 people, with 41,270 new infections and 323 deaths reported in the last 24 hours. Although deaths have not risen as fast as Omicron infections, fuelling hopes the new variant is milder, many countries in Europe and around the world have imposed New Year’s Eve restrictions to help prevent healthcare systems from being overwhelmed. Traditional firework displays have been called off at sites from the Acropolis in Athens to the Champs-Elysées in Paris, while a ban on large gatherings in Berlin means once again Silvester cannot be celebrated at the Brandenburg Gate. Social gatherings across Germany have been limited to 10 people since 28 December, with no exception for New Year’s Eve, while nightclubs are closed and entry to non-essential shops, restaurants and bars is restricted to fully vaccinated people. In France, the prime minister, Jean Castex, called on citizens to act responsibly by limiting the number of guests at parties, testing before attending them and respecting social distancing, but stopped short of imposing a curfew, as was the case last year. Greece has banned music in commercial venues for the night, while in Italy, although no rules have been mandated for private New Year’s Eve gatherings, mass outdoor events have been banned and nightclubs will stay closed until the end of January. In Belgium, communal celebrations such as the new year fireworks display in Brussels have been called off, and restaurants and bars must shut their doors at 11pm. The country’s nightclubs were already closed. The Netherlands’ national lockdown, in force since 19 December, remains, with non-essential shops and bars and restaurants closed until 14 January – although people are allowed four visitors on New Year’s Eve rather than the usual limit of two. In Austria, unvaccinated people – currently required to stay at home except for essential reasons – may join gatherings of up to 10 people for new year. For larger parties of up to 25, everyone must be vaccinated. Nightclubs and apres-ski venues remain closed until at least 10 January. Bars and nightclubs were forced to close from Christmas Day and outdoor gatherings have been limited to 10 people on New Year’s Eve in Portugal, while in Finland bars and restaurants in many regions will have to close at 6pm and limit numbers. With countries around the world urgently seeking to increase the number of people to have received a third booster shot of a Covid-19 vaccine, Israel on Friday began giving an additional jab to people with weakened immunity. The health ministry approved a fourth shot for immunocompromised people on Thursday and heart transplant patients were among the first to get this – to be followed by retirement home residents and geriatric patients. “This decision was taken for fear of an increase in cases of contamination in such institutions that would endanger the health of these people,” the health ministry said. The prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said Israel, which was among the first countries in the world to offer a third shot to the general public, will be a trailblazer for the fourth jab. “Israel will lead the way,” he said.Southampton have complained to the Premier League over what they perceive as a lack of transparency after their home match against Newcastle became the latest to be postponed. The game, scheduled for Sunday, was called off on Friday because Newcastle, for the second time in four days, have a shortage of available players owing to Covid and injury. The Premier League board accepted an application from Newcastle, whose trip to Everton on Thursday also did not go ahead, for a postponement. League rules state that matches can be rearranged if clubs have fewer than 13 outfield players and one goalkeeper available, but there is mounting frustration at the blurred lines between players being absent because of Covid and injury. Southampton are among numerous clubs who believe they should be informed of the numbers behind a postponement. Newcastle’s Allan Saint-Maximin, Callum Wilson and Ryan Fraser sustained injuries against Manchester United on Monday, adding to the absentee list. Southampton feel they were operating under similarly challenging circumstances when injuries saw them field a youthful team in a 9-0 defeat at Old Trafford last season. “There were times where we had nine out – and we played academy players,” the Southampton manager, Ralph Hasenhüttl, said this week. “Injuries are not Covid cases. They [Newcastle] had seven or eight players on the bench during their last game. They should still have 13 players plus one [goalkeeper].” Clubs must declare which “appropriately experienced” under-21 players are available. Premier League rules on the suspension of matches have been the subject of much scrutiny, with Arsenal’s Mikel Arteta one of the managers to call for greater clarity. The rules were adjusted in light of the spread of the Omicron Covid variant and just before Christmas the league published a guide to match postponements that gave “more details on the process by which recent fixtures have had to be called off”. The guide confirms that postponement decisions are taken by the Premier League board after an application by a club. Clubs must make a case for postponement but also list players who have taken a positive Covid test, and list their vaccination status. Medical information on injured players must also be shared, with the league’s medical officers reserving the right to crosscheck the information with club doctors. Further considerations can also be applied. These include the possibility of an outbreak occurring too close to a fixture to be able to establish all those infected, and the inability of a team to prepare safely for a match, for example where the UK Health Security Agency has requested the closure of their training ground. In recent weeks the Premier League has had meetings with club executives and managers at which the postponement process has been discussed. Jürgen Klopp has said Liverpool have recorded three new positive Covid-19 cases but the manager does not believe Sunday’s game at Chelsea is close to being called off. The manager declined to name the trio because they are awaiting PCR test confirmations but those affected, plus Thiago Alcântara and Takumi Minamino, will be missing. “Taki is running outside, Thiago not,” Klopp said. “On top of that we have three new Covid cases in the team and a few more in the staff so it’s not so cool in the moment. I’m not able to say who it is but it’ll be pretty clear on the teamsheet the day after tomorrow. “We aren’t close to getting the game postponed yet. We haven’t had a proper outbreak yet but it’s happening more and more often. It’s like a lottery in the morning when you wait for the result. It was day-by-day pretty much another case and today another one.”My wife, Ruth Freeman, who has died aged 67 of breast cancer, was a researcher, author, and teacher in dental public health. Unusually, she was also a practising psychoanalytic psychotherapist. In her public health role, much of her work focused on people being unable to access the dental care they needed. Born in Glasgow, Ruth was the daughter of Joan (nee Goldblatt), a medical social worker, and Tom Freeman, a renowned psychoanalyst. Her formative years were spent at the groundbreaking Demonstration School, Dundee, where children were taught through a series of projects. After then attending Belfast Royal Academy, she began her dental training at Queen’s University Belfast, qualifying in 1974. After a master’s in dental public health at University College London, she returned to Queen’s as a lecturer and began her research in health promotion, working partly with young children frightened of the dentist. She was appointed the first female professor at Queen’s dental school in 2000. Ruth trained in psychotherapy with her father and practised from the family home in Antrim. In 2006 she became professor of dental public health research at the University of Dundee. Here her focus was on minority groups without easy access to dental care. She developed two nationally funded Scottish government programmes to improve the oral health of homeless people and those in prison. The work is continuing. She also set up her own psychotherapy practice at her home in Newport. Ruth was a member of the British Psychoanalytic Council and a fellow of the Faculty of Public Health, Royal College of Physicians (UK). These overlapping interests motivated her focus on the needs of minority care groups. Drawn to the work of Anna Freud on children and adolescents, Ruth edited Anna Freud: Selected Writings (1998) for Penguin Classics, with Richard Ekins as her co-editor. Ruth possessed the unusual qualities of making research fun and engaging both for her colleagues and the people she sought to help. She also wrote many books, including Psychology of Dental Patient Care: the Common-sense Approach (2000); Preparing for Dental Practice (2004), with Trevor Burke; and Communication in General Practice (2006). She had recently written papers for an international research group on the social exclusion of many people through economic, political, cultural and individual factors. She was concerned that too many were not getting the oral healthcare that they needed, not only in developing but also developed societies. She had also completed a paper for the BMJ about emotional exhaustion in Scottish dental staff. She retired from her own practice in April and from the University of Dundee in August. Outside her work, she was interested in gardening, pottery and pen-and-ink illustration. Ruth and I first met at a dental conference in London and eventually married in 2014. She is survived by her brother, Robert, and me.“The future is far from certain,” says Julian Pariera, the owner of Beauchamp Laundry Services in Birmingham. “I’m extremely concerned at how things are panning out.” Pariera is one of thousands of small business owners across the UK who will bear the brunt of the national energy crisis that risks driving the UK to a cost of living catastrophe within the next year. Before next winter, he will need to renegotiate an energy deal to run the washers and clothes dryers that his customers rely on after a record surge in energy market prices. “We fix our energy tariffs for up to five years, and every time we renew a deal it seems to double. This time I won’t be surprised if our energy costs quadruple. It’s madness,” he says. “These costs can’t be reflected in our charges because if we put up our prices by this much our customers wouldn’t be able to afford it. So the question I have to ask myself is how we can manage while still protecting our customers?” “The government talks about getting business back on track after Covid – and I’m not saying they’re doing a bad job – but with these cost pressures it’s just ridiculous. We’ll carry on somehow because this business has been in place for the last 30 years – we’re established – but if we were just starting out we wouldn’t manage,” Pariera says. For now, it is still more affordable for many of Beauchamp Laundry’s customers to bring in damp clothes and linen to be tumble dried during the winter than to run their own dryers at home, Pariera says. But at some point in the next year he may need to adjust his dryers to offer fewer minutes for each pound spent. These concerns are shared by small business owners across the country, which employ almost 13 million staff and make £1.6tn in turnover every year. The Federation of Small Businesses has warned that energy costs are the top concern of its members and could prove to be “an existential threat”, particularly for the fragile end of the small business sectors that were hardest hit by Covid-19 restrictions. Ibrahim Dogus, the owner of three restaurants near the London Eye (who is also a Labour party councillor for Lambeth), says a “vicious circle” of rising costs and falling revenue endemic across the hospitality industry means even longstanding eateries in prime locations are struggling to secure affordable energy deals. Many suppliers refuse to offer contracts to restaurants without a hefty security deposit, or charge eye-watering rates to guard against the risk they might go under, he says. “Before the recent price hike I’d pay between £2,500 and £3,000 a month for energy at one restaurant. But my latest bill for November was £5,600. At the same time, turnover has fallen to between 10% and 15% of what it used to be. Before the pandemic we might serve 600 people; these days it’s closer to 60. But our costs are still climbing. We’re quite worried,” he says. Dogus has already cut his staff from 60 to 25, made use of the government’s support schemes, and negotiated payment plans to manage the debt he owes to his landlords and pay business rates. But energy companies are the exception, he says, and this could prove the difference between whether his chain survives or not. “Energy companies are not interested in helping at all. If you don’t pay in full for a couple of months someone comes to turn off your lights. Never mind that you can’t pay them if you can’t serve customers. It would be over,” he says. “It’s a very difficult moment for small businesses. There’s been Brexit, there’s been Covid. But on top of everything else, energy costs could be the breaking point,” he says. • This article was amended on 4 January 2022 to add the detail that Dogus is also a Labour party councillor for Lambeth.My friend Terence O’Malley, who has died aged 79, was an inspirational teacher who became a passionate campaigner for the rights and welfare of the people of Afghanistan, and chairman since 2000 of Safe, the Irish aid organisation for Afghanistan. Terry was fired by a deep sense of injustice at the neglect by foreign powers of their former battleground in Afghanistan. In 2001, a month after the September 11 attacks, he wrote in the Irish Times of that neglect and of the aid efforts that had been hampered by a failure to grasp local nuances of behaviour and custom. The exceptions occurred when aid workers “who had spent many years working among the Afghans … knew and understood Afghan tribal customs and identified with them and were privileged to have Afghans as close friends”. In that spirit (and for comfort) he wore local dress when visiting remote communities on horseback, immersed himself in the culture – and made friends. He put his trust in Afghans and sought partnership with local NGOs, initially helping to educate young people for the reconstruction effort, later laying more emphasis on direct aid for rural development projects. The rights of Afghan women were a key concern. Terry aided Mary Akrami, who founded the first women’s shelters in Kabul. He was equally intent on creating the conditions for change, knowing that a Safe-funded school where girls would study alongside boys was a gateway to their liberation. Terry was born in Oldham, Greater Manchester, the son of Marion (nee Hilton) and George O’Malley. George’s job with ICI took the family to County Dublin when Terry was five and he was schooled at Midleton College, Cork, the High School Dublin and Trinity College Dublin, where he studied science and mathematics. Already he was drawn to the east: embarking for India straight after university, he spent six happy years managing tea estates in Assam. He and Patricia Daybell were married in Dibrugarh, Assam, in 1968 – they had known each other for years in Ireland. Back in Ireland, they worked shoulder to shoulder at Aravon preparatory school, south of Dublin, where Terry was headteacher for 20 years from 1977. The enthusiasm and sense of adventure that had taken him to India, and led him to get involved in Safe (Support for Afghan Further Education) in the 1990s, were part of what made Terry a gifted educator. Long before science became part of the Irish primary school curriculum, his pupils were engrossed in breeding locusts in the classroom – to name one award-winning project. He drew the children into his own passion for cricket and other sports, for drama, music and much more. Behind his old-school gravitas and pursuit of high standards lay a belief in education in the fullest sense of the word, and a warm, deep and thoroughly modern rapport with his pupils, in many cases lasting long after they had left school and until his final days. He is survived by Patricia, his daughters, Kate, Clare and Lucy, son, Jamie, his sister, Barbara, and seven grandchildren.The financial markets climbed a wall of worry through 2021, as investors drove up asset prices in the face of persistently high inflation, a global supply chain crisis and one of the most frenzied speculative booms in decades. Shares rallied to record levels as money poured into stocks, deal-making soared and the gamification of investing hit new heights. Here are some of the biggest moments from a rollercoaster year. Meme stock mayhem The year’s drama began on Wall Street, where groups of retail traders teamed up through online forums to attempt one of the biggest short squeezes in market history. Organised through Reddit’s Wall Street Bets group, they homed in on beaten-down stocks that hedge funds had shorted (by selling borrowed stock, planning to buy it back cheaper in future). In a frenzy that gripped Wall Street, the WSB army used two weapons to cut down the hedgies: call options – derivatives that gave the right to buy shares at a certain price – and memes, to fuel their orchestrated buying, as they tapped into public distaste for predatory speculators. The phenomenon started with GameStop, the US video game retailer, driving its share price up an astonishing 1,700% in a month, and briefly causing the markets to wobble as hedge funds ran up huge losses trying to buy borrowed stock back. But this squeeze was dramatically, and controversially, punctured after trading app Robinhood curbed share buying. It blamed demands from its clearing houses; r/wallstreetbets cried foul, although a lawsuit claiming a conspiracy with market-maker Citadel Securities was thrown out last month. The saga resulted in a new vocabulary entering the markets, with “diamond-handed” traders refusing to fold their positions, and others crying “yolo” (you only live once) as they embarked on risky but potentially lucrative trades. This GameStop frenzy was repeated with the cinema group AMC, the retail chain Bed Bath &amp; Beyond and the car rental group Avis, flaring up several times in the year. These rallies ended in tears for some retail traders, who were left holding the bag as the meme stocks dropped back. But despite a tumble in late December, GameStop is still up 700% this year, with AMC about 1,200% higher. Spacs race Special purpose acquisition companies (Spacs) – created to buy other, as yet unknown companies – also boomed early in the year, before fizzling out as some performed badly. By December a fund that tracked Spacs was down more than 20% for the year, while the S&amp;P 500 was up more than a quarter. This speculative fever was fuelled by a lot of money sloshing around the system, thanks to record low interest rates and pandemic stimulus programmes. “The big theme remains how the price of all financial assets remains grossly inflated both on a relative and outright basis,” says Bill Blain, a strategist at Shard Capital. ‘Monetary distortion’ Central bankers continued their ultra-loose monetary policy through 2021, repeatedly soothing the markets that rising prices would be temporary. America’s Federal Reserve kept buying $120bn (£89bn) of bonds each month, but finally started to taper the programme in November as inflation hit its highest level in decades. This “monetary distortion” has warped the way people think about capitalist free markets, Blain argues. “Distorted financial asset prices create all kinds of unintended consequences – from stalling the normal ‘business cycle’ by allowing obsolete zombie companies to survive, stifling and distorting business evolution, to facilitating the misdirection of capital within the economy.” Or, as the Wall Street Bets crowd put it, “money printer go brrr”. Cryptomania These massive distortions were most evident in the cryptocurrency market, where the combined value of bitcoin, ethereum and newer entrants such as solano reached $3tn in the summer, before prices chilled later in the year. Crypto did hit some key milestones – El Salvador became the first country to make bitcoin legal tender, in a launch marred by technical glitches – but there were also several jolting crashes, including a Chinese crackdown on bitcoin mining. After hitting record highs of about $69,000, bitcoin ends the year below $50,000, up 64% for the year. Supply chain shocks Supply chain problems gripped the global economy, with big consequences for commodity stocks. Covid disruption to trade networks and factory production was exacerbated after the Ever Given container ship became wedged in the Suez canal in March. While iron ore and copper experienced volatility, lumber prices really stood out. They surged in the first half of 2021, jumping 400% to a peak of $1,700 per thousand board feet in May amid short supplies. But prices then tumbled as builders put construction projects on ice. Agricultural inflation hit people in the pocket, too. Global food prices reached 10-year highs, with corn and wheat up 20%, and arabica coffee bean prices gaining 80%. Had investors known on 1 January that US inflation would reach 6.8%, a 39-year high, by November, they would have be forgiven for investing in gold. But the traditional hedge against inflations had its worst year since 2015, losing about 4% and lagging behind many other assets. Inflation also affected fixed-income assets, with global bond markets on course for their worst year since 1999. Overall, the UK’s FTSE 100 had a solid year, gaining about 14%. Wall Street saw strong gains, with the Nasdaq Composite up 21% and the broad S&amp;P 500 index surging 28% over the year, including a remarkable 70 record highs. Tech stock Big tech grew ever more powerful, with Apple, Google, Microsoft, Nvidia and Tesla accounting for more than a third of the S&amp;P 500’s returns this year. But smaller, less profitable tech stocks tumbled, as their pandemic sales growth slowed and the US Federal Reserve moved towards raising interest rates next year, dampening their appeal as growth stocks. An index of unprofitable US tech stocks created by Goldman Sachs was pummelled in November. By the end of the year, the bull market in tech IPOs has turned into a bear, with most US tech floats at least 20% off their highest point. Video-conferencing operator Zoom fell by 45% during the year, while Peloton flopped 75% close to its pre-pandemic lows, dragged down by a reluctant cameo in Sex and the City. “At the outer extreme, stocks that wouldn’t have looked out of place in the tech bubble of 2000/2001 are 60% lower on average than earlier in the year,” points out David Miller, the Quilter Cheviot investment director. “Chinese technology companies are down a similar amount, but for different reasons. The growth-to-value rotation still being trotted out by one-trick-pony strategists looks like it might already have happened.” China crisis Beijing gave the markets several scares, with the indebted property group Evergrande threatening to cause a messy collapse, and jolt the Chinese economy. In the summer, President Xi Jinping launched a crackdown on technology companies, sending shares in overseas-listed companies such as ride-hailing service Didi plunging. Curbs on the education sector, and tighter controls on children playing video games, also rattled some stocks. Takeover frenzy It was a record year for global merger and acquisition (M&amp;A) activity, with stacks of capital and sky-high valuations leading to a whirl of deal-making. The value of M&amp;A globally topped $5tn for the first time ever, according to Dealogic data, beating the record of $4.42tn set in 2007, before the financial crisis. But the veteran investor Charlie Munger had a word of caution this month. Munger, 97, told a conference that the markets are wildly overvalued in places, warning that “I consider this era an even crazier era than the dotcom era.”UK regulators have approved Pfizer’s “life-saving” antiviral drug Paxlovid, which boasts nearly 90% success in preventing severe illness among vulnerable adults if taken soon after becoming infected with Covid-19. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) found the oral treatment “to be safe and effective at reducing the risk of hospitalisation and death in people with mild to moderate Covid-19 infection, who are at an increased risk of developing severe disease”. The agency said Paxlovid was most effective when taken during the early stages of a Covid infection, and recommended it was used within five days of a patient’s first symptoms. The approval is for patients aged 18 and over with at least one risk factor for developing severe illness, such as obesity or diabetes, or being over 60. Dr June Raine, the MHRA’s chief executive, said: “We now have a further antiviral medicine for the treatment of Covid-19 that can be taken by mouth rather than administered intravenously. This means it can be administered outside a hospital setting, before Covid-19 has progressed to a severe stage. “I hope the announcement gives reassurance to those particularly vulnerable to Covid-19, for whom this treatment has been approved. For these individuals, this treatment could be life-saving.” Before Christmas Pfizer said the UK government had agreed to purchase 2.5m courses of Paxlovid after an earlier purchase of 250,000 doses, conditional on regulatory approval. The MHRA noted that Paxlovid was “not a substitute for vaccination”, and said vaccines and boosters remained the best way to avoid being hospitalised because of Covid. Pfizer has said the drug showed near 90% efficacy in preventing hospitalisations and deaths in high-risk patients, with recent data suggesting the pill was also effective against the Omicron variant. In a clinical trial involving high-risk adults with Covid, Paxlovid reduced the rate of severe illness by 89% compared with a placebo group. Just three out of 389 patients were hospitalised or died from Covid-19 after taking the drug within three days of symptoms, compared with 27 out of 385 in the placebo group. Scientists said Paxlovid worked through protease inhibitors, which prevent a virus from replicating. These were similar to those used to treat HIV, making it beneficial for patients with weak immune systems. The two parts of Paxlovid, nirmatrelvir (PF-07321332) and ritonavir, are taken together, twice a day for five days. PF-07321332 is a new antiviral, while ritonavir – which slows the breakdown of PF-07321332 within the liver to increase its effectiveness – is already used alongside HIV medications. However, ritonavir can interfere with the functioning of other drugs through the liver, meaning Paxlovid may not be offered if patients cannot pause existing courses of medication. Prof Munir Pirmohamed, the chair of the MHRA’s commission on human medicines, said its coronavirus expert working group had endorsed the agency’s approval of Paxlovid, calling it “another safe and effective treatment” against Covid-19. “As it is deployed, we will monitor its effectiveness and safety in the real world, including any drug interactions, as we do with all medicines,” he said. The MHRA has already approved an antiviral pill, molnupiravir, made by Merck. But its results have been disappointing and it may be only about 30% effective in preventing hospitalisation. There have also been concerns raised over molnupiravir’s potential to lead to further variants.The Ghislaine Maxwell case raises so many questions, and yet scarcely discussed is the one that perhaps matters most. Naturally, there’s huge interest in whether Maxwell, convicted this week of recruiting and grooming teenage girls for sex with her one-time boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein, will seek to reduce her sentence by naming names – opening up the pair’s notorious little black book and telling prosecutors who else among the rich and powerful abused the vulnerable minors Maxwell trafficked for sex. In Britain, much of that interest focuses on Epstein’s longtime pal, Prince Andrew, who was so close to the couple he invited them on visits to Balmoral, Sandringham and Windsor: it’s lucky the prince doesn’t sweat, because if he did, he might be drenched now. So far he has refused to answer US investigators’ questions – not for his own sake, you understand, but according to multiple reports, to save the Queen from embarrassment. Because a 61-year-old man hiding behind his 95-year-old mother would not be in the least bit mortifying. There are other questions, such as: how many others enabled the travelling child abuse ring that Epstein and Maxwell operated, turning a blind eye to what was surely obvious? Or: when else would the BBC respond to the conviction of a child sex offender by interviewing a brother of the offender who refused to accept the verdict of the court? And how come that Today programme interview with Ian Maxwell came so soon after the BBC had given a platform to one of Epstein’s lawyers, presenting him as if he were merely a neutral expert? All those questions matter, and yet the one that preys on my mind is more timeless. It’s the question that arises in all such cases of human cruelty yet which one hesitates to ask, lest the inquiry seem naive: why? The coverage of Maxwell has probed that a bit, suggesting for example that Ghislaine Maxwell was conditioned, as the daughter of the publishing magnate Robert Maxwell, to cater to the whims of a monstrous man, and simply transferred her allegiance, and her service, from one monster to another. Growing up surrounded by wealth and power, where the deference of officialdom was taken for granted, would have had its effect too. Ghislaine Maxwell may well have assumed that people like her and Epstein were granted a special kind of impunity, that they could break the laws that restrained the appetites of lesser mortals, because for most of her life that had indeed been the case. And yet, both those answers are unsatisfying as explanations. There are plenty of abusers who did not grow up with either a Maxwell-style father or Maxwell-level wealth and, conversely, there are people whose upbringings were comparable to Ghislaine Maxwell’s but who did not go on to commit terrible crimes. So the why question lingers, just as it did in sharper and more horrific form at least twice in the last month alone. December 2021 began with convictions for the father and stepmother of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes in a case so appalling, I confess at the time I could barely read accounts of it. The six-year-old was subjected to a regime of sustained torture which was, incredibly, filmed by those who inflicted it. The little boy was made to stand in isolation for up to 14 hours at a time, without anything to eat or drink. He was beaten. To punish him, his father took the football shirts he loved and cut them to shreds in front of him. Perhaps most unbearable of all, the jury was shown footage of a weak and frail Arthur shortly before his death saying: “No one loves me. No one is going to feed me.” When the man and woman guilty of destroying Arthur’s brief life were found guilty, there was revulsion, of course – and on Friday their sentences were referred to the court of appeal for being too lenient – but the public conversation moved without pause for breath to the policy implications. There was intense debate about the state of children’s services, about the damage done by austerity, about target-driven culture, about the recruitment and retention of social workers and so on. But what was missing was a much less sophisticated question. Why would two people do such terrible things to a defenceless child? How could a father cause such pain to his own flesh and blood? There was a similar reflex 11 days later, following the verdicts in the equally soul-draining case of Star Hobson, a child, a baby really, who died at just 16 months, having been punched to death by her mother’s partner as her mother did nothing to save her. Once again, the pair filmed their months of cruelty against the little girl, apparently finding the videos amusing enough to send to friends. And yet the immediate talk was not of how two people could do such a thing, but of a local “child safeguarding practice review” and whether control of children’s services should belong with the local council or the Department for Education. I understand the impulse to concentrate on these institutional, bureaucratic issues. The assumption is that there will always be people capable of horrendous brutality, that that fact will never change, and so the sensible focus of our attention should be on prevention. I get that. And yet the sheer speed with which we move to technocratic answers, barely even asking the harder human questions, begins to look like displacement activity. It’s as if we can’t bring ourselves to contemplate the puzzle of what humans are capable of, because we have no idea what we’d say. Earlier, God-fearing generations did not find this so difficult. Nor do those who still have traditional faith. They have recourse to a vocabulary that includes the notion of evil and wickedness and that allows them to talk about it. But those words don’t trip so easily off the secular tongue. Instead, we look for explanations in psychology or economics, assuming, to adapt Stephen Sondheim’s lyric, that if people are depraved it’s because they’re deprived, whether of love or money. That view persists. There was an echo of it in the closing argument from Maxwell’s defence lawyer, when she asked “why an Oxford-educated, proper English woman would suddenly agree to facilitate sex abuse of minors”. Only the poor or poorly educated behave badly. We can see the flaw in such reasoning, even before you get to the insult it delivers to all those who endured great privation, emotional or material, without becoming abusers. And yet, the absence of easy answers does not give us a licence to stop asking hard questions. We need to be able to stare wicked acts and evil deeds in the face, rather than to comfort ourselves that they exist solely as functions of failed systems, errors that could be eliminated given the right policy tweak. This need not be a bleak endeavour. I think of Julie K Brown, the Miami Herald reporter without whose fearless pursuit of Epstein’s crimes this week’s reckoning might never have come. I think of the courage of the victims, who kept up the fight for justice at great cost. Unfathomable evil is part of the human story, but so too is unimaginable good. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistA law banning plastic packaging for large numbers of fruits and vegetables comes into force in France on New Year’s Day, to end what the government has called the “aberration” of overwrapped carrots, apples and bananas, as environmental campaigners and exasperated shoppers urge other countries to do the same. Emmanuel Macron has called the ban on plastic packaging of fresh produce “a real revolution” and said France was taking the lead globally with its law to gradually phase out all single-use plastics by 2040. Spain will introduce a ban on plastic packaging of fruit and vegetables from 2023. For years, international campaigners have said unnecessary plastic packaging is causing environmental damage and pollution at sea. From New Year’s Day, France will ban supermarkets and other shops from selling cucumbers wrapped in plastic, and peppers, courgettes, aubergines and leeks in plastic packaging. A total of 30 types of fruit and vegetables will be banned from having any plastic wrapping, including bananas, pears, lemons, oranges and kiwis. Packs over 1.5kg will be exempt, as will chopped or processed fruit. Some varieties, including cherry tomatoes or soft fruits such as raspberries and blueberries, will be given longer for producers to find alternatives to plastic, but plastic packaging will be gradually phased out for all whole fruits and vegetables by 2026. With an estimated 37% of fruit and vegetables sold wrapped in plastic packaging in France in 2021, the government believes the ban will cut more than 1bn items of single-use plastic packaging a year. The environment ministry said there must be curbs on the “outrageous amount of single-use plastic in our daily lives”. Fruit and vegetables wrapped in layers of plastic have exasperated consumers not only in France but neighbouring countries. Nearly three-quarters of British people have experienced “anxiety, frustration or hopelessness” at the amount of plastic that comes with their shopping and 59% think supermarkets and brands are not doing enough to offer refillable, reusable or packaging-free products, according to a poll commissioned by Friends of the Earth and City to Sea in June. An Ifop poll for the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) France in 2019 found that 85% of people were in favour of banning single-use plastic products and packaging. More than 2 million people have signed a WWF petition calling on world governments to stop the plastics pollution crisis. In angry posts on social media, shoppers have complained of what they deemed absurd wrapping such as coconuts in several layers of plastic or single bananas in individual plastic bags. Moïra Tourneur, an advocacy manager at the NGO Zero Waste France, said the French law was a “good and appropriate” move, although she questioned what she called the “surprising” list of exempt fruit and vegetables given a longer transition time of at least another year before going plastic-free. These include brussels sprouts, spring onions, green beans, broccoli, mushrooms, peaches and apricots, some of which are already sold loose in many shops. Tourneur said: “The ban is fair and fitting … Giving more time for certain fruit and vegetables is a bit of a shame. There is a climate emergency. People are conscious of the need to act urgently on this issue.” WWF France, which has campaigned on the impact of plastics on biodiversity and marine life in the Mediterranean and across oceans, said it was important to welcome the law as “a positive step in the right direction”, while reminding governments there was more work to be done to end plastics pollution, including on microplastics. Pierre Cannet, its director of advocacy and campaigns, said the law sent a positive message and “puts plastics at the heart of the national debate”. He added: “We need to stay humble and vigilant by saying there is still a lot to do. We’re still very far from an economy without plastic, and from all the steps needed to eradicate plastics pollution.” Camilla Zerr, a plastics campaigner at Friends of the Earth for England, Wales and Northern Ireland, said: “I think it’s a very good approach and I would hugely urge the UK to be doing the same and not to lag behind.” She said that in the UK fruit such as bananas or apples wrapped in plastic packages were sometimes cheaper than those sold loose, which was “very problematic”. Zerr added: “It is interesting to note that in the UK the main brands sell fruit and vegetables wrapped, but at corner stores you can find a lot of loose fruit and vegetables on sale, which proves it is possible to go without plastic.”The current average daily price of a level 3 intensive care bed in an NHS hospital is £1,932. In the hospital where I work, as in all others, the overwhelming majority of people in intensive care with Covid are unvaccinated. Boris Johnson could afford to treble or quadruple the $100 being offered to New Yorkers who get vaccinated and save the NHS a fortune, to say nothing of the beneficial impact on the wider economy. Jullien Gaer London • The Rev Geoffrey Lang claims that the real breakthrough will come when a father brings his baby into the Commons (Letters, 29 December). The breakthrough occurred in 2014, when the Lib Dem MP Duncan Hames did just that. Simon Fisher Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire • At my grammar school in Bristol in the mid-1950s, I was taught to scrub a wooden kitchen table – a skill that I have not put to use in all my 80 years (Letters, 28 December). Vivien Berry Spalding, Lincolnshire • A year after Brexit took full effect, perhaps now is the right time for an article detailing all the positive aspects of the deal for the UK. Alternatively, you could just have the headline “Brexit benefits”, and leave the rest of the page blank. Sarah Pegg Edinburgh • I’m determined to get a letter published in your print edition on 1 January so that, just for one day, I can say I’ve had a letter published every day in 2022. Toby Wood Peterborough, Cambridgeshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The number of confirmed Covid cases in the UK continued to rise on the last day of 2021, with a new record of 189,846 reported in the previous 24 hours. It follows two consecutive days when the number of new cases was above 180,000, with 189,213 reported on Thursday and 183,037 on Wednesday – although the latter included a backlog in some nations of cases recorded before and during the Christmas period. Experts said the latest figures are likely to include the first infections arising from people socialising on Christmas Day and Boxing Day. NHS England also revealed there were 2,370 hospital admissions with Covid in England on 29 December, a 90% week-on-week increase and the highest daily total since 29 January. In the last winter wave, admissions peaked at 4,134 on 12 January. Experts say the daily case figures do not include reinfections and not everyone who is infected has symptoms and takes a test, suggesting the true number of infections is likely to be higher. Friday’s figures reported 203 people having died within 28 days of a positive Covid test. Thursday’s data had 332 recorded deaths, a steep rise from 57 on Wednesday, explained in part by NHS England not reporting hospital deaths since 24 December. The number of Covid patients in hospital in England increased to 12,395 on Friday, from 11,452 the day before. A total of 859 people were in hospital in Scotland with Covid as of Thursday, up from 810 the day before. According to a new estimate on Friday from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), one in 25 people in England had Covid before Christmas, including one in 15 in London. Based on swabs collected from randomly selected households in England, the ONS said an estimated 4% of the community had Covid in the week ending 23 December – equating to about 2,024,700 people. The week before, about one in 35 people were estimated to be infected.Having read the stories in your “How I returned from rock bottom” series and your report on children’s social care (29 December), can I encourage anyone looking for an adventure or challenge in 2022 to consider fostering or mentoring teenagers for a while? As a foster carer to teenagers for several years, I met some amazing youngsters. All of them were far braver than I was at their age about moving in with a stranger, sometimes at short notice. Some I am still in touch with, others I remember and worry about, but being a foster carer was never dull, often fun and always interesting. A slogan on an advert for foster carers a few years back said “the life you change will be your own”. This is true, and some life experience, a sense of the ridiculous and, perhaps, a cat or dog are really all you need. Eileen Flinter London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As your leader argues (27 December), the platinum jubilee will not only celebrate the Queen’s long reign but also start to raise questions about the next one. After accession, the new sovereign has to make three statutory oaths: to be a true and faithful Protestant; to uphold the Church of Scotland; and to uphold the rights and privileges of the Church of England. In our more secular and pluralist society, these oaths need to be revised and updated. But revision would require fresh legislation, which needs to be passed during the present reign to be in time for the next accession. Parliament could consider this, as your leader suggests, along with other royal matters, perhaps in a joint committee of both houses. We suggested possible revisions of the oaths in 2018. And our 2020 book about the other European monarchies – The Role of Monarchy in Modern Democracy – offers comparative lessons on what to expect of a modern monarchy. Prof Robert Hazell and Dr Bob Morris The Constitution Unit, University College London • Your leader put forward a useful proposal regarding reform of the monarchy. But we know that under the present government (or indeed under a future Labour government) there is zero chance of such reforms. The best hope for reform of the feudal monarchy, under which we are all subjects, rather than citizens, is for Charles III to be as disastrous a king as his namesake ancestor 400 years ago. Then, perhaps, parliament will take control. One lives in hope. Mark Flinn Chester • The only way to modernise the monarchy is to turn the country into a republic. Peggy Thomas Hebden Bridge, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.It amuses me to think of Tim Dowling having respect for Marmite eaters, now that he’s plucked up strength to try it after 30 years (Escape your comfort zone: My voyage through the foods I’ve avidly avoided – from baked beans to Marmite, 25 December). He probably doesn’t realise that it was recommended food for babies and small children in Britain in the late 1940s, regarded as a good source of vitamin B. This remained the case even after I had my own children in the 1970s, until some experts expressed concern over the high salt content. So, Tim, many of us did not bravely choose Marmite, but were weaned on to it before we could speak. Susan Treagus Manchester • Well now, Tim, you might feel more inclined to eat a smidgen of Marmite regularly if you knew that the vitamin B in it helps to repel mosquitoes. I have always loved the thinnest spread of Marmite on a finger of toast or cream cracker, and since having a little daily have not been bitten as much. Catherine Roome Staplehurst, Kent • Despite Tim Dowling’s anxiety, we are indebted to Marmite. When, in March 2020, my husband and I suddenly felt unspeakably tired and wretched, all we ate for a whole week was toast and Marmite. It was the only food that these two early sufferers from Covid could manage. A brilliant pick-me-up. Janet Mansfield Aspatria, Cumbria • Baked beans are best served on a slice of buttered toast spread with Marmite. The sweetness of the former is then cut through with the saltiness of the latter. A final touch for Guardian readers would be to sprinkle a few fennel seeds into the pan of baked beans. Barbara Wynch West Hallam, Derbyshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.It’s easy, says Laura Barton, for new arrivals to cluster together (I moved to the coast for a better life – now I’m back in London where I belong, 28 December). For most of my life I have lived in rural areas and commuted to London. When I get home I shake off the city and get back to real life. This means chatting over the fence to my neighbour, with whom I have nothing in common, but he’s my neighbour. He doesn’t have regimented tulips (though he does mow his lawn three times a week), but if he did then I would admire the damned things. Then when I go for a coffee with the neighbours who are our friends, I indulge in some gentle mocking of the lawn-mowing. Our hamlet has suddenly become popular, and we welcome our new neighbours if we ever see them on our walks – if they come out from behind the electric gates they put up. They may be just our sort of people, but we’ll never know. Our community will carry on around them, talking to each other, in real life and on social media groups, because that’s how communities work. We don’t pick and choose – we rub along together regardless. Dee Ward Old Romney, Kent • You need a discerning eye and a contemplative soul to enjoy coastal life. Since the first lockdown I have paced almost every morning along the beach, the pier and the hills close by. Each day brings new variety to my photo collection of my walks. The sea has a wonderful translucence in still weather, and an invigorating turbulence during gales. The tide sets a different scene every day. The sky has infinite patterns according to mist, fog descending, fog clearing and, of course, clouds that linger or scud. Stand on the glassy-wet beach when the tide is out, and you can see sunrises under your feet as well as stretching above your head. Yvonne Williams Ryde, Isle of Wight • What a perfect description of the joys of life in London by Laura Barton. My husband and I chose to move here seven years ago when our changing work patterns meant that we could suddenly live wherever we chose. We got as close to the centre as we could, swapping a large house and garden in a coastal city for a small Victorian terrace; we sold both cars and now rely on the highs (and occasional lows) of Transport for London. Some friends thought we were mad but we love it – especially now that we are retired and can make the most of what this amazing city has to offer. Rita Sammons London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.No sport ushers in the new year free from the worries the pandemic brings but rugby union, perhaps more than most, looks to 2022 with trepidation. The Premiership continues on Saturday with bumper crowds, as was the case for the festive fixtures, but behind the scenes and with the Six Nations looming, key talks are scheduled in the coming days. The government has not yet seen fit to introduce crowd restrictions to sporting events in England – Premiership clubs are likely to lobby for a pause to the season if it does – but that fate has already befallen Scotland and Wales. The Dragons chairman, David Buttress, has described the move as “devastating” and Wales’s first minister, Mark Drakeford, recently admitted he could not say if the restrictions would be lifted by the time of Wales’s first Six Nations home match in February. In Scotland – who host England on the first weekend of the Six Nations – restrictions have been imposed for at least three weeks and a formal review is scheduled for 11 January. Before that, however, it is understood a key meeting is scheduled for next week when organisers are expected to learn whether contingency plans will need to be activated and Covid protocols tightened. Add in the current plight of the two European competitions – recently postponed fixtures have to be shoehorned into a cluttered calendar while the French government’s rules on travel from the UK threaten the next rounds of fixtures in January – and the situation is all the more precarious. The French government’s insistence that all sportspeople be fully vaccinated by mid-January is just another headache that European officials and Six Nations organisers are grappling with as the new year dawns. Granted, adapting to the challenges posed to cross-border competitions is not an issue limited to rugby union but unlike the Champions League, club rugby is not awash with money. As Bristol’s director of rugby, Pat Lam, recently pointed out, even the cost of chartering a plane only to find the European fixture has been cancelled hits rugby clubs hard. The same goes for cancelling matches – for gate receipts rather than lucrative sponsorship or prize money are the lifeblood – and Bristol forewent around £300,000 after their fixture against the Scarlets was scrapped. That Sale’s Boxing Day trip to Newcastle was called off on Christmas Day only highlights how the Premiership is not immune, as do the 55 positive cases – the second highest on record – produced this week. The optimistic view is that the bullet will be dodged, that crowd restrictions will not be required in England, that they will be lifted soon enough in Scotland and Wales, that teams competing in France will be granted the necessary exemptions and that the Six Nations can go ahead with full crowds. For the unions, the financial impact of having to play the tournament behind closed doors or with strict limits on attendance does not bear thinking about. For supporters and indeed, players it is a similarly desperate prospect. “It would be a huge, huge step backwards if there are no crowds moving forwards for clubs and the Six Nations which is obviously such a showpiece event,” says the Northampton and Wales fly-half Dan Biggar, who last week ran out in front of more than 70,000 fans at Twickenham during Harlequins’ annual Big Game. “You saw it in the autumn, getting crowds back. Everyone coming to games now has to have a passport, they’ll be double or triple-jabbed, and it’s an outdoor event so I don’t see why they wouldn’t be allowed in. As long as it’s safe, that’s the most important thing. “I hope for an event like the Six Nations and for the game up and down the UK moving forward we get some sort of sensible outcome. As long as everyone is safe and jabbed then I think it makes sense to keep crowds in. I think you would have seen a different game [against Harlequins] if the stadium would have been completely empty. “We played a lot of games with no crowds but if you look at the first handful of games they almost felt like training games. It felt like it did not really matter whether you won or lost because it felt like a training match and like the intensity was knocked out of it. You lose any advantage of playing at home and bits and pieces like that. “I think it would be a huge step backwards if crowds were to go. I think the rest of the lads in Wales are pretty frustrated with it. That’s normal frustration, isn’t it? We are probably getting into different things with politics now but I think everything should be aligned.” If the new year is also a time to reflect as well as look forward then listen to Biggar and you cannot help but wonder what might have happened had full crowds been allowed for the British &amp; Irish Lions series against South Africa. Rugby union was not without its jaw-dropping moments in 2021 – Harlequins’ Premiership victory is testament to that – but the Lions was supposed to be the showpiece and it barely registers a footnote in any sporting reviews of the year. It has also sparked fierce debate about the quality of the product on the pitch, but Biggar sees a sport moving in the right direction. “With the Lions, if we’d have won the series there might have been some [negative] column inches written still but we would have been celebrating a massive success,” adds Biggar, who lines up for Northampton at Saracens. “One penalty decision either way and there’s a very different slant on it. You look at the way the international game is, defences are a lot tighter, the preparation time you get is always difficult to compare with the club game. “If you look at the way we [Saints] try and play it’s very positive, like Quins. We’re always trying to be positive with the ball. It’s having a balance. There are lots of high scores in the Premiership at the minute, and that’s the way the game is going – you’re going to have to score a lot of points to win, especially in this league. “Gone are the days of accumulating three, six, nine points and then edge a game that way. Week in, week out you are playing against the best players in the world in front of sell-out crowds.” Biggar is not alone in hoping that remains the case in the coming weeks and months.2021 has been quite the year. To call it a dumpster fire would be an insult to dumpster fires. From the 6 January assault on the US Capitol to the emergence of Omicron, it was the year that never failed to disappoint. And yet, there have been glimmers of hope: the miracle of coronavirus vaccines. The miracle of the conviction of a murderous cop, Derek Chauvin. And now, the conviction of Ghislaine Maxwell, 60, who was found “guilty of one of the worst crimes imaginable: facilitating and participating in the sexual abuse of children. Crimes that she committed with her long-time partner and co-conspirator, Jeffrey Epstein,” said Manhattan US attorney Damian Williams. Chauvin and Maxwell are similar monsters in that they thought they could get away with anything: Chauvin because he was a police officer, a position he had reason to believe would relieve him of any accountability in the killing of an innocent Black man, convictions in such cases being extremely rare. And Maxwell because she was a socialite, a member of the elite, as well as the paramour of a multimillionaire who was closely connected to other rich and powerful men – notably Bill Clinton, Donald Trump, Prince Andrew and the lawyer Alan Dershowitz, whose client list has featured such choir boys as Harvey Weinstein, Trump and Epstein himself. Maxwell had reason to believe she would get away with her crimes, too – Epstein had already been let off easy once before, in 2008, when through a shockingly generous plea deal he was sentenced to just 13 months despite the fact that federal officials had identified 36 underage girls he had allegedly sexually abused. Maxwell knew that the courts often have very different rules for the likes of Epstein and her. She also seemed to think that no one would listen to the four brave women who testified against her – the victims of her crimes, two of whom she had lured into Epstein’s bed when they were just 14 years old. “In her eyes, they were just trash, beneath her,” assistant US attorney Maurene Comey said at the trial. These women didn’t go to Oxford, like Maxwell did, nor did they come from money. But Maxwell’s own pedigree was less than exemplary. When her father, Mirror Group publishing tycoon Robert Maxwell, fell off his yacht and drowned in 1991, there was speculation that it was suicide, or perhaps even that he had been killed by someone who resented the fact that he had allegedly stolen hundreds of millions of pounds from his company’s pension fund. It was all strangely similar to the speculation surrounding the hanging death of Epstein in his prison cell in 2019 before the beginning of his trial for the sex trafficking of minors. Who wanted him silenced before all the sordid details – and all the names – came out at his trial? the Internet buzzed. Just when you thought nothing could be added to the Epstein-Maxwell story to make it even more symptomatic of the rot of our institutions, here come the conspiracy theories. In a surreal sign of the times, there is a parallel mass delusion involving much the same scenario as Maxwell and Epstein’s real-life activities: it’s QAnon, which posits the existence of a secret global child trafficking network run by powerful elites, and which Trump was allegedly trying to stop. This delusion factored into 6 January, when some QAnon believers showed up at the “Stop the Steal” rally, thinking Trump was about to vanquish the cabal. Meanwhile ,Trump had actually been a friend of Epstein and Maxwell’s (“I wish her well,” he said when she was arrested in 2020) and he had been a passenger on the “Lolita Express”, the derisive name members of the media gave to the private plane Epstein used to fly his underage victims to his residences. Other passengers included problematic rich guys Kevin Spacey and Bill Gates. That plane, a luxury Boeing 727, featured private bedrooms and padded floors allegedly designed for sex in flight. It was just one aspect of the lavish lifestyle Maxwell dangled in front of the girls she enticed into having sex with Epstein and her. Maxwell performed the same role as the Child Catcher in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, though decked out in designer goods and proffering clothes and money instead of lollipops. There is a complicated process to grooming, and Maxwell became an expert at it; but tellingly, she mostly just picked girls who came from families that needed money. They were not well-off, like Epstein and she. “Selecting these girls was predatory behavior,” assistant US attorney Alison Moe said in her closing statement. “Maxwell and Epstein picked vulnerable girls. Maxwell was Jeffrey Epstein’s right hand.” A 2020 global study from the United Nations reported that almost two-thirds of people convicted of human trafficking in 2018 were men, although the number of women involved in this crime is higher than others. That’s because women are often used to gain the trust of women and girls, which they can usually do more easily than men. Maxwell is facing up to 65 years in jail for five counts of enticing, transporting and trafficking minors to engage in illegal sex acts and criminal sexual activity. That is, unless she tries to get a shorter sentence by naming names of other people who might have been involved. Nancy Jo Sales is the author of Nothing Personal: My Secret Life in the Dating App InfernoMartin Kettle is right to search for answers to England’s failure in Australia beyond the flaws in Burns’s backlift, but I don’t think it is blinkered complacency, either (English cricket is in disarray. It’s a metaphor for the country, 30 December). For most of the 20th century, two rivers of talent flowed into the county game: one from the club grounds such as Farsley in Yorkshire, which was always home to Ray Illingworth’s heart, the other from the playing fields of independent schools. In the last 40 or 50 years, the latter stream has, perhaps unexpectedly, continued to flow and to deliver, while the former has slowed to a trickle. There are reasons: cricket clubs are no longer central to their communities as they once were; cricket in primary schools is frail and fragmented – despite the best efforts of Chance to Shine – and that means it barely exists in secondary schools. This is particularly true in inner-city, disadvantaged – and ethnically diverse – areas so that there is rarely a straight or clear road that leads a boy or girl from a child’s enthusiasm to an adult career. How – or whether – any of this can be changed is a question that can’t be answered on your letters page. John Claughton Oxford University CC 1976-79; Warwickshire CCC, 1979-80; master in charge of cricket, Eton College, 1985-96; chief master, King Edward’s school, Birmingham 2006-16 • In his analysis of the state of English cricket, Martin Kettle cites multiple causes, both social and structural, referring to “the pathways to cricket’s renewal and growth” having been “cut off, closed and neglected”. He also alludes to the significant stratum of white upper-middle-class support for the English game. The contrasting place of cricket in youth culture in England and Australia seems relevant here. Until the 1960s, cricket equalled soccer in terms of its heroic figures. As any parent, particularly of boys, of subsequent generations will acknowledge, cricket has been progressively edged to the fringes of youth culture not only by the success of soccer, but because the playing the game is seen to be detrimental to “street cred”. In Australia, cricket not only sits comfortably at the heart of youth culture, it is seen to be positively “rock’n’roll”, the cricket club disco being as good a place to play with one’s rock band as any other venue. Visit any Australian park on a summer’s day and one will witness not only cricket matches of all generations but impromptu games of aspiring youngsters, reminiscent of past scenes in English parks. To bring cricket back to anything approaching its former status would require vision, funding and a monumental effort which, sadly, one feels to be far beyond the capability or ambition of the game’s current administration. Martin Allen Shoreham, West Sussex • Martin Kettle’s contextual analysis is a welcome shift from the extensive coverage of the flaws of individual players and the internal organisation of the game. Building on the work of Rowland Bowen and CLR James in looking “beyond a boundary”, two additional points come to mind. First, I think they would have referred to the international context, specifically the role of the International Cricket Council, whose inequitable allocation of funding results in Australia, India and England receiving the greatest share and the largest say over the allocation of fixtures – thus reinforcing divisions between the wealthier and poorer nations. Second, in light of the racism highlighted in the Azeem Rafiq case, they would have regarded it as essential that the England and Wales Cricket Board, in its distribution of funding to counties, leagues and junior cricket, has transparent social inclusion criteria and a way of ensuring their implementation. Perhaps the quote from CLR James, ‘‘What do they know of cricket who only cricket know?’’, should be prominently displayed in players’ dressing rooms and boardooms. Mike Stein Pudsey, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.London has recorded its worst ever annual death toll from teenage homicides after two boys were killed within an hour of each other in stabbing incidents, bringing the total to 30 for 2021. A 15-year-old was stabbed and killed in south London and a 16-year-old in west London on Thursday, bringing the total beyond the 29 deaths recorded in 2008. Campaigners said efforts to tackle knife crime had been inadequate and it was now so prevalent, it was becoming normalised, while a senior Labour politician called on the government to take more action to deal with the “epidemic”. “Knife crime is accepted by this generation as part-and-parcel of growing up and that’s completely unacceptable,” said Patrick Green, the chief executive of the anti-knife crime charity the Ben Kinsella Trust, which was set up in 2008 after the fatal stabbing of 16-year-old Ben in north London. “It shows that not enough has been done and, if I’m being really critical, then I’d say the approach to tackling it has been scattergun. We have to sustain our response to knife crime, it has to be over the long term and not just one and two-year funding for projects. “It is a societal problem which will continue unless it is addressed properly.” Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said the news was “devastating”. She added: “It is truly awful that more young lives have been lost to the epidemic of knife crime across the country. No family should have to go through losing a child in this way. “Important further action is needed from government to tackle the knife crime epidemic – including more neighbourhood police back on the beat, stronger laws on the criminal exploitation that draws children and young people into drug and knife crime, and support for the youth services and early intervention work that keep young people safe.” They spoke after a 16-year-old boy was pronounced dead at 8.25pm on Thursday, having been stabbed at Philpot’s Farm, in Yiewsley, west London. About an hour earlier, a 15-year-old boy died after being stabbed in Ashburton Park, in Croydon, south London. Another 15-year-old boy was arrested on suspicion of murder in relation to the Croydon stabbing. Neither victim had been named. Separate murder investigations were launched and police appealed for witnesses to come forward. The 30 killings of teenagers in the capital in the calendar year is the worst death toll on record. The latest stabbings will prompt renewed discussion about the possible causes of youth violence, with experts suggesting these include a rise in the number of children who are vulnerable, increased pressure on services such as policing, and social media fuelling conflict. The seriousness of the situation was further underlined by Pastor Beryl St James, from Shiloh Worship Centre church and charity, which is based in Thornton Heath – near the scene of the first killing. She said she had received a call from a parent who had found a knife in their child’s room on Friday morning. Speaking from the scene, she added: “I know we have to work and we all have duties to fulfil, but as a parent you cannot think that it’s OK to leave the state to continually look after your child.” Anthony King, the chair of the MyEnds programme, which aims to tackle knife crime in London, told reporters at the scene in Croydon: “Sadly, it’s because we’re having a lot of breakdowns in schools, in education; young people are being excluded too quickly, some for minor incidents, there’s breakdown in the homes. “Parents, if you see a bread knife or bun knife missing from the home, please speak to somebody, please contact an agency or an organisation and let the teachers know.” The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said he was “devastated” by the two deaths. He said: “I refuse to accept that the loss of young lives is inevitable and will continue to be relentless in taking the bold action needed to put an end to violence in our city.” Commander Alex Murray, Scotland Yard’s lead for violence in London, said: “I am deeply saddened by every single homicide this year, and greatly concerned by those that have been teenage killings. Each one is a tragedy leaving behind heartbroken families and distressed communities. “My thoughts are with the victims and all those impacted. They are not statistics, not just numbers, they all have families, and they all should have had their lives ahead of them. They and their families have been robbed of something precious and we should all be doing everything we can to stop this. “These devastating losses continue to motivate every single officer at the Met to catch those responsible, bring justice to their families and take weapons off the street.” Scotland Yard said police were called to the Croydon stabbing shortly after 7pm. They gave first aid to the boy before the ambulance service arrived, but he was pronounced dead a short time later. Officers were called to the stabbing in Yiewsley shortly after 7.30pm, where they found the 16-year-old victim suffering from a puncture wound. He was also declared dead at the scene. The victims’ family members had been informed but neither boy had been formally identified, Scotland Yard said. Postmortem examinations were due to be held later. Overall, the Met believes serious violent crime is falling. Homicides, at 130 for 2021, were virtually the same as the year before. In 2019 there were 150. The Met says that in calendar year to November 2021, compared to the same period before the pandemic in 2019, knife crime fell by 32%, or 4,613 fewer offences. It says gun crime decreased by 38%, with 738 fewer offences. Murray said: “A great deal of work has already begun and plans are in motion for the new year ahead. We are using existing and innovative tactics, proactive operations, and all the powers available to us to ensure we are doing everything we can within the scope of policing to deal with violence in all its forms.”The UK has experienced its warmest New Year’s Eve on record, with temperatures reaching more than 15C (59F) and customers being turned away from ice rinks that had melted. The record was broken twice in one day, with the Met Office recording 14.9C at 11am on Friday in Ryehill, in East Yorkshire, and 15.3C about an hour later in Coningsby, in Lincolnshire. The previous 31 December high was 14.8C, observed in Colwyn Bay in north Wales in 2011. At Somerset House, one of London’s most popular event venues, the unseasonably warm temperature forced the closure of the ice rink attraction on Thursday and Friday, with similar scenes at the ice rink in Hampton Court in Surrey. In Berkshire, some people had New Year’s Eve ice creams, as visitors to Windsor enjoyed the alfresco cafes. The Met Office said temperatures would continue to climb across the country later on Friday, before falling slightly at night as the UK rings in 2022. Areas of southern and eastern England, including the West Country, London and Lincolnshire, were expected to experience the warmest weather. Revellers in some parts of the UK will have to brace for rain in the evening, with light drizzle expected across pockets of eastern and southern England and north Wales. However, the overall picture was “exceptionally mild”, with temperatures of 14.5C in Hawarden, north Wales, and 14.2C in Yeovil, Somerset, reported on Friday morning, forecasters said. In Bournemouth, on England’s south coast, people strolled along the seafront enjoying the mild weather. It came after what was likely to have been Britain’s dullest December since the 1950s, with less than 27 hours of sunlight across the country on average. The Met Office said there had been just 26.6 hours of sunshine over 30 days – 38% less than the national average for this time of year. The figure places this month in the running to become one of the 10 dreariest Decembers on record, forecasters said. Britain’s dullest December was in 1956, when 19.5 hours of sunlight was the national average, while the brightest was in 2001, with 64 hours recorded on average across the UK. The Met Office forecaster Craig Snell said the dull weather was linked to milder temperatures across winter generally, which are likely to be due to the climate crisis. “One of the reasons we’re getting the dull weather is the fact that it’s been so mild. We’re drawing in south-westerly wind from the Atlantic and it’s also drawing in a lot of moisture. It keeps us warm but it also produces a lot of cloud,” he said. “The globe is warming up, so we would expect our winters to be milder than they were.”Spain registered record-breaking temperatures this week and areas of the Italian Alps are forecast to reach up to 15C above the seasonal average in the coming days as much of Europe experiences an anomalously warm start to the new year. In Bilbao, northern Spain, temperatures hit 24.7C, a high not seen since record-keeping began in 1947. In Segovia, near Madrid, 22.7C was recorded, the highest since 1920, and nearby Avila reached 20.2C, its highest since 1983. “These high temperatures are not normal,” said Rubén del Campo, a spokesperson for the state meteorological agency AEMET. “These are temperatures that you would normally see in the month of April.” He attributed the year-end heat to a mass of hot air over Spain combined with high pressure. “It’s a normal phenomenon that we do see, but what’s strange this time is the high temperatures we’re seeing.” Scientists have long predicted that the climate crisis and global heating would lead to more frequent extreme weather, although random extreme events occur naturally. The high-pressure anticyclone has shifted to France and Italy, and alpine rescuers have warned of a risk of avalanches. Luca Mercalli, a meteorologist, said: “At the moment it is about 15C in areas of the Alps at an altitude of 1,600 metres and is not hitting zero beneath 4,000 metres. It hasn’t even been freezing at night – the temperature has not dropped below 10 degrees, and this is very unusual.” Temperatures in some of Italy’s best-known ski resorts, including Cortina d’Ampezzo and Courmayeur, are forecast to be 13-15C above the seasonal norm on New Year’s Day, and the balmy weather is expected to linger until 3 January. Ski resorts at an altitude of up to 2,000 metres are bereft of snow. “And they can’t produce artificial snow as the temperature is too warm,” said Mercalli. Italy’s alpine rescue service has advised skiers to regularly check weather bulletins owing to the risk of avalanches. “The elevated temperature combined with strong winds create the conditions for avalanches,” Mercalli said. The rest of Italy is also experiencing abnormally warm conditions, with a high of 18C expected in Rome on Saturday and 22C in the Sicilian city of Catania by the middle of next week. In Spain, the high temperatures cap off a year that began with a deadly snowstorm that blanketed large parts of the country in snow and brought Madrid to a standstill. “It’s been a year of extremes,” Del Campo said. The snowstorm left some municipalities grappling with temperatures as low as -25C, while days later the coastal city of Alicante hit 30C. “We’ve never seen -25 and nearly 30C in the same month,” said Del Campo. “That’s not something we’ve ever seen in Spain.” Italy also experienced extreme weather events in 2021, with Siracusa in Sicily believed to have broken the European record for the highest temperature, reaching 48.8C in August.No crowds attended the cortege for Assunta Maresca, better known as Pupetta Maresca, who died at home this week in Castellammare di Stabia aged 86. Maresca, a convicted murderer and mafia boss also known as Lady Camorra, had been the centre of such frenzied media attention in her life that Naples authorities declared she would not have a public send-off. “We are seeing on social media a glorification of this woman who is a symbol of the Camorra in our neighbourhood,” Francesco Emilio Borrelli, a regional councillor for the Europa Verde party, said in a letter to the Naples police. “The mythologising of bosses is to be avoided at all costs.” Maresca, a tiny woman with great charisma and film-star looks, was the author of her own mythology. She made headlines at the age of 18 when she murdered her husband’s killer in broad daylight – an act of revenge made more dramatic by her youth and beauty, and the fact that she was six months pregnant. “I would do it again in a heartbeat,” she declared at her trial. She was the subject of a number of films (including by the great Francesco Rosi) and TV shows that depicted her as a glamorous avenger. One controversial TV drama was called The Courage and the Passion, and in another fictional treatment of her life she played herself. “Pupetta understood the rules of the game,” said Barbie Latza Nadeau, who interviewed her recently for a forthcoming book. “She kept a scrapbook of newspaper cuttings about her. She enjoyed the publicity. She understood her power and when to play the woman card.” Maresca used publicity to protect herself and to draw attention away from her two brothers, both gangsters. After the notorious serial killer Raffaele Cutolo launched a new criminal organisation to take on the traditional Camorra families, in 1982 she called a press conference and denounced him as a “power-crazed madman”. It was astonishing for a person associated with the mafia – let alone one so glamorous – to make a public declaration, and the press went mad for it. “She knew what she was doing, taking Cutolo on,” said Felia Allum, senior lecturer in Italian and politics at the University of Bath. Gabriella Gribaudi, a professor of contemporary history at the University of Naples, said: “Pupetta Maresca was one of the old school of women bosses – she was ahead of her time. There have been many others since. Women have a much more prominent role in the Camorra than in the other mafias, just as they do in the rest of society in Naples.” Women such as Anna Moccia, “the Black Widow”, and Maria Licciardi, “the Little One”, are figures of considerable power in the Camorra. Moccia had four sons, and when her husband was killed she took the decision to fight rather than flee, and sent her 13-year-old son into the Naples courthouse with a gun to shoot his father’s killer. Licciardi took the reins of the clan after her brothers went to prison. Her nephew, known as “the Little Prince”, carried out a series of hits on her command. “Both women wiped out their enemies over time,” said Gribaudi. “And they ran the clan’s business affairs very successfully.” The business affairs of the clans, in the case of the Naples Camorra, have kept the city and its satellite towns in a state of critical underinvestment, unemployment and cyclical poverty for about 150 years. The Camorra has infiltrated local authorities and run public works contracts for roads, schools and hospitals like a cartel. The Camorra’s brand of loan sharking typically involves an enforced “partnership” in which the original owner loses control of their business. In this way, the clans have come to dominate the economic lives of citizens across much of the region. Women in Naples traditionally control loan sharking and extortion, for which violence or the threat of violence is considered essential. The Contini Bosti group consolidated its power when three sisters, Anna, Maria and Rita Aieta, married three bosses and brought the families together. After their husbands were arrested, the three sisters took over the business and ran the extortion racket very successfully. “When they went to make collections they would take female muscle,” said Gribaudi. The sisters also have a keen eye for branding. They drive identical yellow Smart cars, so people know they’re coming. The Giuliano family from Forcella cultivated a rock-star image, protected by a cult-like following in the neighbourhood. Erminia Giuliano, known as Celeste for her bright blue eyes, took over the family business when her brothers became collaborators (pentiti), which she defiantly refused to do. Already famous for her friendship with Diego Maradona, she cultivated a glamorous public image. “Celeste has had affairs with men from clans at war with her own,” said Gribaudi. “It’s a high-risk game she’s playing, but she gets away with it because she has charisma.” When police arrested Celeste in 2001, she insisted on having her hair and makeup done before she emerged for the perp walk. She had learned from the master, Pupetta Maresca. “Pupetta knew how to show her power,” said Allum, “which is traditionally a male trait. She never hid.”Few artists can claim Willem de Kooning and Walt Disney as equal influences in their work. The California painter Wayne Thiebaud was one. Thiebaud, who has died aged 101, signed on as an “in-betweener” at the Disney Studios in Los Angeles as a teenager, filling in the backgrounds to Mickey Mouse cartoons whose figures were drawn by experienced animators. For the rest of his long life, he would be open in his admiration for cartoonists, and for commercial art in general. Two decades later, in 1956, Thiebaud “went east to meet those heroes of mine”, De Kooning pre-eminent among them. New York, in those days, was in thrall to abstract expressionism. “De Kooning and I could talk endlessly about brushstrokes and so on,” Thiebaud recalled in an interview in 2017. When he got back to Sacramento, he started over again as a painter, returning to the basics – “Shapes, seeing if I could get them to sit on the plane, that kind of thing.” The unlikely meeting place of these two disparate strands in his work was to be patisserie. “If you really look at a lemon meringue pie or a beautiful cake, it’s kind of a work of art,” Thiebaud recalled on turning 100 in 2020. (Asked what kind of cake he would like to celebrate his birthday with, he plumped for the lemon pie.) It was a different filling that was to reveal the potential of pastries as subjects for his art, though. In the early 1960s, Thiebaud set to work on a still life of pumpkin pie – Pieces of Pumpkin (1962), perhaps, or a work like it. “I mixed a big gob of what I thought was the colour and put it on the triangle,” Thiebaud later said. “I was horrified.” Hoping to rescue the painting, he made a second version with an under-drawing of blue and yellow that showed around the filling’s edges. The result of this was to make the orange shimmer, an effect Thiebaud was to dub “halation” and take as his own. “I looked at the picture and said: ‘Boy, if I paint that stuff that’ll be the end of me as a serious artist,’” he mused, half a century later. That Pieces of Pumpkin sold at Christie’s for £1.6m in 2008 suggests how wrong he was. (In 2019, his Encased Cakes of 2010-11 went for £6.2m, a record for his work to date.) Thiebaud’s shortcrusts and butter icing whetted an appetite for his art that even a Stakhanovite output was unable to sate. In part, this was a case of mistaken identity. In 1962, the year of Pieces of Pumpkin, pop art burst on to the American scene. Thiebaud’s pies and cakes were seen as part of the ironising of consumerism that underpinned Andy Warhol’s soup cans or Roy Lichtenstein’s outsized cartoons. This was not quite the case. Its subject notwithstanding, Pieces of Pumpkin is shaped by such modernist concerns as mark-making and the disposition of forms on a grid. That the grid happens to be a diner display cabinet and the marks of Thiebaud’s paint those of gooey pie filling is only part of the story. Josef Albers, a rigorously abstract artist, compared his own painting of squares to the spreading of butter on pumpernickel. Thiebaud’s pastries are as close in spirit to Albers as they are to Warhol, and perhaps more so. If its ingredients remained the same, the meaning of his confectionery changed with time. Iced cakes, in 1962, were as much a symbol of American affluence as were cars with tail fins. When Thiebaud painted Encased Cakes 50 years later, angel food had been supplanted in the California diet by sourdough bread. Piped cream and glacé cherries now spoke of that more innocent time when, as a teenager, Thiebaud had worked behind the counter of a Long Beach deli called Mile High and Red Hot. His work came to seem touched with melancholy, whether or not it actually was. Thiebaud’s father, Morton, a sometime inventor and motor executive, had moved the family to California from Arizona when his son was six months old. Wayne’s mother, Alice (nee Le Baron), then a telephonist, was from an old Mormon family: her grandmother had walked across the plains to Salt Lake City with Brigham Young, the so-called American Moses, pushing a handcart. Morton moved the family back to Utah in 1931, to a small ranch he had managed to buy but lost three years later. If life on a hardscrabble farm was hard, Wayne remembered it as happy. “The Mormon community is very, very intersupportive,” he laughed in old age. “I was what you’d call today, I think, a spoiled child.” By 1934, the family was back in California, where Thiebaud would spend the rest of his life. Sent to the Frank Wiggins Trade School in Los Angeles (later called LA Trade Technical College), he took a course in signpainting that led, briefly, to a job with the department store chain Sears, Roebuck. An undistinguished year at Long Beach Junior College – “I got one credit, and that was in public speaking and athletics,” Thiebaud ruefully confessed – was interrupted by the outbreak of war. This he spent in the US army air force, drawing a cartoon strip called Aleck for a service newspaper and, later, scenery for bomber training films under the command of Capt Ronald Reagan. (“It wasn’t a very pleasant experience,” recalled Thiebaud, a lifelong Democrat.) It was during this time that he met and married Patricia Patterson, in 1943. They had two daughters, Twinka and Mallary, before divorcing in 1958. In 1947, Thiebaud took advantage of the GI bill to train as an art teacher, first in San Jose and then in Sacramento. Realising that teaching would not provide for his growing family, he took a job in the advertising department of the Rexall Drug Company, where he met a commercial artist called Robert Mallary. (Thiebaud’s second daughter would be named in his honour.) The son of a Berkeley professor, the cultivated Mallary also worked as a fine artist, showing with the Allan Stone Gallery in New York. Stone gave Thiebaud a show in 1962: Pieces of Pumpkin was in it. Against the advice of Barnett Newman, who warned him to “lose the pie guy”, Stone would represent Thiebaud until his death in 2006. There was, in both Thiebaud’s life and his art, something deeply American. The formal seriousness of his work was not the only thing that separated it from the glibness of pop. His paintings, like the man who made them, were good-natured and heartfelt. These qualities won Thiebaud the affection of generations of students at the University of California, Davis, where he taught, latterly as an emeritus professor, for 60 years. His pupils at Davis included the polymathic artist, Bruce Nauman. Above all, Thiebaud counted himself “one of those lucky, lucky people”. If he resented being typecast as a painter of pastries, it did not show. A retrospective of his work at the White Cube gallery, London, in 2017 came as a surprise to those visitors who knew him simply as a purveyor of pies. Among the works on display were portraits – the 1966 Green Dress was one – and the so-called Delta landscapes, including the elegiac Fall Fields (2017). The only animus against confectionery Thiebaud owned up to was a dietary one. Asked, at 100, to name a cake that might cheer up a Covid-stricken populace, he replied: “I think I’d rather tell them, be careful about eating too many sweets and watch your vegetables.” Then he added: “Sugar is kind of an enemy of good health.” In 1959, Thiebaud married Betty Jean Carr, who died in 2015. Their son, Paul, died in 2010. Wayne Thiebaud is survived by Twinka and Mallary, by his stepson, the artist Matt Bult, and by six grandchildren. • (Morton) Wayne Thiebaud, artist, born 15 November 1920; died 25 December 2021Official statistics on gender-based violence in Spain will be broadened to include killings of women and children by men regardless of whether there was a prior relationship between victim and killer, in what is being described as a first in Europe. “What is not named does not exist,” said Spain’s equality minister, Irene Montero. “We have to recognise all of the victims and make visible all forms of violence – all machista [sexist] killings – so that we can put in place policies for prevention, early detection and eradication.” Since 2003 Spain has logged killings as gender violence if there is evidence that the killer and the victim had been or were in a relationship. From Saturday 1 January the definition of gender violence will be broadened to include the murder of any woman or children in which gender is deemed to have played a role. Every case will be analysed, and the statistics will be further divided into five categories ranging from killings linked to sexual exploitation, trafficking or prostitution to the killing of minors – boys and girls – if the crime is believed to have been carried out with the intent of harming a woman. “We’re going to be the first country in Europe to officially count all femicides,” said Montero, describing the move as the “most basic exercise of redress” for victims of male violence. “To name femicides for what they are is to carry out justice,” she added. The move puts Spain’s leftwing government at the vanguard of an approach that focuses on the role that power dynamics, rather than personal relationships, play in gender violence. “We have to repair the machista terror that kills women simply because they are women,” said Montero. The change in record-keeping comes after several high-profile cases that have rocked Spain. Protesters took to streets across the country in June after the discovery of the body of a six-year-old girl believed to have been murdered by her father and dumped at sea. An investigating judge later alleged that the girl and her one-year-old sister were killed by the father to cause “the greatest pain imaginable” to their mother. Statistics kept by the Spanish government show that since 2003 at least 1,125 women have been murdered by their partners or ex-partners, including at least 43 women in 2021.They arrived at Bristol Temple Meads train station clutching cans of booze, a change of clothes and this year’s most essential New Year’s Eve accessory – a negative lateral flow test. The closure of nightclubs and restrictions in bars and pubs in Wales was not going to stop a determined band of Welsh fun-seekers hopping across the border for a big night out on the English side of the Severn. “Mark Drakeford [the Welsh first minister] doesn’t want us to have a good time in Cardiff but he can’t stop us coming over here,” said Luke Spear, a 22-year-old bar worker. “Covid has affected young people a lot. I spent my 21st birthday in lockdown. We’re going to have a good time now.” Gabe Mason, 23, a student from Swansea, said he believed the Welsh government had been too cautious. “I think they have panicked, to be honest with you.” Mason was accompanied by a carrier bag filled with cans of lager. He and a group had booked rooms at a budget hotel. “Usually we would go out in Swansea,” he said. “We’ve all been vaccinated and had boosters so we’re not worried.” The Welsh government has been criticised by many in the hospitality industry for bringing in strict rules while the UK government has allowed a pretty normal New Year’s Eve to take place. Drakeford told people thinking of travelling to England from Wales for New Year’s Eve celebrations to “think consciously and carefully” but stopped short of asking people to stay put. Chanel, a 26-year-old nursing assistant from Cardiff, was planning to dance the night away at Bristol’s Motion club. “I don’t think Omicron is any worse than the flu. We’ll be careful, we’ve all got our negative tests, but we don’t want to miss out any more. We’re here to rave,” she said. Keeley, a bar manager, also 26, said she feared Cardiff would be horribly quiet. “At the place where I work there’s no band and no DJ. They’re stopping serving drinks at 11.30pm. People will be wandering around the streets at midnight. It’s such a shame.” It was not just a Cardiff exodus. Pubs and clubs all along the English side of the border were reporting large numbers of Welsh people arriving. And though the Scottish government asked people not to cross the border for Hogmanay and argued that to do so broke the spirit of its hospitality restrictions, inevitably, some defied the request. Grahame Vallance, who runs the Coach and Horses pub in Carlisle, eight miles from the border, said: “I’ve noticed a lot more Scottish people coming in – a lot of Rangers scarfs, Celtic scarfs. They are still showing caution. It’s not like: ‘Wahoo, let’s get on with it!’” Back at Temple Meads, British Transport Police patrolled the station but the mood was jolly and festive. Amy Norman, 23, of Caerphilly arrived with cans of pre-mixed gin and tonic. She said: “We just wanted a night out. I don’t understand the rules. I don’t see why places have to close in Wales but they can be open in England – it doesn’t make any sense.” Some were heading farther afield. Jake Alexander, 27, a media company worker, was travelling from Wales to London. “It’s time to party,” he said. “A lot of my friends in Cardiff have been crying off events because they are so bored of the rules. Table service is fine when it is quiet but who wants to do that on New Year’s Eve? And the rule of six in Wales is no good when you want to get out there and usher in the new year. So it is Islington for me.” Eve Humphries, 24, who works for an education company, said: “I just want to get on with life. I’m leaving my friends in Cardiff and heading off to stay with friends in London. I don’t want to be looking over my shoulder and people ticking me off for breaking the rules. People of my age want to get out there and live life. I’ve just so, like, had it with rules, rules, rules. I love Wales but not on a dead New Year’s Eve.”Three hours after an impassioned public plea by Middlesbrough’s manager, Chris Wilder, the Football League finally agreed on Friday afternoon to postpone his side’s Championship match at Sheffield United, scheduled for Saturday lunchtime. An alternately incandescent and bewildered Wilder had made plain his shock after the EFL declined initial requests by the Teesside club to call off the televised game. Boro had registered 19 positive Covid tests in the wake of their 2-1 win at Blackpool on Wednesday night. Nine players and 10 staff members were affected, with seven of the nine senior professionals affected due to have been in Wilder’s starting XI at Bramall Lane. “It’s been the most difficult 48 hours of my 20-year managerial career,” he said. “We’ve been absolutely decimated by Covid.” With two more players developing sore throats on Friday afternoon and a 20th positive test result recorded, the fixture eventually fell but Wilder, in charge of Sheffield United until last March, was earlier astonished when, he says, the EFL advised him to recall four loan players. Two played a full 90 minutes for their clubs on Thursday night, Djed Spence appearing in Nottingham Forest’s 1-0 home Championship defeat against Huddersfield and Lewis Wing featuring for Sheffield Wednesday in their 5-0 League One thrashing at Sunderland. “The blunt message we keep getting back from the EFL is: ‘You have an obligation to fulfil this fixture,’” said Wilder on Friday afternoon as he suggested that playing in South Yorkshire on Saturday would threaten the league’s integrity and player welfare, while exacerbating Covid’s spread. “Apart from Covid we have four or five injuries and one boy who might last 30 minutes but the EFL want us to supplement our available players with the group out on loan. I can’t get my head around that. I’ll be making calls to Forest and Wednesday to see if we can have Djed Spence and Lewis Wing back to sit on the bench.” The away dugout would have been sparsely populated after key members of Wilder’s backroom staff, including his assistant, Alan Knill, the first-team coach, Matt Prestridge, and Kieran Scott, the director of football, tested positive along with three kit men, a sports scientist and a trio of performance analysts. It would not have been the first return Wilder had wanted to the club he led from League One to the Premier League, played for and supported as a boy. He had never envisaged joking that he might be required to lay out the kit at Bramall Lane and even drive the team bus. Since succeeding Neil Warnock at the Riverside in November, he has presided over a marked upturn in form with promotion-challenging Boro having won four of their past five games, climbing to fifth. He remains adamant he was not crying wolf and insists he had been looking forward to the reunion with Paul Heckingbottom’s recently much improved Sheffield United, regarded by Wilder as potentially the strongest side in the Championship. “I’m a man of integrity and a man of honesty,” Wilder said before the postponement. “I’ll play a game anywhere against anybody on a level playing field and I understand you can’t always play your best side. But we’ve been absolutely decimated. There’s been zero preparation. “Our history as a club in the past two years shows we’ve had minimal Covid issues, our protocols are very tight, we’re not sloppy and we don’t cut corners, but this outbreak has ripped through us. “It’s quite baffling that other games are being called off but we’re having to do our best, with hardly any staff or players, to prepare for a top game in the Championship live on Sky in front of 30,000 people. “I’ve not seen anyone else have to recall anybody from loan. What will Public Health England [now UK Health Security Agency] say about this? There’s obviously an outbreak at our training ground. It’s incredibly confusing.”“You scaremongering ignorant fucking cunt, you and your retarded team made predictions that could have fucked this country for billions of pounds, fucked Christmas for a second time and cost thousands thier [sic] jobs only to have your most pessimistic ballshit [sic] now found to be just that. How fucks like you can sleep at night is beyond me and I hope you are fucking held to account for what you have done and could have done if there weren’t some people in the government with a brain.” How would you like to get this in your inbox? As a senior scientist advising the government on Covid, I get this sort of email on a fairly regular basis. Indeed, (someone calling himself) Mr Roberts (who sent this) is a regular offender. What particularly upset me about this email was that it wasn’t sent to me, but to a junior member of my team. Awful, isn’t it? Although this is a typical email from Roberts, it is not altogether typical of the genre. Roberts’s spelling is generally good and his sentences might be a bit long, but the grammar is usually sound. Most letter-writers have at best a very basic grasp of the English language – enough to get their point across, but extremely rudimentary. The spelling really is shocking. Sometimes it makes me wonder about the mental state of the sender; whether they are from the UK at all (Russian call centres come to mind); or whether they were even written by a human. I find it strangely comforting to think that some of them might have been generated by a clever bit of computer code rather than an angry, deluded member of our society. Other things that I have learned is that if you mention vaccination in the media, particularly vaccination of children, then there is likely to be a reaction. However, this only occurs if one’s comments are picked up by the rightwing press – particularly the Daily Mail. The letter-writers also seem to use the same tropes, like the phrase “tick tock” (sometimes just that) or the Nuremberg trials and, of course, Bill Gates (who must get this stuff by the bucketload every day). This rehashing of the same motifs sometimes leads me to believe that there is a coordinated campaign, or at least that these ideas are circulating somewhere and they cut and paste them into their letters to my colleagues and I. But it isn’t all bad. Sometimes you get someone who is genuinely concerned and/or confused. I always reply to these letters. If I can help explain the science or the risks so that they come to a more informed decision, then I feel I have done my job. Then there are the slightly more outre examples. There is an artist who occasionally sends me a picture of a misty landscape or a still life – wonderfully touching and thought-provoking – and the musician who dubbed one of my Radio 4 interviews over his song. Bonkers, but it worked. And perhaps that is the lesson. There are some people out there who might need help, some rude and threatening types who really need to look at themselves, some confused souls who need advice, and some magical, whimsical sorts who just need to carry on doing what they do. Help those who need it, block out the idiots (spam filters are great) and concentrate on the wonderful, the wacky and the profound. Happy new year! • John Edmunds is a professor of epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and a member of the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage)Many know Wanaka, a picturesque tourist town at the foot of New Zealand’s Southern Alps, for its most famous tree. The willow, which blooms uncannily from the glacial lake as if floating on water, represents different things for different people. For some, the miracles of a divine nature, for others, a marvel easily explained by science. In the last several months another unlikely phenomenon has taken root among its residents. Three weeks ago, in what many local patrons describe as a “sudden move,” three of the town’s four yoga studios simultaneously said their final namaste and closed their doors. “The last time I went there there was nothing at the class to suggest things were changing, and then I went online to book my next class and found out I couldn’t do that,” said Judith Cullen, a local Tarras resident who had been enjoying yoga as an important part of her routine. The three studios decided that they were unable – or unwilling – to operate under Aotearoa’s “traffic light” system, which requires teachers and students alike to be double vaccinated. “Our studio is all about inclusion and if we can’t include everyone, we’ll include no one,” said the owner of one of the three to shut its doors. If local vaccination rates are anything to go by, any vaccine scepticism in the town is relatively confined. According to the most recent data from the Queenstown Lakes District, more than 99% of the region is double vaccinated, putting the small minority of unvaccinated in stark relief. New Zealand’s overall vaccination rate is now at 91% of the eligible population according to the Ministry of Health. Around 40% of workforce is covered by vaccine mandates. Issues with vaccine hesitancy in the nation are evident elsewhere in the country. Several calls to other yoga studios around the Auckland region indicate that some have lost as much as 40% of their instructors with the introduction of the mandates. Pilates teacher and masseuse Laura Indrane, who was instructing at one of the Wanaka studios before its closure, has started taking on clients privately in the wake of the studios’ closure. “The vaccination rate in Wanaka and Queenstown lakes is very high and a lot of people who want to practise and keep fit may be feeling really let down,” said Indrane. ‘It’s gone wrong somewhere’ Born out of the 70s hippy movement, wellness culture has grown into a big industry in recent years both in New Zealand and around the world. The global sector is thought to be valued at $1.5tn, through the focus on optimising an individual’s physical and mental state, often by side-lining modern medicine in favour of “natural” alternatives. For many steeped in the industry, the Covid-19 vaccine, designed by big-pharma and disseminated by mandate via big government, runs contrary to their entire belief system. A “reactive pro-vaxxer,” Indrane worries that the idea of wellness is being distorted from its real meaning. “I’m sad about it because I’m working in this wellness industry and I feel like people who work in wellness should promote health, but it’s gone wrong somewhere. I’m not sure where,” said Indrane. Where exactly things went wrong may not be clear, but few can argue the powerful role that social media has had in the rise of anti-vax thought in the global wellness community. Wedged between photos of downwards dogs, glowing chakra, and well-lit crystal balls, high traffic wellness accounts have been leaving a granola-crumb path to more sinister conspiracy theories. “If you’re looking at yoga or wellness, you already have some pretty thriving accounts that are popular as it is. And what you find is that often it’s a subtle pivot, and sometimes a less subtle pivot, where these wellness accounts will be posting similar photos, but the captions underneath will start to include some incredibly strong anti vax rhetoric,” said journalist David Farrier, who has been investigating the rise of conspiracy theories online. The rise of this social media disinformation was almost too much for Ursula Griffen, owner of a mindfulness company and member of New Zealand’s spiritual wellness community. “I was seeing a lot of it on my feed. I was learning about ‘segregation’ as they were calling it, and that instilled fear in me,” said Griffen. Despite having had vaccines her entire life and never thinking twice about it, the weight of the disinformation around the Covid-19 vaccine meant she had to spend weeks considering whether or not to get it. Eventually science, and some helpful words from her brother overseas, brought her over the line. With help from her meditation teacher doing a sermon on radical acceptance over the car speakers, she got her vaccine at a drive through clinic in South Auckland. “I took my beads that I got in Utah that were cedar berries for protective energy and I was just saying to myself, ‘I’m divinely protected’,” said Griffen. “And I got the Pfizer protection too, because I believe in that as well.” • This article was amended on 2 January 2022 to correct the spelling of Laura Indrane’s name.The “appalling” scale of abuse, intimidation and threatening behaviour directed at the UK government’s scientific and medical advisers has been laid bare in a Guardian survey of experts working on the pandemic. Dozens of UK advisers described incidents ranging from coordinated online attacks to death threats and acts of intimidation, such as photos being taken of their homes and shared online and suspicious packages arriving in the post, some containing items with messages scrawled on them. Further harassment has included vitriolic tweets, emails and phone calls, hate mail, threats of violence, complaints sent to employers, referrals to the General Medical Council watchdog, offensive notes left on cars and abuse shouted through the letterbox. The police have brought charges in a small number of cases when individuals linked to specific threats were identified. Advisers were not the only ones targeted. The abuse spilled over to their students, colleagues and family members, including partners and children. One adviser who works as a GP said the surgery’s receptionists had been subjected to “vile tirades” from callers as a result of their advisory role. In another case, an adviser’s child was repeatedly targeted by a teacher who blamed the parent for the government’s lockdown policy. The family did not make a formal complaint because the child’s exam grade depended on the teacher’s assessment. The Guardian survey was sent to more than 100 scientists, doctors and other researchers who contribute to the advice ministers receive through bodies such as the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), the modelling and behavioural science subgroups that support Sage, and other expert groups such as the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag) and the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI). The responses have been anonymised. Three-quarters of the 42 respondents received significant abuse about government policy, their views on the science, or their research findings, often after being quoted in the media or speaking at open events such as parliamentary inquiries or webinars hosted by organisations such as the UK’s various royal societies. In an article for the Guardian today, Prof John Edmunds, an epidemiologist at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and a member of Sage, said he and junior staff were targeted regularly with abusive emails. “If you mention vaccination in the media, particularly vaccination of children, then there is likely to be a reaction,” he writes. “However, this only occurs if one’s comments are picked up by the rightwing press – particularly the Daily Mail.” One of the advisers surveyed received a death threat on Twitter, which was reported to the police, and experienced a “tidal wave of abuse” whenever they appeared in the media. “A lot of it is misogynistic and a lot of it is deeply unpleasant,” a doctor said. “I’ve never experienced anything like this before. I’m just trying to do the best I can to stop people dying.” Much of the activity comes from people who feel more threatened by the government’s response to the pandemic than the pandemic itself, even though advisers are not involved in policy decisions. Many advisers say abuse peaks whenever they speak publicly about masks, vaccines, Covid treatments, circuit-breakers or lockdowns, meaning it is increasing with the spread of the Omicron variant. At the beginning of the pandemic last year, a surge in threatening behaviour led government security experts to brief the advisers on how best to protect themselves, including how to increase computer security and improve their personal safety by varying the time they travelled to work and the route they used, and checking under their car before driving. Some advisers have had security reviews of their homes and workplaces and alarms and 24-hour surveillance cameras installed, linked to the local police station. A number of universities have hired private security firms to help the experts operate safely and to ensure campaigners and protesters do not disrupt their work. Government cybersecurity experts have removed some sensitive material posted online, but this has not always been possible. Many advisers reported a stream of hate via Twitter and email, with messages such as “I hope your family die”, “I hope cunts like you are fucking held accountable”, “you will pay for killing our children with vaccines” and “fuck off back to where you came from”. The mainstream media sometimes fuelled the activity by emphasising worst-case scenarios, some respondents said, or legitimised abuse from social media trolls by launching their own attacks on advisers. The survey found no clear evidence that women received more abuse than men, but some were less willing to describe their experiences. Numerous male counterparts expressed dismay at the intensity and nature of the abuse directed at women they knew. “There seems to be a huge gender imbalance with women being targeted so much more than men,” one said. Despite the torrent of abuse, several advisers emphasised that they also received praise, thanks and support from members of the public, which counterbalanced the vitriol. “It has vaccinated me against much of the hate,” one said. George Freeman, the science minister, called the abuse “appalling”. He said: “All of us who value our freedom and democracy need to call this out … Scientists and doctors should not be held responsible for decisions taken in good faith by ministers accountable to parliament.” Chi Onwurah, the shadow science minister, said the attacks were “wholly unacceptable” and the government’s much-delayed online safety bill was desperately needed to counter misinformation. While many advisers praised the Cabinet Office and the Sage secretariat for setting up “extensive support mechanisms”, some felt they would have benefited from a warning and security advice before signing up. The attention has led some scientists to keep their heads down, refuse interviews, and consider withdrawing from the public discussion. But most said the abuse had little effect or even emboldened them. “If anything, it motivated me to engage further,” one adviser said. “Clearly my voice was being heard and having an impact.” Another said: “If we stop speaking up, and stop providing advice, something else will fill the void and it will be misinformation, false narratives and so on. Do we acquiesce and allow them to take over and risk people’s lives?”Boris Johnson faces a further headache over the scandal surrounding the funding of his Downing Street flat refurbishment after Labour demanded the findings of an investigation be made public after reports it will exonerate him. Calls for all evidence to be handed over to parliament’s standards commissioner, amid fears of a “Whitehall whitewash”, led to the prime minister trying to prevent the saga spiralling further. Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on interests, is looking into whether he was misled during an initial inquiry in the spring investigating if Johnson knew about payments to cover the redecoration of his flat above No 11. Despite Johnson telling Geidt he knew nothing about donations to fund the makeover until immediately ahead of newspaper reports in February 2021, the Electoral Commission revealed that prime minister had exchanged WhatsApp messages with the donor, Lord Brownlow, in November 2020 about securing further funds. The watchdog imposed a fine of more than £17,000 on the Conservatives for breaching donation reporting laws. On Thursday, the Financial Times said Geidt had exchanged several letters with Johnson and that, while he would criticise the prime minister’s behaviour, he would not change his initial ruling that there had been no wrongdoing. A senior government source confirmed the outcome to the Guardian, and Geidt is expected to publish the letters early in the new year. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said the leak would “only serve to underline the deep flaws in this system”. She called on Geidt to publish his findings immediately and hand the evidence over to Kathryn Stone, the standards commissioner. Stone is said to be considering launching an investigation of her own into whether Johnson broke the MPs’ code of conduct. Evidence Rayner said should be handed over includes WhatsApp messages exchanged between Johnson and the Tory peer who initially covered some the costs of the No 11 refurbishment. A senior Labour source said the prime minister had “made a fool” of Geidt and the outcome of the report showed “you can lie to him and get away with it”. Wendy Chamberlain, the Liberal Democrats’ chief whip, said people deserved “proper answers, not another Whitehall whitewash” and that Johnson was only concerned about “getting himself off the hook”. Tory MPs believed Johnson being exonerated avoided setting off events that could have ended with calls for his resignation if it was found he breached the ministerial code. However, they remained sceptical of whether it was enough to win back the confidence of his disgruntled backbenchers. A minister said: “This is a guy who’s the political equivalent to a cat. He’s been burning through his nine lives and may have got one of them back, but he’s still got very few left. He now needs a period of calm and quiet achievement.” Another frontbencher added of the ill-feeling caused by the scandal: “It’s stuck and it’ll take a lot for the PM to rid himself of the image.” Other senior Tories stressed that regardless of the report’s outcome, they still believed Johnson’s defence was – at best – questionable. One suggested that the prime minister may struggle to “meaningfully regain credibility”. Caroline Slocock, director of the Civil Exchange thinktank and a former private secretary to Margaret Thatcher, told the Guardian that Stone should launch an investigation. She said, comparing the situation to the 1980s political satire: “This looks like classic Yes, Prime Minister – the PM both knew and didn’t know about the funding of his flat and was both open and not open to Lord Geidt by concealing WhatsApp exchanges.” Slocock added the outcome showed “the need for a truly independent adviser on ministerial standards” who was independently appointed and able to investigate breaches of the ministerial code without permission from the prime minister. Dr Catherine Haddon, a senior fellow at the Institute for Government, agreed that Geidt “needs to show he can still be an effective watchdog” by pushing for the report to be published imminently and seeking to gain more powers and independence “so that this situation can never arise again”. She said while Johnson may feel relieved he has been cleared, the “saga of the wallpaper is unlikely to be over”, and that the investigation had “badly damaged the public’s confidence in ministerial code investigations”. The Cabinet Office said it would “not comment on speculation” and pointed to the terms of reference of Geidt’s investigation, which said his advice to the prime minister would be “published in a timely manner”.Tens of thousands of residents were forced to flee in northern Colorado after fast-moving wildfires destroyed an estimated 600 homes. Over 30,000 residents across three communities outside Denver had to evacuate their homes after wind-fueled grass fires rapidly burned through multiple buildings including a hotel and Target shopping complex, along with 580 homes. The fires erupted Thursday outside Denver, following an extremely dry fall and a winter so far nearly devoid of snow. “We might have our very own new year’s miracle on our hands if it holds up that there was no loss of life,” Governor Jared Polis said at a news conference on Friday, hours after declaring a state of emergency. “We know that many people had just minutes to evacuate and if that was successfully pulled off by all of the affected families – that’s really quite a testimony to preparedness and emergency response.” At least one first responder and six other people were injured in the fires. According to Boulder county sheriff Joe Pelle, there could be more injuries – and deaths – because of the intensity of the fires, propelled by winds that gusted up to 105mph. Pelle said downed power lines were suspected to have caused wildfires. “This is the kind of fire we can’t fight head-on,” Pelle said. “We actually had deputy sheriffs and firefighters in areas that had to pull out because they just got overrun.” Pelle said on Friday that there were still some active fires and asked residents not to return home unless they had been told it was safe to do so. The towns of Louisville and Superior, situated about 20 miles (32km) north-west of Denver and home to a combined 34,000 people, were ordered evacuated ahead of the fires, which cast a smoky, orange haze over the landscape. Mike Guanella and his family were relaxing at their home in Superior and looking forward to celebrating a belated Christmas later in when reports of a nearby grass fire quickly gave way to an order to leave immediately. Instead of opening presents, Guanella and his wife, their three children and three dogs were staying a friend’s house in Denver, hoping their house was still standing. “Those presents are still under the tree right now – we hope,” he told the Associated Press. By first light Friday, the towering flames that had lit up the night sky were gone, leaving smoldering homes and charred trees and fields. The winds had died down, and light snow soon began falling, raising hopes it could snuff out hot spots. The White House released a readout of a call between Joe Biden and Polis on Friday, which said the president “assured him that every effort will be made to provide immediate help to people in the impacted communities”. Sophia Verucchi and her partner, Tony Victor, returned to their apartment in Broomfield, on the edge of Superior, on Friday to find that it was spared any serious damage. They had fled the previous afternoon with just Victor’s guitar, bedding and their cat, Senor Gato Blanco. “We left thinking it was a joke. We just felt like we were going to come back. At 5 o’clock, we thought, maybe we’re not coming back,” Verucchi said. They got an email Friday morning saying it was OK to return. “Seeing the news and seeing all the houses burnt, we just feel very lucky,” Verucchi said. Polis had warned onlookers to stay away from the fires, saying: “Don’t head towards the fires looking to see them. We are getting reports of clogged roads from onlookers. Also, it’s very dangerous. Stay clear of the areas with fires and let our firefighters and first responders do their work.” According to the National Weather Service, strong winds downed power lines and overturned big-rigs in the area. More than 24,000 people lost power during the windstorm. Some residents were unable to open their garage doors while attempting to evacuate. Ninety-percent of Boulder county is in severe or extreme drought, and it hasn’t seen substantial rainfall since mid-summer. “With any snow on the ground, this absolutely would not have happened in the way that it did,” said snow hydrologist Keith Musselman. On Friday morning, local authorities lifted mandatory evacuation orders that were issued on Thursday afternoon for residents outside of Boulder county, including those in Broomfield and Westminster, as cooler temperatures and lighter winds slowed down the wildfire. Snow was expected in Denver on Friday, along with a 70% chance of precipitation later on in the day. Meteorologists forecast that 2022 will begin with temperatures falling into the single digits in the area, with the weather warming up on Monday. Frank Cooper, a National Weather Service meteorologist, told the Denver Post that the snow will help settle the first when it arrives, but that winds are expected to reach 10 to 15 mph, which will trap the smoke from the fire. “There’s just a lot of smoke and haze around this morning and that’s not going to go away,” he said. Associated Press contributed to this reportAnd so here we are: among the dark, blustery, not so cold days of between-Christmas-and-new-year. A time to say goodbye to 2021, the year everyone hoped would be better than 2020, and that wasn’t, really. The year many hoped would mean the end of the pandemic, though the one certainty of early 2022 is the Omicron variant. This moment of the calendar – curiously inert for those whose work pauses at this time of the year – offers for many a precious kind of deep inactivity. This year, the British are not entering a prolonged and complete lockdown as we did when 2020 slipped into 2021, but still, in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland, there are many restrictions on the extent to which people may gather together, and in England, those alert to the dangers are broadly following suit voluntarily. The time, in short, is one of retreat; for some, loneliness. The temptation is to switch on the TV and to revel in the teeming joys of all that the bafflingly myriad streaming services have to offer. Christmas movies – all the way through the spectrum from Die Hard to Love Actually, according to taste – are available at the click of the remote. For some, it’s a time to finally binge-watch Succession; or to sit down in front of a classy adaptation of a family classic, like the BBC’s entertaining Around the World in 80 Days. But solace comes in other ways too, ones that are easy to forget amid the seasonally guiltless possibilities of TV immersion. Company and comfort can come through reading, and, in particular, the reading of wintry, frosty books. There are many stories that readers turn to again and again at this time of year, some of them at least supposedly for children. Philip Pullman’s modern classic Northern Lights has its culmination in the icy far north where the aurora borealis dances, ruled over by polar bears and witches. Susan Cooper’s 1973 story for young readers, The Dark Is Rising, is for some grown-ups an annual ritual, to be begun on the eve of the solstice, 20 December, when the story begins, and continued in real time until its end on Twelfth Night. The tale is set in the unmagical semi-rural locale of Windsor and Slough. But for young Will, who turns 11 on the shortest day, his life is about to become one of enchantment and danger. The world around him is to be submerged in the deepest, longed-for, but perilous snow. The forces of dark will do battle with the forces of light, and Will is to play his part. Cooper, who as an undergraduate attended lectures by JRR Tolkien and CS Lewis, drew on Arthurian tales, and British and English folklore, to invest her chosen landscape with a rich stratigraphy of story. Her book also has a fond relationship with the 1935 children’s novel The Box of Delights by John Masefield – poet laureate and, briefly, a Guardian leader writer. It is another child’s story, drawing on British mythology, that takes place in deep snow – and in which those benign-seeming theological students out carolling might not be all that they seem. The Box of Delights itself is a thrilling, magical mechanism that can take you anywhere you desire. It is a metaphor for the act of reading itself – the power of story to transport a person anywhere, out of isolation, into thrilling new worlds far away from the anxieties that attended the limping, wintry end of 2021 in Britain.Two years after Boris Johnson made “levelling up” the lodestar of his new administration, the public still struggles to understand what the prime minister means by it. A new YouGov poll has found that half of those questioned either had no idea what the phrase signifies, or were not completely sure. The government’s flagship domestic policy resembles a ghost vessel drifting in a mist of Whitehall obfuscation and procrastination. After a torrid period, Mr Johnson badly needs this to change in the new year. However fuzzy the follow-through, the political logic of his original pledge to level up England remains crystal clear: as it seeks to hold together the new electoral coalition forged in the 2019 “Brexit election”, improving the situation and prospects of voters in the north and Midlands is fundamental to the government’s hopes of re-election. The pots of money distributed piecemeal via the various levelling-up funds – described as a “drop in the ocean” by the Centre for Cities thinktank – will not cut it. Having promised to restore pride, regenerate places and deliver economic growth in the “red wall”, a convincing plan is urgently required to demonstrate how this will be done. The indications are that this will not be forthcoming, partly for fear of antagonising voters in the more prosperous south. The twice-delayed levelling-up white paper is now expected by the end of January, and briefings suggest its emphasis will be on devolution and the reform of local government throughout the country. The mayoral model is likely to be promoted beyond the city regions, and Cameron-era local enterprise partnerships may be targeted for replacement by more democratically accountable bodies. Given that the secretary of state for levelling up, Michael Gove, has been told by the Treasury that no more money is on offer, proposing to redistribute power instead carries an obvious attraction: it allows high-minded talk about community spirit and “trusting the people”, but comes without an expensive price tag. Sadly for Mr Gove and the prime minister, real empowerment cannot be delivered on the cheap. Levelling up regions and places that have been neglected for decades – and which bore the brunt of post-crash austerity – requires significant long-term investment in public services, improved infrastructure and a costly revolution in vocational education and adult retraining. Greater devolution is a praiseworthy goal in an overcentralised country where all roads (and high-speed rail lines) lead to London; but without the necessary resources, and significantly expanded local revenue-raising powers, it will amount to an abdication of strategic responsibility by the state. One recent study observed that the slashing of government grants to local authorities since 2010 hit “urban areas with a legacy of industrial job loss especially hard”. A proliferation of elected mayors across the country looks more like a distraction than a solution to the problems of postindustrial England. In a speech last summer, Mr Johnson took inspiration from the example of Germany’s efforts to narrow its east-west economic divide after reunification. But successive German governments spent €2tn reducing the gap, whereas Rishi Sunak has effectively capped the government’s main levelling-up fund at £4.8bn for this parliament. If the government will not draw the appropriate lessons from the German experience, the Labour party should spell them out: this amorphous agenda may have become an object of mockery, but what it does and does not deliver from now on will be crucial in deciding the outcome of the next election.On days like these, as the calendar ticks around, as we link hands and sing of our joy at being one notch further on the doomsday clock, it is customary to talk about hopes for the future and life lessons learned from the last 12 months of kicking balls, running around tracks, driving fast cars and all the rest. Except of course, there are no actual lessons to be learned from professional sport, which is basically lighted shapes moving on a screen, digital celebrity worship, a confusion of desires coopted into a pay-per-view entertainment product. Perhaps at if we dig a little deeper and adopt a twinkly, world-weary frown, we might say the only lesson to be drawn from sport is that there are no lessons, that what really matters is, you know, the friends we made along the way, the show, the harmless distraction. Which is fine, but it doesn’t explain why nobody really thinks that, and why we are all still so violently addicted to this, splayed on our backs like dying woodlice, maws crammed with 24-hour rolling hot opinion-substance, big match acton live-streamed to the inside of your eyelids. Or why so much energy is expended on picking shapes and stories out of that confusion, anointing heroes and castigating villains, like dogs barking at the skies. All of which is a flowery and circuitous way of (1) avoiding another folksy review of the year; and (2) getting on to the strange fate of Bruno Fernandes, whose up and down year has been capped by a particularly strange week. Welcome to the ballad of Bruno. This is a footballer who spent the first half of 2021 as a Ballon d’Or candidate, team leader and exemplar of dressing-room standards. Last January Manchester United were top of the league and Fernandes was the best player in the country, mining his own rich seam of goals and assists, “demanding more” from those around him and creating a sense of life and purpose in the Solskjær bubble. Fast forward to Thursday night and Fernandes missed the win against Burnley having been booked (for whinging) against Newcastle. In the meantime a kind of opinion-creep has wheedled its way in, a digital wave of revisionism. With a whiplash sense of urgency, Fernandes has been fingered as something else: a whinge-bag, penalty fraud and general tactical misfit, perhaps even a dressing-room toxin, to be rooted out by the fearless hand of Ralf. This is of course a familiar process with the current United, a sporting institution so fraught with ghosts and ghouls, so frightened by its own shadow it has become a real time Murder On the Orient Express, a place where in the end everyone is guilty, everyone did it, and everyone must pay. Fernandes will survive this. He remains United’s most effective attacking player. But it is all a little wild, and pointlessly destructive. Gary Neville started the whinge-bag thing in his punditry spot during the Newcastle game. Neville is always brilliantly watchable, and clearly has his own inside track. But it is also a funny line coming from an ex-player whose own very successful career was basically powered by high-grade whinge-baggery, who spent 15 years propelling himself around the pitch with a full bladder of whinge cradled beneath each arm, the droning, screeching, whinge-piping soundtrack to the glories of Fergie-era United. Until a recent run of poor form the whinge-baggery of Fernandes was seen as an asset. Here is a man who will not accept mediocrity, who works like a demon and demands the best. So what changed? The most obvious problem is tactical. Under Ole Gunnar Solskjær the plan was simple. Basically, give it to Bruno. His job was to float in between the lines with three mobile runners ahead of him, to provide instant, high-risk forward passes or shoot himself. Bruno was the end point of every attack, his job simply to provide the final click of the hammer. Three things have interrupted this. First, Solskjær’s team dissolved, driven in part by a doomed urge to move on from this slightly linear style. Secondly Cristiano Ronaldo arrived, which changes everything, not just tactically, but culturally. An ambitious creative Portuguese footballer will always say playing with Ronaldo is a dream. In reality, and at this late stage, it’s a nightmare. That presence is too heavy, the gravity too strong. There is only room for one basking tactical nabob in a Ronaldo team. And he’s not going to be called Bruno. The third thing is the distinct blueprint of Ralf Rangnick, whose 4-2-2-2 system (or 4-4-2 on Thursday night) sees Fernandes pushed to the left of the attacking “box”, a different role that will require some grooving. He can make this work. Even Bad Bruno has burped up a load of goals and assists in the Champions League and made 44 chances from open play, more than anyone else in the Premier League. The problem as ever is the more generalised flux around him. Manchester United are particularly gruelling in this respect, a genuinely weird list of disconnected objects – Ronaldo, Harry Maguire, a swarm of bees, Donny Van De Beek, doomed romanticism, three slices of cheese – that will always become incoherent at times. And because football is a TV show, and TV shows need villains, it was always likely the great finger of blame would hover over the occasionally frustrating attacking player who isn’t called Cristiano. Even the small details count. Fernandes looks like a nag. His “body language” (really? This is a thing now?) can be hilariously terrible. He looks like the kind of person gets who really angry in a queue and cries when it’s his turn to be served. He looks like a comically frustrated high-end pastry chef. He looks like a touching cartoon kangaroo lost in the big city who just wants a friend. He also deserves a little more respect. The skinny kid who came in from the outside, who comes home from every game and watches it again in full, noting his own stats (which is, let’s face it, exactly what you or I would do) is also the best signing since Ferguson left the club. Those Peak Bruno times have been among the few moments of clarity, the closest United have looked to a more evolved entity, divorced from the past, the ghost train, the haunted house. Plus, one folksy end-of-year reflection: Fernandes was good in the dark times too, when crowds were absent, when things could have simply wound down into entropy, and when his hunger and his whinge-baggery really did seem to fill those lighted spaces. I went to a few of those games, and was always grateful for a bit of Bruno, who may have his own brittle edges, but who is quite clearly a part of the solution.London has recorded its highest ever level of teenage homicides in a single year after two boys were killed on Thursday. A 15-year-old was stabbed to death in a park in Croydon on Thursday night, while a 16-year-old died after being stabbed in Hillingdon. The killings were the 29th and 30th teenage homicides in London in 2021, surpassing the previous peak of 29 in 2008. Most of those who died were victims of knife crime and many were killed by other teenagers or by those in their early 20s. The youngest victim was 14 years old. Here is a list of the 30 victims and what we know about their lives and how they died. Anas Mezenner, 17, Haringey, north London, 19 January Anas, 17, was found with stab wounds in West Green Road shortly after 9pm on 19 January. He was taken to hospital but died at 4.25am. A 17-year-old boy was found guilty of his murder after a trial at the Old Bailey in August, and two other teenagers were found guilty of his manslaughter. Anas, who was studying at a City and Islington College and was described as “quietly talented” and “creative”, had made an anti-knife crime video for a media studies course weeks before he died. His brother said: “Anas was never, never about this knife crime stupidity. He always kept himself humble, he was always kind and always put others first.” Romario Opia, 15, Islington, north London, 25 January Romario was found stabbed in Holland Walk at about 5.30pm. He was pronounced dead at the scene a short while later. His mum is said to have dashed to the scene when she heard her son had been attacked. More than 100 people attended a vigil in his honour on 2 February where he fell. His sister wrote an emotional tribute to Romario when she launched a crowdfunding appeal to help the family cover the funeral and burial costs, describing him as “funny, loving [and] amazing”. She continued: “Everywhere he went he made a big impact on everyone and all his friends and family love and miss him so much. Everyone who knew Romario knows he had a big smile and an enthusiasm for life. He made everyone laugh, he was happy and confident and had a big heart.” Hani Solomon, 18, Fulham, west London, 11 February Solomon was killed during a fight between two groups of men shortly after 6.30pm in Ackmar Road. He was treated by police, paramedics and an air ambulance team but was pronounced dead at the scene less than an hour later. Two people have been charged with his murder. Solomon, who was from Wandsworth in south London, was described as “one of the nicest boys around, always positive, always smiling” by one of his friends, Noah. Another friend, Tyrell Logan, said: “He was a friend you could always count on … If you can’t afford something, he’s there for you. If you can’t do something, he’ll do it for you – that’s how he works, that was his moral in life.” Drekwon Patterson, 16, Wembley, north-west London, 18 February Drekwon was stabbed just yards from Preston Road underground station in Brent, shortly after 11.30pm. He was taken to hospital but died the following morning. Five people were arrested in early morning raids by officers in April, but no one has been charged. Drekwon, who was a pupil at Harrow college, was killed months after his parents had relocated for safety after an attack in November. His friend Ty told the Daily Mail: “Drekwon was not affiliated to any gang, I can promise you that. He was very funny and a proper entertainer. He loved making us laugh. He was very street smart and I’m going to miss him a lot.” Ahmed Beker, 19, Paddington Green, west London, 26 February Beker was attacked just after 9.10pm and was treated by paramedics and an air ambulance team but died at the scene. Two teenagers, both aged 18, have been charged with murder. His cousin Josiph Beker was stabbed to death in Edgware in 2019. James Beker, Ahmed’s uncle and Josiph’s father, told MyLondon that his nephew was humble, kind and quiet and said the family was devastated by his death. He continued: “We will never be healed from it … We are not in the war. How can they do this? How can they carry a knife to kill people?” Tai Jordan O’Donnell, 19, Croydon, south London, 3 March O’Donnell was stabbed a number of times in the legs at a house in Alpha Road just after 12.10pm. He was pronounced dead within minutes of emergency crews arriving at the scene. A 22-year-old man has been charged with his murder. In a statement released online, his mother, Stacey O’Donnell, said: “He was one in a million; a loving, kind, beautiful human being and we as family couldn’t be prouder of the man he was growing into.” His friends organised several memorials to celebrate his life after he died. One of his friends, Dwaine, from Croydon, said: “I met him at college about three years ago, and everyone who knew him thought he was a good person: kind, polite, respectful.” Mazaza Owusu-Mensah, 18, Abbey Wood, south-east London, 6 March Owusu-Mensah died when he was stabbed in the chest during a fight in Edington Road at about 5.30pm. Paramedics tried to save him, but he was pronounced dead at the scene. A 25-year-old man has been charged with murder and possession of an offensive weapon. One tribute posted on Snapchat read: “RIP Maz. [We were] brothers. I’m gonna miss you, we’ll link up soon. Life feels so different I can’t take it in. We had big dreams bro, I’m gonna miss you lord knows it ain’t gonna be the same without you.” Ezra Okobia, 14, Lewisham, south-east London, 6 March Ezra was fatally injured by fumes from a fire at his home in Russett Way shortly before 6am. He was taken to hospital but died four days later. His five-year-old brother, Joseph Okobia, and mother, Victoria Amaning, 34, also died after inhaling fumes. Amaning “used petrol to start a fire” in her Greenwich home, before “locking herself and her sons in the bathroom”, killing herself and her two children in March this year, an inquest has heard. Little has been reported about Ezra’s life, but shortly after the fire took place, before it emerged how it started, one neighbour told the Sun: “The whole community is absolutely devastated by what has happened and we are all still in shock … Her two sons were her everything, all the children, including my own, all used to play together down here, we’re a very close community like that.” Nikolay Vandev, 19, Tottenham, north London, 8 March Vandev was stabbed along with a second victim, aged 18, in Penshurst Road shortly before 2pm. He was pronounced dead at the scene, while the 18-year-old was taken to hospital and treated for non life-threatening stab wounds. Two boys, aged 15 and 17, have been charged with murder. Vandev was the fourth person to be killed in Tottenham in 2021, with the Metropolitan police increasing officer patrols after the killing. DCS Treena Fleming, who is responsible for policing in Haringey, said: “My deepest sympathies lie with the family and friends of those who have lost their lives in this tragic way. My top priority remains tackling violent crime in our community – as one person killed or injured is one person too many.” Hussain Chaudhry, 18, Walthamstow, east London, 17 March Chaudhry was stabbed in Lea Bridge Road at about 5.20pm. Police and an ambulance crew attended but he was pronounced dead at the scene. Chaudhry was knifed in the neck as he and his family fought off a robber trying to steal a designer jacket outside their home. His brother and mother were also injured. Two people have been charged with his murder. The first-year law student at Soas University died in his mum’s arms. His uncle Reiss Chaudhry said: “He was just trying to protect his mum. He was a good boy and such a lovely boy. His mum was badly cut across her hand and his brother was hurt too, and they are both still in surgery. He was stabbed in the neck and he died laying in his mother’s lap.” Levi Ernest-Morrison, 17, Sydenham, south-east London, 10 April Levi, who was autistic, was killed in a machete and knife attack in Sydenham Road on the evening of 10 April. Tyreese Ulysses, 19, launched the attack after learning that Levi was “bothering” his mother, Nichola Leighton, by knocking on her door looking for him. Both Ulysses and Leighton were found guilty of Levi’s murder earlier this month. His father, Christopher, described his son as “loved”, saying: “He had a simple way of touching people.” Meanwhile, his mother called him a “special boy” and said: “He was a beautiful boy with a beautiful heart. My son was autistic and disabled so it hurts more.” Fares Maatou, 15, Newham, east London, 23 April Fares was found stabbed in Barking Road in what his family have described as an “unprovoked attack”. Emergency services tried to save him but he was pronounced dead just over half an hour later, still wearing his school uniform. Two boys, aged 14 and 15, have pleaded not guilty to his murder and will face trial next year. A crowdfunding page set up by Fares’s family said he was a “kind and considerate child who stood up for what’s right”. The page also states that his father had been in a coma since January after being admitted into an intensive care unit with Covid-19 and woke up to find his son had been murdered. His friends also paid tribute and told PA: “If you ever needed him he would be there. He was happy. He loved life.” Abubakkar ‘Junior’ Jah, 18, Newham, east London, 26 April Jah was found in Coolfin Road, at about 3.45pm, having been shot and stabbed. He died at the scene. He was the brother of Ahmed Jah, who was stabbed to death just a few streets from the scene in April 2017. Police believe the killings may have been linked. Nobody has been charged with Jah’s murder. His father, who had fled war-torn Sierra Leone to come to the UK in the 1990s, told the Daily Mail: “I don’t understand how somebody can be killed like that, right in front of their house. I’m not able to sleep. [Junior] was my friend. I saw some future in him and he held my hope, but now that’s vanished.” Daniel Laskos, 16, Harold Wood, east London, 7 May Daniel was fatally stabbed in the neck stabbed in Church Road at about 6.40pm after being confronted by a gang outside a shop. Ambulance and air ambulance teams tried to save him after the fight but he died at the scene. Six people have been charged with his murder. His uncle John said Daniel’s family had come to London from the Czech Republic about a decade ago. He added: “He was a lovely boy. His mother is devastated. We have no idea why this happened.” Taylor Cox, 19, Islington, north London, 8 June Cox was shot in the head in Hornsey Rise Gardens at about 4.25pm. He later died in hospital. One person has been charged with murder. His father, David Campbell, said he had previously survived a stabbing in 2019. Campbell, who moved the family to the outskirts of London after the first attack, told the Islington Gazette the stabbing crushed his son’s dreams of being a professional footballer. He said: “He became less confident after the stabbing and didn’t want to go certain places. If he went out he took a cab because he was scared for his life. In the last couple of weeks he seemed happier.” Denardo Samuels-Brooks, 17, Streatham, south London, 10 June Dernado was stabbed after he was chased along a busy high street in the mid-afternoon. He was taken to hospital but was pronounced dead less than an hour later. Four people, all teenagers from Croydon, have been charged with murder. The local MP Bell Ribeiro-Addy said on Twitter: “My thoughts and prayers are with the family of the young man, stabbed to death on Streatham High Road this afternoon. Arrests have been made and an investigation is ongoing in the area.” Jalan Woods-Bell, 15, Hayes, west London, 11 June Jalan was stabbed in a fight at about 8.30am while on his way to school in Blyth Road. A 15-year-old boy has been charged with his murder. “He [Jalan] was quite cheeky in a funny way and mischievous with that smile … he was just a really good character and wasn’t one to shy away,” his uncle told My London. He added that his nephew had a supportive family and group of school friends who were all in shock. Tashawn Watt, 19, Sydenham, south-east London, 25 June Watt was stabbed in Miall Walk just after 9.30pm. He was treated by an ambulance crew but died at the scene. He was just yards from his house when he was attacked and his mother and brother cradled him in the street as he died. A 19-year-old has been charged with his murder. Tributes poured in after his death with the street lined with hundreds of flowers. Denise proudly told My London: “We called him ‘star boy’, because he was … He made me proud at parents’ evening because every teacher had the same thing to say about his potential.” Camron Smith, 16, Shrublands, Croydon, south London, 1 July Camron was found by paramedics having been stabbed inside his home in the early hours of 1 July. He was pronounced dead at the scene. Police believe he was chased after answering the door to a group who then attacked him. Four teenagers, including a 15-year-old boy, have been charged with his murder. Mourners gathered to lay flowers around the cordon after his murder. Devastated friends said Camron, known as LilCamz, was “never in a group or a gang”. Tamim Ian Habimana, 15, Woolwich, south-east London, 5 July Four teenagers were soon charged with his murder after Tamim was found stabbed. Footage of the killing was shared widely on social media. Hawa Haragakiza, Tamin’s mother, spoke at a vigil in Woolwich after his death, promising to begin campaigning for an end to London’s knife-crime epidemic. She said: “My son was all about peace and where I’m coming from, I’m all about peace.” Keane Flynn-Harling, 16, Lambeth, south London, 5 July Keane was stabbed in Oval Place at about 11.45pm. A 36-year-old has been charged with his murder and possession of an offensive weapon in a public place. He was named after the former Tottenham Hotspur striker Robbie Keane by his Spurs-loving family. “I’m so sorry you’re gone. We love you so much, rest in perfect peace,” read one of the tributes left at the scene. Another said, “Love you with all my heart baby boy, we love you millions.” Damarie Omare Roye, 16, Thornton Heath, south London, 9 July The 16-year-old was stabbed in Bensham Manor Road and was taken to hospital but died two days later. Police believe he was attacked after a fight with two men on a moped. A 19-year-old has been charged with murder. Damarie’s father, Dwayne Roye, made an emotional plea to end knife crime, saying: “I feel as if my heart has been ripped out. He was a kind, respectful boy.” Stelios Averkiou, 16, Tottenham, north London, 1 August Stelios was stabbed at a skate park in Lordship recreation ground at about 2.15pm. He was reportedly sitting on a park bench with friends when he was set upon. He died nine days later. Two boys, aged 16 and 17, have been charged with murder. Stelios’s godmother Maria Stanforth created a fundraiser page to help raise money for his funeral. She wrote: “Our handsome and loving Stelios was taken from us all, far too soon. Heaven has gained an angel.” Alex Ajanaku, 18, Leyton, east London, 1 September Ajanaku was found in Beaumont Road with shotgun wounds at about 1.30am while attending an illegal rave. He was treated by police and paramedics but died at the scene. He is believed to have been sitting with a group of friends when the shooting occurred. A 43-year-old man was arrested on suspicion of murder and later bailed. The detective in charge of the investigation described the killing as a “senseless attack on a young man”. Hazrat Wali, 18, Twickenham, 12 October Wali was stabbed to death in a playing field in front of schoolchildren. A 16-year-old boy has been charged with his murder. He was a refugee from Afhganistan. He had moved to the UK two years earlier and was studying construction and building in the nearby Richmond upon Thames College. His friend Sahil Kochay told the Evening Standard: “He didn’t hold any hate towards anybody. He used to stand up for everyone.” Kamran Khalid, 18, Ilford, east London, 28 October Khalid was stabbed 24 times in Harrow Road in the early hours of the morning on 28 October. He was reportedly on his way home from the gym when the attack took place. Two teenagers, the youngest just 15 years old, have been charged with murder. Speaking to MyLondon, his mother, Samina Khalid, said losing him has “left a void in her heart forever”. Jermaine Cools, 14, Croydon, 18 November Jermaine, the youngest victim, suffered stab wounds and died after a fight in London Road. He took himself to the nearby hospital, but died soon after from multiple stab wounds. A murder investigation was launched after the incident but no one has been arrested. His father, Julius Cools, said he forgives his son’s killers, describing his son as “an angel”. DCI Richard Vandenbergh, from the Metropolitan police, is continuing to appeal for information over the murder, saying “at the very least, his parents are owed an explanation for why their son was killed”. Rishmeet Singh, 16, Southall, 24 November The Met was called to Raleigh Road just after 9pm after reports of a stabbing following a fight involving a group of people. Officers found 16-year-old Rishmeet with stab wounds. He died at the scene a short time later. Friends of the 16-year-old told ITV News London he had never been involved in crime or violence. In a statement, the college that Rishmeet attended, said: “All of us at Uxbridge College are profoundly saddened to learn of the tragic loss, in such worrying circumstances, of this young man taking his first steps into adulthood.” Unnamed boy, 15, Croydon, 30 December Police were called to Ashburton Park shortly after 7pm. Officers found a 15-year-old boy with stab wounds who died at the scene a short time later. Unnamed boy, 16, Hillingdon, west London, 30 December Police were called to Philpot’s Farm Open Space in Yiewsley, and found a 16-year-old boy with a puncture wound. He was pronounced dead at 8.25pm and a murder investigation was launched, making him the 30th teenage homicide in London in 2021.Leading health bodies are urging the federal government to defer “mayhem” changes to Medicare Benefits Schedule telehealth arrangements that would hit vulnerable patients as Covid cases surge. The changes, due to come into effect on 1 January, will restrict phone consultations for a long list of specialist items in favour of video conferencing or face-to-face appointments. The Clinical Oncology Society of Australia (COSA) president and medical oncologist, Prof Fran Boyle, said the timing of the changes was “appalling” considering the dramatic increases in Covid cases across the nation. She said the changes to MBS item numbers, intended to help people with cancer and other illnesses, would limit access to care for vulnerable demographics, particularly in remote areas. Telehealth services were dramatically expanded as a temporary Covid measure in March last year, to reduce community transmission and protect patients and health care providers. Pre-Covid, telehealth was used in a limited way for people living in rural and remote areas to access specialists via video conferencing facilities at health centres. On 13 December, the Department of Health announced $106m would be provided over four years to support continuing telehealth services as a permanent fixture in the Australian health system, a move broadly welcomed by health bodies. Days later, it was announced 128 telehealth items would end from the new year on the recommendation of the MBS Review Taskforce. Boyle said she only became aware of the changes two weeks out when they were publicly released. “They made their own quiet plan,” she said. She said most of her patients would be “hit like a hammer” when the changes came into effect. “Most people have no clue it’s about to happen,” she said. “We will have to reorganise a week of patients, which is a stress they don’t need. “It looks like they’re giving everybody something – you can keep telehealth as a specialist service without a distance requirement, but only if it’s done by video. “What’s going to be a major problem for patients this coming week is the phone consultations will no longer have the medicare item number they’d be expecting from the last year.” Boyle said “overwhelmingly” patients took up phone consultations as video added a “layer of complexity” and wasn’t an option for many – notably older people and others with limited access to technology and reliable internet in regional and rural Australia. And, with cases doubling in NSW almost every day, she said patients would be “very worried” about coming back into clinics. “They had only just started getting back their confidence,” Boyle said. “I can bet you they won’t want to next week and we won’t want them to either. The people in the country who are still the most vulnerable to Covid are people with cancer, because they really struggle to get immunity even with two or three vaccines. “It was an OK plan if there was no virus and it was business as usual, but business cannot be usual for cancer patients. These people are anxious enough already about their own vulnerability, the timing couldn’t be worse.” Boyle said the one item remaining for phone consultations with cancer specialists – a “rarely used” item number for brief conversations with a patient you already knew – was a “small concession”. “Sometimes a backflip is required and I’m pretty sure they know how to do that now,” Boyle said. The Australian Medical Association president, Dr Omar Khorshid, said “acknowledging we are still in a pandemic” would have seen the availability of item numbers extended, not reduced. “The limitation of a whole series of numbers might be justifiable in a post-pandemic world but it’s going to make the provision of medical care during this extreme outbreak in NSW that much more difficult,” he said. “We’ve repeatedly suggested while the pandemic is here there should be full access to the measures brought in at the start of the pandemic. That’s certainly not transpired.” Khorshid said the AMA had been in negotiation with the federal government for a “long time” and had been supportive of access to phone items, while the health department had been “very much of the mind” they should be limited. “Presumably with concern they’ll cost more money,” he said. “We’ve made it very clear by removing phone items you’re creating inequity in the community. “People least able to access videoconferencing are often people with the most health needs – rural and elderly Australians. “Patients will have almost no awareness, it’s very little notice and very much last minute.” Cancer Australia data indicates only 2% to 5% of monthly specialist services were delivered by telehealth video call in the first part of 2020, compared with 10% to 24% via phone. A recent study on patient satisfaction with telehealth consultations similarly found patients undergoing phone appointments were more likely to continue with the service than those who used videoconferencing. The lead researcher Dr Andrew Parsonson said lack of infrastructure and technical difficulties with the videoconferencing technology may have been key barriers to overcome the scaled implementation of consultations via video. Rare Cancers Australia, a consumer advocate group, said it was also “deeply concerned” about the restrictions of telephone consults. “Cancer disproportionately impacts older Australians who are not as technically proficient as younger patients,” chief executive Richard Vines said. “Denying them access to telephone consultation is heartless. “The video conferencing facilities currently available at some of the major cancer centres are neither reliable nor intuitive. On each of the last four occasions when my wife has attempted remote consultation we have needed to revert to the telephone for effective communication.” Breast Cancer Network Australia said it was “too soon” to remove telehealth items from the MBS and called on the federal government to defer the changes as Covid cases place increased pressure on the health system. The network’s director of policy, advocacy and member support, Vicki Durston, requested a deferral to the changes to provide more time for clinicians and consumers to have a “seat at the table” to inform decisions that affect cancer care. “This is of particular concern to our network of people with breast cancer who have relied heavily on telehealth over the past two years for their treatment and follow-up care,” she said. The health department was approached for comment.A retreating ocean is often the first sign of a tsunami. The water along the shoreline is dragged back dramatically, exposing parts of the shore and seabed that are normally underwater. It’s helpful to frame the first two years of the pandemic in similar terms to this ocean drawback. Detaching from our own specific circumstances, and our own specific pandemic pain, we have a unique opportunity to actually see the metaphorical seafloor of the world. Exposed by the pandemic were the often invisible systems that organise our society. These systems are comprised of everything from the expectations of ongoing and unlimited growth via the systems of capitalism and globalisation, to the systems of class, systemic racism and patriarchy, to the more localised systems of government and public service, to the social systems of the nuclear family and individuals, and how our communities, cities, households and green spaces are organised. Also exposed in the drawback of two pandemic years has been our internal seafloor – that of our own psyches. We got to see what we are made of, with previously unimaginable circumstances creating a chance to really test ourselves, see where we fracture and where we are strong. Just like a tsunami, we can expect further devastation to come. But this exposure of our systems could also show us how to rebuild stronger. So what did we see when the virus exposed what’s underpinning our lives and our very selves? And what will we do with this newfound clarity? Economics writer George Megalogenis wrote that the “wicked genius” of Covid was to seek out where the holes and gaps were in our open economic model. In his Quarterly Essay titled Exit strategy: politics after the pandemic, Megalogenis identified that the weak points in Australia’s pandemic response were in the areas that the government had privatised. “Covid says ‘You’ve left me a gap in your safety net – I’ll start killing’,” he told Richard Fidler’s Conversations in 2021. “Australian privatisation was where the weak points were. The commonwealth contracts everything out in aged care” and “the damage done last year in Victoria was when the virus got out of hotel quarantine – also staffed by contract workers including security guards and cleaners who were under trained, underpaid and unaccountable.” But at least until Omicron came along in the final weeks of 2021 – apart from a few notable exceptions including the slow vaccine rollout, the privatisation of aged care and hotel quarantine and lack of support for the university sector and the arts – Australia’s government systems turned out to be robust enough to largely protect the population and the economy. Australia suffered a relatively low death and infection rate compared with the rest of the world, due to border closures and a high level of compliance with lockdowns. And the economy was spared the worst, largely due to the Jobkeeper and Jobseeker schemes. The approach of the federal government (and its NSW counterpart) has changed in response to the rapid emergence of the Omicron variant, stressing the “personal responsibility” of citizens and dramatically changing requirements for testing and isolation – with as yet unknown consequences. But in the initial waves of infection in 2020, according to the ABS, if “Australia had experienced the same crude case and death rates as three comparable countries – Canada, Sweden and the United Kingdom – there would have been between 680,000 and 2 million cases instead of the 28,500 that did occur, and between 15 and 46 times the number of deaths”. Still, the pain was not evenly distributed. While wealthier, white-collar workers were able to work from home (and during lockdown have access to more green spaces and beaches), the brunt of exposure to the virus was found in more working-class jobs such as manufacturing, in insecure work such as food delivery and the gig economy, and in migrant and female-dominated care work, especially in the so-called “LGAs of concern”. Healthcare staff have been quitting in record numbers – due to illness, stress and burnout – and the majority of them are women. According to the Grattan Institute, women also bore the brunt of the economic and psychological impact of the virus, and their lifetime economic disadvantage will be compounded. According to a report by Australian Unions, “government responses have not adequately addressed the way the Covid-19 crisis is reproducing and deepening existing structural inequality faced by women, and intensifying work and family pressures. In many ways, government policies have made it worse.” Then there is the looming “shadow pandemic” of worsening mental health outcomes. During lockdowns, suicide rates were down but self-harm increased, particularly in young people. This does not bode well for a mental health system that was already under pressure. Two years in, despite this mess at the crossroads of capitalism, gender, class, intergenerational disadvantage, race and work, we have not moved to fix the systems that underpin inequality. Character test On a more personal level, the pandemic revealed the limitations of the nuclear family – and the need for a “village”. Healthy families need other people around to help – friends, aunts and uncles, teachers, grandparents and neighbours. Part of what was exposed on the seabed was the necessity of communities and personal support systems to stay connected to families, and acknowledgment in a person’s workplace of the whole load an employee might be carrying in their life – not just in their work. Work bled deeply into domestic life and domestic spaces, much more work fell to women, parents found it impossible to work and supervise schooling at the same time, and many families felt overwhelmed and marooned without access to the village. And then there’s the even more personal reckoning – a glimpse at our own psyches. Were we resilient? Calm? Kind? Or fearful and fretful? The great Stoic philosopher Epictetus said: “Circumstances don’t make the man, they only reveal him to himself.” And so it was here. The past two years have shown us what we are made of – and provided to us the sort of character test that only usually comes round with world wars and depressions. While countries such as America are experiencing high levels of public rage and anger, over everything from mask mandates to slow service in restaurants, in Australia the rage hasn’t been as marked, although it has been there in anti-lockdown protests and in our shops. Australia’s low level of mortality and relatively high level of compliance with lockdown rules – particularly in 2020 – are probably connected. There was the sense of caring for the stranger and not wanting to do something to endanger people in your community. This sense of cohesion bodes well for a healthy society – it’s something hopeful to hang on to. So what will we do with our newfound clarity? Seeing the truth of one’s own lives laid bare by the pandemic will no doubt prompt some to reorganise. And there’s a certain amount we can reorganise in our own lives. Maybe you have already started remaking things that were revealed during the pandemic to be broken. Friendships that were revealed to be too one-sided or unfulfilling may have been jettisoned, marriages and relationships ended, jobs quit, fitness regimes embarked on, cities swapped for the coast or country. Maybe the pandemic accelerated what was always going to happen. Or maybe it gave you a nudge of the carpe diem kind, or maybe the unique pressures of lockdowns broke the back of things that would otherwise have drifted along for decades to come – intact mostly, but never really stress-tested. Changing these elements that make up our lives – our friends, our partner, our job, family, our health and fitness, the place where we live – seems big. It’s remaking our lives. Swapping Larry for Barry, Bondi for Berry, making sales for making soap, while enormous within the unit of one life, is not grand stuff that alters the course of human history. What’s needed are systemic shifts that lead to a reorganisation of society that can better absorb large shocks – and to support each other through those shockwaves. It’s ground-up stuff. The pandemic began in Australia in March 2020 – but for me, it will be forever linked with something that started earlier. November 2019 and the skies were red and full of ash. We all wore masks that summer … just a different sort. The past two years and the things we’ve seen have given us a taste of the radical planetary reorganisation that will need to occur when the climate crisis really bares its teeth. Like all painful experiences, once this chapter of the pandemic is over, we will want to forget. With all our lovely distractions back – bars and restaurants and gyms and hairdressers – we can paste over the issues all of us have with our set-ups and our systems. We think a move to the country – our own personal revolution – is change enough. But of course it is not. We have seen the bottom of the seafloor in all its ugliness, beauty and degradation. Such clarity is a dark gift. The real work is ahead.Critically understaffed public hospitals in New South Wales are planning to fly in nurses from overseas, a leaked memo reveals, as managers beg staff to cancel leave and take on extra shifts amid surging Covid cases. It comes as a state health policy change will allow health workers who are close contacts to be recalled to their jobs, the Guardian understands, before completing their seven-day isolation period, if they are considered essential. More than 2,000 health workers are currently isolating due to Covid exposure. At St George hospital in Sydney’s south, the burden of increased hospital presentations and isolation orders was laid bare in a grim end-of-year email sent to all nursing staff, pleading for them to cancel leave. The internal email, obtained by Guardian Australia, warns the hospital “can’t seem to keep up with the exposures and positive staff”, despite concerted efforts to source nurses. “We have commenced the process for overseas recruitment,” the email stated. The last resort had been taken after managers approached more than seven local nursing and midwifery labour agencies, an effort which yielded just one additional registered nurse. Additionally, the hospital had approached private hospitals for workers and pulled back secondments, but had not been able to staff its wards sufficiently. “Across the facility, the patients numbers in the departments are unprecedented,” the email stated, noting the hospital had been forced to reopen its second Covid ward again. “It doesn’t really seem quite right to be wishing a happy new year,” the email said. The NSW Nurses and Midwives Association general secretary, Brett Holmes, said hospitals were going to “extraordinary lengths” and managers were “turning themselves inside out trying to find staff”. “Overseas recruitment is a glimmer of hope right now,” he said. At St Vincent’s hospital in Sydney’s east, the facility’s executive director, Kevin Luong, was reported to have sent an email to staff on Thursday, warning the hospital was in an “extremely vulnerable” position. “Whilst we are trying our best to work around this, we are beginning to run out of options to maintain safe nursing staffing levels,” the email said, according to the ABC. Guardian Australia has seen an email sent to St Vincent’s staff pleading for nurses to work shifts on New Year’s Eve and New Year’s Day, offering a $250 bonus on top of usual penalties as an incentive to work. The offer was extended for nurses in admin roles. “Our current staffing vacancies in nursing is unprecedented and at crisis level,” the email said. The internal email also explained the hospital was “changing our model of care” to focus on emergency department presentations and ICU patients in the first instance. The email urged any nurses who had patients who could be suitable for discharge to do so as soon as possible. Guardian Australia has also been told of concerning staffing ratios in the emergency department at the Royal Prince Alfred hospital in inner-Sydney, as well as at various hospitals across the city. On Friday, NSW’s Covid outbreak became one of the fastest growing in the world, with daily cases almost doubling to 21,151 on New Year’s Eve. Six people died with Covid. Hospitalisations in NSW grew to 832 on Friday, having more than doubled in the week since 382 were in hospitals the previous Friday. Intensive care hospitalisations were rising steadily, with 69 people in ICU beds – 39 of whom were unvaccinated. A spokeswoman for the South Eastern Sydney local health district confirmed it had “approached several nursing agencies to recruit additional staff to join our healthcare team”, and that it was “standard practice” for an LHD to organise its own staffing, including choosing to recruit internationally. Earlier, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, claimed his state’s health system “remains strong”, and said the national close contact definition changes agreed to on Thursday would “put downward pressure in that space”. “We have the best health system in the country, arguably the best in the world, and that is because of years of investment,” he said. “We’ve seen a significant increase in case numbers, but what is pleasing is that our health system remains strong,” Perrottet said. However, Holmes said union members were “copping abuse” because patients were presenting to hospital expecting a smoother experience because of how Perrottet was describing hospital pressure. “Patients and family members are presenting to hospital expecting a robust, high-functioning health system and become extremely agitated when they experience the widespread staffing crisis first-hand,” he said. “Our members want the NSW premier and health minister to admit the current situation in our hospitals is dire and call on the public not to abuse health staff as the system struggles under increased demand,” Holmes said. When asked by Guardian Australia how current pressures in NSW hospitals compared with the worst of the Delta outbreak, Holmes said “I think it’s there now”, noting that during lockdown, presentations for illnesses from car accidents and other life events diminished, but were occurring now. “We’re now fully open, all of those normal everyday presentations are still occurring, and yet we’re still seeing large numbers of patients coming into the health system with Covid – as a result of this government’s decision to let it rip,” Holmes said. Holmes said the current issues in hospitals were a combination of a surge in Covid cases, combined with Covid exposures forcing staff into isolation. “Our members are going above and beyond, shift after shift. Despite everything that is being thrown their way. Enough is enough. The government cannot continue piling more upon nurses and midwives and ignore the conditions they are dealing with.” The chief health officer, Kerry Chant, noted that while hospitalisations had more than doubled in a week, some of those recorded in the hospitalisation figure were in hospital for other reasons, and that this phenomenon was occurring given the extent of the spread of Omicron. The NSW Ambulance commissioner, Dominic Morgan, also appeared at the premier’s Covid update on Friday and warned residents, even those who are Covid-positive, to reserve calling 000 for serious symptoms and illness. He said one in three people who called ambulances currently were not deemed high enough priority for transport to hospital, and said people calling for PCR results and other non-emergencies “tie up our emergency medical call takers and divert us away from the cardiac arrests, the chokings, the drownings”. Do you know more about pressure in the healthcare system? Contact elias.visontay@theguardian.com. You can remain anonymous.Jess Harwood is an illustrator who lives and works on Gadigal land, and shares her artwork @jessharwoodartA juicy watermelon is made to sound like cunnilingus while banana and rockmelon make a potent visual and aural connection. Director Sheridan Harbridge wryly recalls the early challenges of using fresh produce to simulate sex on stage: “How do you find a classy way to smack fruit together?” In a new production of “apocalyptic romcom” 44 Sex Acts in One Week, written by playwright David Finnigan, the humble tomato makes its debut “to simulate the sound of a jade yoni egg going into my vagina”, reveals Rebecca Massey, who plays both sex coach author Malaine Gutierrez and Devil Wears Prada-style editor Irene Gamerman. Using fruit on stage as a live radio play is “messy, so messy”, muses Harbridge. “How do you protect the actors and the audience from so much fruit and juice and stickiness? We’ve had to get a really good sound artist in to control the chaos. The traffic and placement of props has become more important than the dialogue.” Centred in this den of steaminess, Emma Harvey plays clickbait blogger Celina Valderrama who, desperate to avoid being fired, offers to review and perform all the acts in Gutierrez’s new how-to sex manual. Lowbrow meets highbrow as an ecological crisis and a pandemic hit, presciently part of a script written well before Covid-19 emerged in the world’s consciousness. Finnigan, who previously wrote the controversial stage and radio play Kill Climate Deniers, says of 44 Sex Acts and its satire of the wellness boom: “It’s an extremely smutty piece but it’s got a playful edge. There is a lot suggested and they’ve [Massey and Harbridge] found this brilliant technique that allows them to go big.” The best-laid ambitions butted against coronavirus, however. Massey and Harbridge, who appeared together in Kill Climate Deniers at Griffin Theatre in 2018, had formed their own production company, Moonshine &amp; Tits, later sensibly rebranded as Club House Productions, with the aim of mounting works that could respond quickly to the cultural and political zeitgeist. When the pandemic closed theatres in 2020, they wanted to record Finnigan’s new script as a radio play, complete with foley and fruit-sex sound effects (Harbridge’s idea). Optimistically, 44 Sex Acts was shifted to the stage after Sydney theatres first reopened, with the fruit sounds to be made in front of audiences. Then, the trouble started: a lockdown shuttered 44 Sex Acts at Belvoir St theatre after just three performances in December 2020. State border closures cancelled a Brisbane festival season at the Brisbane Powerhouse in September 2021. Likewise, the pandemic again struck out a planned return season for Belvoir’s Festival of Everything that same month. The pair clung to their bananas and carried on. They programmed the play for Sydney festival in 2022 because they were “deranged by then”, says Harbridge, laughing. “Not from being wise, or resilient, it was just too late to turn back.” Massey recalls thinking: “Fuck this, we’ll go big.” Finnigan has since tweaked the script, and the staging “this time is really using the space fully”, says Harbridge. Understudies are lined up in case any performers are forced to drop out, and there are unconfirmed plans to tour the work, where borders permit. In a déjà vu piece of Covid-19 intimate bubble casting, Harvey’s blogger character Celina enlists a man, Alab Delusa, played by Harvey’s partner in real life, Matthew Hardie, to help perform the 44 sex acts, ranging from bondage and discipline to orgy participation. This use of real-life acting partners as sex experimenters recalls the earlier production, when Harbridge herself played Celina, with Harbridge’s own partner, Michael Whalley, playing Alab Delusa (Whalley has since returned to Melbourne to continue playing Ron Weasley in Harry Potter and the Cursed Child). There is also a “B story” in the play involving mosquitoes and frogs, says Massey, which is going to be “looped” with sound effects of water. But the fruit is the real star: both on stage and in her own life, Massey walks around supermarkets “banging things and stroking them to see what sort of noise they make”. Touch fruit, this new Sydney festival season will be the first time that playwright Finnigan has seen 44 Sex Acts in One Week performed on stage. This time last year he was stuck in London as international borders closed. Finnigan still has his sights on lancing the US$1.5tn wellness market and on the “big boom of people seeking alternative sexuality resources” and the “whole lot of grifters who have moved in to sell everything you can think of with no qualification needed”. “If you need a selenite cleansing disc for your jade yoni egg at a DIY vaginal steaming kiosk, you can get that at the drop of a hat,” he says. “The wellness industry now has this frightening political edge to it. Perhaps it always had. These obsessions with getting back to ‘primitive humanity’, there’s a lot of stuff entailed in that. “You get further into the world of these motivational sex gurus, who are teaching you how to ‘cure your cancer with mindful masturbation’. “I don’t know what the ethics are there, but it seems questionable.” 44 Sex Acts in One Week is at the York theatre, Seymour Centre, from 12 to 16 January as part of Sydney festivalOne of the best things about returning to the office is all the incidental steps involved. I’m not a natural gym dweller – I just hate the places – so to keep my body moving in our sedentary modern lives I have to walk. My way to do enough walking to make up for the lack of other exercise (other than yoga) is to get off the bus or train one or two (maybe three on a good day) stops before my destination and walk the rest of the way. I’ve been doing this for more than 15 years, so I can safely say it works in keeping my weight down, spirits up (mostly) and muscles toned (enough for me). And it gets addictive, especially if you have an Apple watch, or a Fitbit or some other step counter. When we go back to the office, I’ll be walking 2km from the bus stop to my desk every morning and afternoon. In the morning, it’s a good opportunity to listen to RN Breakfast (what will I do without Fran Kelly?) and in the evening, it’s all about walking the work off and de-stressing. I might listen to a podcast, convince a colleague to walk with me, catch up on family phone calls or just notice the city around me. It can get a bit sweaty in Sydney summers but I just do it in gym gear and get changed at work. It’s a big chunk of my daily move target and I don’t even notice doing it. My only tip is to start slow and build a routine. If you’re not a morning person, just start out doing it after work. Pretty soon, you won’t even think about your old stop.In March 2020, as the Covid pandemic took hold, the language learning app Duolingo reported double its usual number of sign-ups. Stuck inside under lockdown orders, people had time on their hands and were looking for ways to occupy it. It wasn’t long before I joined its 500 million users in an attempt to recapture the feeling of learning Portuguese during three months spent in Brazil several years ago: that heady thrill of realising I had conveyed the meaning I meant to, the strange alchemy of suddenly understanding what people around me were saying. Could an app give me that? Ninety days, hundreds of new words and plenty of lessons, “crowns” and “streaks” later, it didn’t feel like it. Was the app teaching me anything at all? Entering 2022 with renewed enthusiasm to learn the language, I decided to see what the experts say. Ingrid Piller, a linguistics expert at Macquarie University, says the process of picking up a new language can feel mysterious because there are several elements going on at the same time. These can be divided into the linguistic and the social. On the linguistic side, you must learn new words, grammatical structures and pronunciation. If you are taking up a language as an intellectual exercise, or so you know how to order a meal on a trip to Paris, apps are really useful. But if you want to converse and impart meaning, then that’s where things get difficult. “Language is about interacting with other people, it’s not something we do alone,” Piller says. “The really big challenge of language learning is actually for our minds to bring all these elements together creatively and make decisions [in the moment]: how do I pronounce this? What kind of words do I choose? And how do I put these together in a grammatically correct sentence, or in larger chunks that produce conversations?” An app can help you with the linguistic, but not the social. And because apps such as Duolingo borrow elements from gaming, they are pretty good at teaching you those building blocks. During lockdown, I spent about 15 minutes a day doing lessons and quizzes, and perfecting my pronunciation of my favourite phrase in Portuguese, “a gente” (we) – it just sounds good! But the more you want to learn, the more diverse your language learning should be, Piller says. You might take classes, watch videos and read Twitter in the other language, while keeping the app as a useful tool on the side. “You get achievement points for logging in every day and unlocking the next level. Some apps do this better than others, but the gamification element is really important in keeping people glued to the screen,” Piller says. Using the app regularly will give you better results than doing a 20-hour language course over a semester, but then nothing for three months. It’s all about consistency. But the dopamine hit I got from the gaming elements in the app wasn’t the same as the thrill I got from booking a table in a restaurant over the phone in Portuguese. There is something vulnerable about learning a language; you have to overcome your fear of sounding stupid. And that’s where true achievement lies – in taking a risk to connect and being understood. An app has none of that social peril – it’s safe, and therefore slightly empty. “We come to think about all kinds of achievement in this metricised way,” Piller says. “[Apps] give us a metric sense of achievement, but it’s a quantity without a quality.” Just as social media apps provide a vehicle for connection, but not connection itself, the magic of language learning happens in the world, not on the screen. And it is a kind of magic. While I was in Brazil, I met a guy who told me he and his girlfriend would sometimes go on dates where they only conversed in English. He said it felt like they were different people discovering each other anew. It’s a comforting thought at a time when travelling overseas is so difficult – the idea that our worlds are created through language, and with a new language we can recreate our familiar worlds afresh.Rural readers are in for a bumper crop of established and emerging writers festivals taking place in country regions throughout 2022, a harvest that also offers plenty of flavour to city-dwelling book lovers seeking literary-themed getaways. Jerilderie-born author of The Dressmaker, Rosalie Ham, says events in the bush have always provided a great excuse for a reunion of like minds. Her extensive literary circuit all began with an invitation to talk at a writers festival in country Victoria. “Shepparton was home territory and I felt reassured about my first festival, but was nervous that someone would accuse me of writing mean things about them, or small towns, or that someone would ask me a question I couldn’t answer,” she says. “I arrived hours too early, my car loaded with every swish outfit I owned, and watery with nerves. I walked to the festival venue from the motel and bumped into an old neighbour, was given a plate of food and a glass of wine, then seated at a table with some Shep locals. “I watched how writers were just people in the green room but turned into performers when they stepped on to a stage. When it was my time to present I knew the audience had come to hear and enjoy, and that I had something to offer.” ‘Basically a big celebration’ In Ham’s experience, rural writers festivals are compact and less frantic. “Everyone knows everyone in country areas so it’s a bit of a reunion, a strengthening of bonds and a happy place to be. “There’s one main street and limited selection for meals, so there’s no point keeping your guard up or pretending you don’t see the romance or fantasy writers. By the end of day one you’ll be besties and have learned something.” She says she has never been approached while taking time out in a country town but “a couple of ladies once waited outside my loo door to have me sign their book”. One remote literary event required a memorable flight. “I didn’t recognise anyone in the boarding lounge but we started sharing ‘looks’ when we realised how tiny the plane was,” she says. “The pilot had to deliver the safety instructions on his knees. Conversation was impossible and the plane shuddered, dipped and rattled its way over lifeless, parched farming country below. It was a great leveller, and we were all relieved to squash into the waiting minibus. Then it drove off without our luggage, so had to chuck a uey. From that point on we were all inseparable.” For its general meeting in Alpha, Queensland, the Isolated Children’s Parents’ Association set up a city of tents. “They were all exactly the same, army-base neat, a gift pack waiting on each neatly made-up stretcher,” Ham says. “People also slept in horse floats and caravans. There were speeches, visiting dignitaries, local celebrities, a band, a dance, a bar – basically a big celebration that ran seamlessly over three days. “It was one of the most impressive efforts at community cooperation that I’ve ever been part of.” Ham also travelled to a Isolated Children’s Parents’ Association event at Hatfield, in the NSW Riverina: “We drove past a deserted corrugated shed under a huge bald tree in the middle of a vast flatness, and someone said, ‘That’s where you’re doing your talk tomorrow.’ “It was an all-girl meeting, and the next day the hall was surrounded by a hundred or more four-wheel drives, the ladies were fixing a clogged toilet and kids hung from or perched on every branch from top to bottom of the huge tree. “Inside the shed was like the produce hall at the Royal Melbourne Show, the noise of discussing, swapping information, catching up and laughing deafening. As expected, the day featured an impressive line-up of speakers, delicious food and ran without a hitch.” ‘The world is small’ Ham’s breakout novel The Dressmaker and its screen adaptation introduced the world to seamstress Tilly Dunnage, who returns to her fictitious hometown Dungatar and unleashes an epic tale of retribution. This portrait of rural Australia, now extended in the sequel The Dressmaker’s Secret, usually sets country tongues wagging. “When I talk about small communities I see the body language shift, people nodding and nudging their friends, and I can feel the hard gazes of those who have something to say. “Once someone said, ‘My best friend’s dad was a crossdresser, he owned the local frock shop,’” Ham says, referencing fashionista Sergeant Horatio Farrat, the character played by Hugo Weaving in the film of her book. According to Ham, it was this recognition and empathy that caused The Dressmaker to hit its mark well before the film came out. “Most rural folk are curious, a skill that’s necessary to succeeding in an environment that changes often yet stays the same,” she says. “Country people meet the unexpected and are accepting and tolerant, quite unlike the general cliche stereotype we see so often.” Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Vintage couture is often a hallmark of Ham’s appearances at country events. The film of The Dressmaker was made by her childhood friend Sue Maslin, and they travelled far and wide in the wake of that film to festivals and rural occasions. “Women came wearing something they whipped up 50 years ago that has stood the test of time, or their mother’s 1950s frock, even their grandmother’s vintage couture,” Ham says. “The blokes dug out their dad’s wedding suit. “There’s an underground movement, a vast cult of sewers, men and women, who tenderly care for their sewing machines and gather in large numbers all over Australia to stitch and socialise, compete and learn.” Ham says she enjoys meeting readers at literary events because they remind her book lovers are a tangible, discerning group; plus she keeps them in mind as she writes. “You also learn to be on your best behaviour at all times because the world is small,” she says. “You never know who you’ll run into.” Country writers festivals 2022 Literary events are taking place across regional and country Australia in 2022. Here’s a taster of what’s on offer: Words Out West, Dalby, Queensland, 4-19 March Scone literary festival, upper Hunter, NSW, 11-13 March Clunes Book Town, central Victoria, 30 April-1 May Bendigo writers festival, central Victoria, 12-15 May Margaret River readers &amp; writers festival, south-west WA, 13-15 May Queenscliffe literary festival, southern Victoria, 13-29 May Kyogle writers festival, northern rivers, NSW, 13-15 May Bathurst writers &amp; readers festival, central west, NSW, dates TBC Words on the Waves, Central Coast, NSW, 3-6 June Word Fest Toowoomba, Darling Downs, Queensland, 4-5 June Bellingen readers &amp; writers festival, mid-north coast, NSW, 10-12 June Outback writers festival, Winton, Queensland, 21-21 June Mildura writers festival, north-west Victoria, 14-17 July Yarra Valley writers festival, Victoria, 15-17 July Corrugated Lines, Broome, WA, 29-31 July Byron writers festival, northern rivers, NSW, 5-7 August Mudgee readers’ festival, central west, NSW, 20-21 August Words in Winter, Daylesford, Victoria, August, dates TBC Write Around the Murray, Albury-Wodonga, NSW/Victoria, 14-18 September High Country writers festival, Glen Innes, New England, NSW, 8-9 October Tamar Valley writers festival, Tasmania, October, dates TBC Blue Mountains writers festival, Katoomba, NSW, 21-23 October Headland writers festival, Tathra, far south coast, NSW, 28-30 October Mountain writers festival, Macedon, Vic, November, dates TBC Southern Highlands writers festival, Bowral, NSW, dates TBC IF Maitland, lower Hunter, NSW, dates TBC Michael Burge is a freelance writer based in Glen Innes. He has just published his debut novel, Tank Water (MidnightSun Publishing), and he is director of the annual High Country writers festival. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityThe conviction of Ghislaine Maxwell on sex-trafficking charges this week has increased the scrutiny of others who worked for or socialized with disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein for years, and their knowledge of the pair’s activities. Attention has largely focused on prominent male associates of Epstein, including Prince Andrew, who faces a civil suit brought by Virginia Roberts Giuffre. Giuffre alleges the Queen’s son had sex with her on three occasions two decades ago when, aged 17, she had been sexually trafficked by Jeffrey Epstein, allegations Andrew vehemently denies. Four Epstein employees and assistants were described in a 2007 non-prosecution agreement as “potential co-conspirators” when Epstein pleaded guilty to solicitation in Florida in return for a lenient sentence. Giuffre has said she hopes Maxwell’s conviction “is not the end but rather another step in justice being served. Maxwell did not act alone. Others must be held accountable.” After Epstein’s arrest and suicide in 2019, the US attorney’s office said that it was not bound by the Florida agreement that named the four women – Sarah Kellen, Lesley Groff, Adriana Ross and Nada Marcinkova – and said they could be subject to criminal charges. All have denied involvement or knowledge of the Epstein-Maxwell abuses. Maxwell, 60, who was found guilty on Wednesday of facilitating the abuse of underage girls for Epstein, had argued she was covered by the non-prosecution agreement, but her argument was rejected by presiding judge Alison Nathan. Kellen, 41, who is now married to an American race car driver, is the most prominent of the four women, but has claimed she was also a victim of Epstein. Kellen was accused by lawyers in legal filings years ago of “bringing girls to Epstein’s mansion to be abused”. Kellen’s name came up in witness testimony during the prosecution phase of Maxwell’s trial, when the government’s key witness, known as “Carolyn”, alleged that Kellen scheduled her sexualized massages with Epstein and paid her $500 to pose for a naked photograph when she was 14 or 15 years old. Kellen, who has changed her name, was not called to testify, suggesting she was not cooperating with government prosecutors. Maxwell’s defense team contended that Kellen was among several potential witnesses “who the government could have charged, criminally, based on the testimony we heard”. Groff was Epstein’s New York-based assistant for 20 years. Earlier in December, a civil case against Groff brought by Jennifer Araoz, who had accused Epstein of sexually abusing her at his mansion in New York City in 2001 and 2002, was dropped. According to Groff’s attorneys, Michael Bachner and Jon Whitcomb, federal prosecutors have no plans to bring charges against her at this time. “After a more than two-year investigation by the Department of Justice into Jeffrey Epstein’s conduct, which included lengthy interviews of witnesses and a thorough review of relevant communications, we have been informed that no criminal charges will be brought against Lesley Groff,” Bachner and Whitcomb said in a statement provided to the Guardian. Groff’s attorneys added that their client had “never witnessed anything improper or illegal”. Groff’s lawyers said that she worked from the Madison Avenue offices, and never stepped foot in Epstein’s personal home. Her duties, they said, included making appointments for Epstein, taking his messages, and setting up high-level meetings with “CEOs, business executives, scientists, politicians, celebrities, charitable organizations and universities” and had “no knowledge and no participation in any of these horrific crimes”. Groff “remains heartbroken for Jennifer and all of the victims,” Whitcomb said. Ross, a former model from Poland who moved to Florida in 2002, was hired to work at the financier’s mansion. Ross, also known as Adriana Mucinska, often flew on the financier’s private jet, according to flight records. Asked during civil litigation about how the Epstein conspiracy operated – and if Prince Andrew had ever been involved with under-age women, Ross repeatedly invoked her fifth amendment rights against self-incrimination. Marcinkova is now a pilot and has changed her name. According to police records reported by the Guardian in 2015, one alleged victim claimed that she was told Marcinkova had been bought from her parents in eastern Europe by Epstein when she was 15. One alleged that she was made to have sex with Marcinkova and to watch her have sex with Epstein. Marcinkova has since changed her last name. Bennett Gershman, a professor of law at Pace University in New York, told the Guardian that he has doubts the government plans to prosecute others. “Yes, there are potential new defendants and the government knows that. It’s at the prosecutor’s discretion whether to go forward to prosecute further or whether they feel having convicted Maxwell that’s going to close the book on the prosecution of Epstein and the things Epstein and Maxwell did together.” Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.html* Wordplay in 16 across and 15 down clues produces the ‘heart’ of the solution required. In each case each defined solution for entry in the grid requires the addition of the same two letters at the beginning and at the end. Across 1* aetatis suae T(ense) + AT/ISSU(e) in AE/AE 7 almond brown LORD N. BOWMAN (anag) 13 lofts LO  TS 14* Amsterdam S(e)T(t)E(r)/R(o)D(e) in AM/AM 15 patella PA  ELLA 16 ghee dietinG HE Eschewed (hidden) 17* dorado RA(w) in DO/DO 18 line of sight LET GO FINISH (anag) 20 reassess RE + SEAS (anag) in SS in [steamship] 21* sense (wi)N(es) in SE/SE 22* Penelope LONE (anag) in PE/PE 26 cellar seller (hom) 28* secularise C(hristian)U(nion) + LIAR (anag) in SE/SE 30 aweto remOTE WAnganui (hidden rev) 32* lamella M(eat)/E(aten)/L(eisurely) in LA/LA 33 ingrate INGRATE/IN GRATE 35 edamame EDAM + (g)AME 37 amnesia cryptic clue [an elephant never forgets] 38* La Scala S(weden) + C(onsular) A(gent) in LA/LA 39 hurdler cryptic def 41 prong PRO&lt;(milliga)N&gt;G 43* Casablanca SABL(e) + AN in CA/CA 45* iconic ON [performing] in IC/IC 47 Dies Irae READIES (anag) + (encore)E [wordplay lacked a second ‘I’] 48* Annan N(ame) in AN/AN 50* enlargen LARG(esse) in EN/EN 54* shoal of fish A FOOL (anag) + IF (rev) in SH/SH 56 lies in LIE + SIN 57 Juno NUJ (rev) + 0 [National Union of Journalists] 59 Rain Man (s)AN MARIN(o) (anag) 60* therewith (h)E(a)R(s)E(s)/W(a)I(t) in TH/TH 61 limit L  IT &amp;Lit [over the limit] 62* stretchiest (Guy) R(i/E)TCHIE in ST/ST 63* Leeds Castle S(ea) CADETS (anag) in LE/LE Down 1* allegorical ECHO GIRL (anag) in AL/AL 2* taffeta F(i)FE in TA/TA [this clue lacked a definition] 3 task T(h)A(t)S/(o)K 4* sea horse (l)AHOR(e) in SE/SE 5 unseat UNITED STATES – ID TEST (anag) 6 eyesore EEYORE’S (anag) 7 Andalusia A(rea)  A(rea) 8 moment double def 9 Nipponese NIP(drink)/PO(river) + knees (hom) 10* Bathsheba T(he)/H(ittites)/SHE in BA/BA 11 Oflag O(ld)/FLAG 12* near the bone BOTH ARE (anag) in NE/NE 19* Israelis LEAR (rev) in IS/IS 23* one gallon (vi)LLAGE(rs) (rev) in ON/ON 24* serialise I(sland)/LAIR (rev) in SE/SE 25 Fire Dance FIERCE AND (anag) 27* lemon sole MONS/O in LE/LE 29 urges (s)URGES 31 ta-ta TA(ffe)TA 34 agama (Vasco) (d)A/GAMA 35 Echo latE CHOpin (hidden) 36* Arrochar CARRIAGE HORSE – SIEGE (anag) in AR/AR 37* aspidistras D(istilled)SPIRIT (anag) in AS/AS 40* reconnoitre COOT INN (anag) in RE/RE 42 guillemot GU  T 43* chaffinch AFFIN(e) [relation by marriage] in CH?CH 44 bench test BENCH + TEST 46 insights THIS SSIGN (anag)The Guardian Footballer of the Year is an award given to a player who has done something remarkable, whether by overcoming adversity, helping others or setting a sporting example by acting with exceptional honesty. Through the window behind Simon Kjær, a grey November afternoon is dimming and the lights across the Øresund strait are starting to flicker. Boats carry commuters home between Sweden and Denmark, or in reverse; the view is striking and simultaneously mundane, a confluence of inexorable nature and everyday business. Inside, Kjær is reflecting on 12 months in which barely anything came to feel familiar. “Positive, negative, we’ve been through everything,” he says. “All the register of emotions. We had it all.” A pause; a repetition. “We had it all.” We are here, in this meeting room at the national team’s hotel in Helsingør, because Kjær has been named the Guardian’s Footballer of the Year for 2021. On 12 June he did something nobody on a football pitch would ever expect necessary: when Christian Eriksen, a close friend, collapsed with a cardiac arrest during Denmark’s Euro 2020 tie with Finland he ran to his aid immediately, putting him in the recovery position and starting the CPR procedure that ultimately helped save his life. As the situation developed, he formed a protective ring around Eriksen with their teammates and comforted Eriksen’s partner, Sabrina Kvist Jensen. Kjær is Denmark’s captain and led them with extraordinary strength and composure through an unthinkable ordeal. The recognition has been overwhelming: name a year-end shortlist and Kjær has been on it, most notably finishing 18th in the Ballon d’Or ranking, while Uefa bestowed its president’s award on him and the Danish medical staff. He accepts our accolade with the same request that greeted the others: that it is taken as a collective honour, shared among the squad to highlight their response. “I appreciate all the positive words and gratitude,” he says. “I’m honoured. But as I’ve always said, my reaction was impulsive and so was everyone’s. What we did, we did as a team. I would not have been able to keep my shit together if I didn’t have anyone to lean against. “It was our friend: not a colleague, a friend. That made it so much more intense, and what we did was instinctive. I don’t believe you can prepare yourself for anything like it. I know, for myself, that I wouldn’t have been able to do any of this without my team by my side. At the end of the day everything was only for one purpose and that was for Christian, his wellbeing at the time and his family.” Eriksen is now healthy, which is all that has ever mattered. When the Finland game restarted with inordinate haste Kjær realised he had, as he puts it, “nothing to give” and was quickly substituted. For whatever it was worth, Denmark lost and the context makes what followed all the more jaw-dropping. Nobody would have criticised Kjær and his team for deciding a summer tournament was no longer for them; they would certainly not have blamed themselves. They took things day by day and found themselves powered by something that, even now, is not easily described. Denmark knew they were a good side but it took more than that to defy logic and reach the last four. “You tried it all,” Kjær says of their attempts to restore a semblance of normality. “We allowed ourselves to train an hour, an hour and a half a day, and then get through it with all the bounces and difficulties that the days would bring.” The first match-shaped hurdle was against Belgium on the same pitch at Parken, Denmark’s national stadium in Copenhagen, that had witnessed such trauma five days previously. They lost 2-1 but that was immaterial. Nobody who was present will forget that sun-drenched afternoon, which became a visceral affirmation of life. Amid a heady atmosphere of joy, relief, regret, gratitude and pride, Denmark tore into their opponents and could have scored five or six. Eriksen watched from the Rigshospitalet, a few hundred yards away. Forget the result: it became the match of their lives. It had been a case of putting one foot in front of the other. “I went on; warm-up; dressing room; walk out for national anthem; get through the national anthem; hear the whistle; take it from there,” Kjær says, slowly enunciating each stage. “I had no idea whatsoever what would happen. Even if I went into the game knowing I should play, at the end of the day I didn’t know if I would play. I had no idea how I would act, no one did, but I was OK. So we enjoyed it and the result didn’t matter, I can tell you that, 100%. It didn’t matter. Not at any point. “The fans, the stadium, that support, the feeling inside, I think it describes what happened for Denmark overall that summer, for people who were there but also those watching on TV. How could we do that performance? I cannot find you explanations; I can only come back to the team, the support, the trust, the comfort we find in each other. Our bond was the only thing that gave us a chance to get back out on the pitch.” Their participation in the tournament hung by a thread but now they knew they could perform. Russia, Wales and Czech Republic were all seen off in a string of adrenaline-fuelled, but coolly executed, victories that led to the semi-final at Wembley. Had destiny simply decided they would go all the way? Not quite: Kjær scored an own goal and, while the extra-time penalty that brought England’s win was marginal, Denmark were out on their feet by the end. The result was fair but it cast no shadow. “If we hadn’t passed through the group stage I’d have been totally OK with it,” he says. “Sure, afterwards I might have looked back and still hoped. I’m still pissed about the penalty, and missing the final. But in the end it was secondary, and football has become secondary for me. It’s not as important as it was before.” Although he would do anything to reverse the circumstances behind this realignment, Kjær has not fought it. He calls the football pitch “the place on earth where I feel the most comfortable”; it can never quite be the same place after Eriksen’s brush with death but it has become one of perspective. It has helped him compartmentalise: every drop must be wrung from the chunk of the day allocated to football, but time with his two children every morning and evening is sacred. “When you have that experience, you carry it with you for the rest of your life,” he says. “But you learn from it, you take things out of it, and maybe that also allows me to play better football than before. I let myself enjoy it and that gives me a more relaxed approach; a more dedicated approach but one where, at the same time, I’m resting in it. I love playing football, always loved it, but I don’t have 10 more years so I have to appreciate the time that’s left.” Those words soon carry added meaning. After the interview has finished Kjær graciously offers a follow-up conversation if any loose ends need tying, but neither of us really expects it to be necessary. Three weeks later, though, his fresh outlook is tested. In the early moments of Milan’s match in Genoa on 1 December, he collides with Andrea Cambiaso and is taken off on a stretcher after lengthy treatment. It looks bad and two days later the news is confirmed: he has required surgery to the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee, along with a reinsertion of his medial collateral ligament, meaning he will be out for six months. On top of the year’s other fluctuations, Kjær did not need this. He has been playing the best club football of his life, anchoring the defence for Stefano Pioli’s rejuvenated side and perhaps bearing out his own analysis. At 32 there has been no sign of a slowdown, quite the opposite, but now it is forced upon him. We are in touch again the following week, after all, and speak remotely. His attitude is consistent. “In the bigger picture this is just my leg, and it is just football, even though both things are pretty important to a footballer,” he says. “I am well, my family is well, and I will return to the football pitch. “I prefer to see it as a positive and rare opportunity. I’ve often had the thought about how it would be to take two or three months away from matches, both to be creative about optimising my game and making my body stronger. Normally that’s never possible in a career. I’d rather not have been injured but I have to accept it, work to get over it and get out as a stronger version of myself.” Kjær has incentives to do that: there is a Scudetto to win and a World Cup in which to lead Denmark, whose armband he has worn since 2016. Back in Helsingør, he drills into the mentality that has brought him this far. He came through the youth system at Midtjylland, where his father, Jørn, was kit man until retiring in February, and had the culture shock of joining Palermo when he was 19. Stops at Wolfsburg, Roma, Lille, Fenerbahce, Sevilla and Atalanta followed: it was a fine, if undulating, club career that became outstanding after he signed for Milan last year. “In my mind I’m a guy who grew up in a small city and my feet are solidly planted on the ground,” he says. “But sometimes you have to be a little bit arrogant, a little bit ignorant, about your own capabilities because it will push you a little bit more. If you’re playing against Messi or Ronaldo, they are probably better than you. But if you know that every day you work your ass off, you can tell yourself: ‘Who is a better defender in the world than me right now?’ A few, maybe a little bit more, but under the right conditions … I believe I’m the best, I have to believe that. If not I never will be, and I will never give 100%.” Kjær speaks softly and deliberately, his answers lengthy but clear. It is not difficult to see how he might carry a squad with him. Denmark has a population of 5.8m and, from the outside, its stream of top-level footballers have exuded a palpable toughness in defying limitations of size. It could be simplistic to twin that with their response to such shocking adversity last summer but the question seems worthwhile: what makes a Danish footballer tick? “Overall we’re very respectful, educated people,” he says. “If you take 100 Danish players from around the world, maybe one will be a little nuts, but I think you’ll find parallels between all of us. You’re brought up to be very independent, learn to take care of yourself, learn to be polite. You learn attitude and confidence is a good thing, but not too much. You appreciate and earn your respect, never taking anything for granted. We’re very direct, we’re very honest, and I think that is very important.” Those qualities forge the ties that bind. On the pitch they have been augmented by genuine excellence. Kjær and Denmark qualified for Qatar 2022 at a canter; they have secured their place when we meet, but beat the Faroe Islands two days later for a ninth straight victory. Even without Eriksen, their undoubted star, they can be backed for at least a quarter-final place. In October 2020, Kjær and Eriksen won their 100th caps in a Nations League win at Wembley. Only eight other players had achieved that for Denmark and it is a small, apt snapshot of the journey they have undertaken together. The symmetry when they ended up in Milan, Eriksen playing for Internazionale, delighted both men. Eriksen has since departed and is training with Odense, where he played as a teenager, as he discerns whether a return to professional football will be possible. The happiest coincidence was short-lived, but it was one episode in something far more profound. “I speak a lot with Christian,” Kjær says. “It’s been my therapy. If I know Christian is OK, then I’m OK; if he’s good, I’m good.” Outside, the beams over the water are becoming sharper; hundreds of invisible figures are returning to the places they know. “Of course I have things I struggle with, and I will always struggle with them. But with time, and if I can see Christian and his family are good, then I am too. That is where I find my peace in it, and that is enough for me.”With an impeccable sense of timing, Ashley Giles flies into Sydney next week to join up with the England squad ahead of the fourth Ashes Test. I know what you’re all thinking: if only he’d arrived earlier. How differently things might have panned out had the “Managing Director, England Men’s Cricket” been able to effect his unique brand of managerial direction earlier in the series? Perhaps, like Glenn McGrath in 2005 or John Snow in 1974-75, the Giles Effect (Conjecture) seems fated to remain an arresting counterfactual in the footnotes of Ashes history. Instead, Giles arrives with the Ashes gone and English cricket in varying states of disarray. The captain, Joe Root, is said to be quietly seething at the manner of this defeat and the entirely foreseeable missteps that have led to it. Chris Silverwood, the man whom Giles decided to make the most powerful England coach of the 21st century, will probably end up leaving his job. However Tom Harrison, Giles’s boss and the chief executive of the England and Wales Cricket Board, still gets his share of a £2m bonus pot. So let’s charitably call it a mixed picture. Of course, such is the level of public anger at this latest Ashes debacle that it is not entirely beyond the realms of possibility that all four of the above could be out of a job in the next few weeks. Silverwood feels the likeliest to go; Giles as the man who appointed him might also find himself dispensable collateral; Root will probably be given the right to go on his own terms should he wish; Harrison is beginning to show the strain of almost seven years at the helm, to the point where he has largely ceased being able to communicate in coherent English sentences. For fans and pundits still stinging from the manner of this latest Ashes debacle, perhaps this would classify as a necessary purgation, a long-overdue cleansing of the stables: an opportunity to burn down the entire festering structure and build something afresh. Which feels instinctively right at a time like this, with England’s defeat widely being described as their worst in Ashes history. And yet perhaps the real lesson of this series is not about who needs to go, but who needs to come in. After all this is – by recent standards, at least – a remarkably thin top team, consisting of no chairman, no chief selector or full-time selection panel, and a bare minimum of coaching staff. Silverwood’s absence from the Sydney Test after a close contact tested positive for Covid has merely underlined the paucity of coaching expertise on tour. Paul Collingwood has left to concentrate on the white-ball tour of the West Indies, Jeetan Patel and Jon Lewis are also isolating, and so pretty much the entire setup is currently in the hands of assistant coach Graham Thorpe. In a way this is a pretty good metaphor for the organisation as a whole: a setup that has been brain‑drained, hollowed out from the inside. It is no secret that the last two years have had a punishing impact on the ECB’s finances. Staff have been furloughed and laid off. Reserves have been whittled down. Programmes have been cut. The official selection panel has been trimmed from four in 2018 to just one: Silverwood, whose latest brainwave was to leave out both Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad on a green wicket in Brisbane. Perhaps some of the pruning was necessary: certainly there have been times in the past when Team England on tour felt more like a circus. But these days there seems to be a distinct absence of expertise at the heart of the setup: the innovation and imagination and life experience and variety of voices that moves a team forward, rather than simply keeping it running. For all his faults national selector Ed Smith was one such voice: a man prepared to embrace the heterodox, posit the wacky idea, imagine the world a shade of Joe Denly. Andy Flower was another, and the decision to retain his services as Lions coach after the 2013-14 Ashes was a quietly inspired move. But perhaps the biggest loss was Sir Andrew Strauss, the man responsible for remaking English cricket twice: first as captain from 2009 to 2011, and then as director from 2015 to 2018, where he put in place the white-ball-oriented strategy that helped England win their first men’s World Cup. This is not to argue that any of them is necessarily the right man right now, or that any of the current occupants necessarily deserve to stay. The broader point is that any successful team needs a surfeit of hard thought as well as hard work, an ability to see round corners and approach problems in new ways. With respect to both, neither Silverwood nor Giles really fit the bill: the latter having overseen a gentle regression of the white-ball side as coach from 2012-14, the former now having done the same to the Test side. In Silverwood’s determination to “take the positives” from England’s third Test defeat there were echoes of Giles’s infamous claim in the wake of the humiliating defeat to the Netherlands at the 2014 World T20 that England had “warmed up well”. They are middle managers, factotums, details men, personally admirable and perfectly competent. They are the bread and cheese of any self-respecting organisation. But you also need people who aspire to more. Instead, Silverwood and Giles were given the keys to the palace, and in the process we learned a good deal about the ECB’s attitude to Test cricket. That with a base level of competence it would essentially look after itself, while the more viable revenue streams were explored instead: 50-over, 20-over, 100-ball. Replacing the men themselves will be easy enough. Replacing the philosophy they embodied will be several degrees harder.We are closing this blog now. Goodnight and a good New Year’s Eve from London. Uganda’s president, Yoweri Museveni, has announced plans to lift Covid containment measures in January that have been in place since March 2020, including reopening schools, bars and nightclubs, citing rising vaccination rates. The country has imposed some of Africa’s toughest restrictions. In September some measures were eased, including allowing the resumption of education for universities and other post-secondary institutions. In a televised speech late on Friday, Museveni said pre-primary, primary and secondary schools would reopen on 10 January. Bars and nightclubs would reopen and a nighttime curfew will be lifted two weeks after schools have resumed, he added. Movie theatres and sporting events would also be allowed to reopen, he said, without giving further details. As of Friday, Uganda had registered about 137,000 confirmed cases and nearly 3,300 deaths. The president urged Ugandans to get vaccinated as the “first solution” to Covid. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: The UK reported another 189,846 Covid cases in the last 24 hours and reported a further 203 deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test. More than 1 million people have tested positive in the last seven days. The number of patients in hospital with Covid in England increased to 12,395, up from 11,452 the day before. Experts say the daily case figures do not include reinfections, and not everyone who is infected has symptoms and takes a test, suggesting the true number of infections is likely to be higher. The full story is here. One in 25 people in England had Covid before Christmas, including one in 15 in London, according to a new estimate from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). Story here. The Philippines will impose tighter curbs in the capital region for the next two weeks, an acting presidential spokesperson said, to try to limit infections by the Omicron variant. The region including the capital, Manila, will be placed under the third of a five-scale alert system from 3 to 15 January. Level 3 bans face-to-face classes, contact sports, and closes funfairs and casinos. The government’s coronavirus taskforce will also reduce the operating capacity for social events, tourist attractions, amusement parks, restaurant dine-in services, fitness studios and personal care services. Ireland became the latest EU country to cut the isolation period for many people who contract Covid, as record infection numbers spark fears of crippling staff shortages in essential public services as well as retail and hospitality venues. Spain, Portugal and Greece reduced isolation times this week, others such as Germany and France are considering doing so, and Italy cut its quarantine for fully vaccinated people who come into contact with someone who has tested positive. The moves follow a similar decision by the US and reflect early research suggesting Omicron generally causes milder illness than earlier versions of the virus. The World Health Organization has described the decisions to cut isolation and quarantine periods as part of a delicate balancing act between controlling the transmission of the virus and keeping national economies up and running. Story here. Germany’s leading coronavirus expert has expressed optimism that his country could expect a “relatively normal” winter in 2022, after data from other countries firmed up the impression that infections with the Omicron variant could be milder than Delta. Story here. UK regulators approved Pfizer’s “life-saving” antiviral drug Paxlovid, which boasts nearly 90% success in preventing severe illness among vulnerable adults if taken soon after becoming infected with Covid. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) found the oral treatment “to be safe and effective at reducing the risk of hospitalisation and death in people with mild to moderate Covid-19 infection, who are at an increased risk of developing severe disease”. The agency said Paxlovid was most effective when taken during the early stages of a Covid infection, and recommended it was used within five days of a patient’s first symptoms. The approval is for patients aged 18 and over with at least one risk factor for developing severe illness, such as obesity or diabetes, or being over 60. Story here. The number of NHS hospital staff in England absent due to Covid has nearly doubled since the start of the month, new figures show. There were 24,632 staff at NHS hospital trusts ill with coronavirus or having to self-isolate on Boxing Day, up 31% from 18,829 a week earlier and nearly double the 12,508 at the start of the month. Turkey logged 40,786 new coronavirus cases on Friday, its highest since April. The health minister warned that the Omicron variant had become dominant as Turks celebrated New Year’s Eve without restrictions. “Although there are no restrictions, we recommend that you act as if there are,” Fahrettin Koca said on Twitter in what he called a New Year’s “warning”. The minister recommended that in this time of increased risk, people should avoided crowded, poorly ventilated environments. New Covid infections have more than doubled from 18,910 a week ago. Since the first cases of Omicron were reported in the UK just over a month ago it has spread rapidly across the UK, fuelling a surge of infections. But scientists have also been working at speed. Here is an overview of the expanding scientific knowledge of the variant. Greece reported 40,560 Covid cases on Friday, setting a new record high for the fourth successive day following a surge of cases of the Omicron variant. Health authorities said 76 deaths had been reported on Friday. Greece introduced new restrictions this week, ordering bars, restaurants and nightclubs to close at midnight, with no standing customers and no music. An exception is New Year’s Eve, when establishments can close at 2am. The country of 11 million people has reported 1,210,853 infections since the first case was detected in February 2020 and 20,790 Covid-related deaths. Italy reported a record 144,243 Covid cases on Friday, following 126,888 the day before, the health ministry said, while the number of deaths fell slightly to 155 from 156. Italy has officially registered 137,402 deaths linked to coronavirus since February 2020, and reported 6.125 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid - not including those in intensive care - stood at 11,150 on Friday, up from 10,866 a day earlier. There were 119 new admissions to intensive care units, down from 134 on Thursday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,260 from a previous 1,226. A record 1.22 million tests for Covid were carried out in the last day, compared with 1.15 million the previous day, the health ministry said. Here’s a bit more context on those latest case numbers in the UK: The number of confirmed Covid cases in the UK continued to rise on the last day of 2021, with 189,846 reported in the previous 24 hours, while the number of people in hospital and the number of deaths also rose. The figures follow two consecutive days when the number of new cases was above 180,000, with a record 189,213 reported on Thursday and 183,037 on Wednesday – although the latter included a backlog in some nations of cases recorded before and during the Christmas period. Friday’s figures reported 203 people having died within 28 days of a positive Covid test. Thursday’s data had 332 recorded deaths, a steep rise from 57 on Wednesday, explained in part by NHS England not reporting hospital deaths since 24 December. The number of Covid patients in hospital in England increased to 12,395 on Friday, from 11,452 the day before. Experts say the daily case figures do not include reinfections and not everyone who is infected has symptoms and takes a test, suggesting the true number of infections is likely to be higher. According to a new estimate on Friday from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), one in 25 people in England had Covid before Christmas, including one in 15 in London. Based on swabs collected from randomly selected households in England, the ONS said an estimated 4% of the community had Covid in the week ending 23 December – equating to about 2,024,700 people. The week before, about one in 35 people were estimated to be infected. The UK has reported another 189,846 new Covid cases in the last 24 hours as over 1m people tested positive in the last seven days. The number is likely to be on the low side thanks to widespread shortages of PCR and lateral flow tests. The official UK Covid dashboard also recorded another 203 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. Nearly 2,000 people were admitted to hospital. The world is celebrating New Year’s Eve in spite of the Omicron variant spreading across the globe – and fireworks and parties are making a comeback this year after many events were cancelled in late 202. My colleague Martin Belam is covering the celebrations in our New Year’s Eve live blog: Portugal has reported a new daily record of 30,829 coronavirus cases, up from 28,659 the previous day, with Omicron accounting for an estimated 83% of new cases. The health authority DGS registered 18 fatalities from Covid, up from 16 on Thursday, but that was a fraction of the more than 300 daily deaths recorded in late January when Portugal had just begun its vaccination campaign. The number of patients in intensive care was steady at 145, well below the more than 900 in early 2021. Portugal has one of the world’s highest Covid vaccination rates with about 87% of its 10 million population fully inoculated. In the run-up to New Year’s Eve, the government ordered nightclubs and bars to close, required people to have negative Covid tests to enter hotels, casinos and restaurants, and limited outdoor gatherings to 10 people. Thousands of flights in the US and internationally have been delayed or cancelled on Friday, adding to travel disruption during the holiday week owing to adverse weather and rising Covid cases, Reuters reports. More than 2,600 flights were cancelled globally as of early Friday, including more than 1,200 flights within the US or entering or departing it, according to a running tally on the flight-tracking website FlightAware.com. There were more than 4,600 flight delays in total. The Christmas holidays are typically a peak time for air travel, but the rapid spread of the Omicron variant has led to a sharp increase in Covid infections, forcing airlines to cancel flights as pilots and crew need to be quarantined. On Thursday, for the second day in a row, the US had a record number of new reported cases, with more than 290,000 new infections reported each day, a Reuters tally showed. The state of New York reported more than 74,000 new Covid cases on Thursday, from more than 336,000 tests. New York said last week it would sharply limit the number of people it allows in Times Square for its New Year’s Eve celebration. Some critics have raised concerns over the celebrations going ahead at all. The rise in US Covid cases has caused some companies, particularly in the energy sector, to change course from earlier plans to increase the number of employees working from their offices starting next week. Chevron was to start a full return to office from 3 January but told employees this week it was postponing the plans indefinitely. US airline cabin crew, pilots and support staff are reluctant to work overtime during the holiday travel season despite offers of hefty financial incentives. Many workers fear contracting Covid and do not welcome the prospect of dealing with unruly passengers, some airline unions have said. In the months preceding the holidays, airlines were wooing employees to ensure solid staffing, after furloughing or laying off thousands over the past 18 months. It’s been more than two years since China first notified the rest of the world of a new virus sweeping through its population. Since then the hunt for Covid’s origins has been mired in controversy and accompanied by political tensions. Our China affairs correspondent Vincent Ni has taken another look at efforts to trace Sars-CoV-2’s origins: Robert Garry, a professor of microbiology and immunology at Tulane medical school in Louisiana, got a call from his university management telling him that agents from the FBI and CIA had requested a chat about his research into the origins of Covid-19. Garry agreed and on 30 July three agents flew down to Louisiana to talk to him in person. The meeting, held at a university conference room, began at 9am and ended at about 5pm. “I presented my evidence to the agents, who were properly trained scientists themselves. They asked all the right questions,” Garry told the Guardian. “I told them: there is no way this virus could have been a manufactured weapon. There is also no evidence to suggest it was a lab leak. But I’m also conscious there are people out there who will always disagree.” Their conversation came two months after Joe Biden ordered US intelligence to investigate how the pandemic began. In normal circumstances, investigating an emerging infectious disease outbreak is a purely scientific inquiry, as was the case with Sars in 2003 and with Mers a decade later. But the search for the origin of the Covid pandemic has come in the middle of a global controversy that has mixed public health, domestic politics and international diplomacy. Local authorities in England are drawing up contingency plans to deal with staff shortages being made worse by Covid that could leave them unable to empty bins or provide other council services. The Local Government Association said: As cases of Covid-19 rise in light of the Omicron variant, councils are concerned that existing staffing issues may get worse, potentially impacting on service delivery in some areas and they are putting in place contingency plans to address this. We want to work with government to address these issues to ensure councils can be resilient in supporting their communities through this wave of the Omicron variant and that they can continue to deliver the services people rely upon. The Philippines will impose tighter curbs in the capital region for the next two weeks, the acting presidential spokesperson said on Friday, to try to limit infections by the Omicron variant. The health ministry on Friday recorded 2,961 new coronavirus infections, a two-month high, and reported a positivity rate of 10.3%. “In the coming days, we might see an increase in active cases,” acting presidential spokesperson Karlo Nograles said in a televised announcement. The region including the capital Manila is an urban sprawl of 16 cities that is home to more than 13 million people. It will be placed under the third of a five-scale alert system from 3 to 15 January, Nograles said. Level 3 bans face-to-face classes, contact sports, funfairs, and casinos. The government’s coronavirus task force will also reduce the operating capacity for social events, tourist attractions, amusement parks, restaurant dine-in services, fitness studios, and personal care services. With roughly 2.84 million total confirmed cases and 51,504 casualties, the Philippines has the second highest number of Covid cases and deaths in southeast Asia, after Indonesia. The Philippines has so far detected 10 Omicron cases, three of which three were domestic infections and the rest were from overseas travellers. The country’s genome sequencing capacity is limited. “It is prudent to assume that Omicron is already in circulation, or is already in the community,” the health secretary, Francisco Duque, said at a news conference on Friday. Ireland has become the latest EU country to cut the isolation period for many people who contract Covid, as record infection numbers spark fears of crippling staff shortages in essential public services, as well as retail and hospitality venues. Spain, Portugal and Greece reduced isolation times this week while others, such as Germany and France, are considering doing so and Italy cut its quarantine for fully vaccinated people who come into contact with someone who has tested positive. The moves follow a similar decision by the US and reflect early research suggesting the highly transmissible Omicron variant fuelling the pandemic’s latest surge generally causes milder illness than earlier versions of the virus. However, the sheer number of people becoming infected – and thus having to self-isolate if they contract the virus, or quarantine if they are a contact of someone who tests positive – threatens to cause chaos in hospitals and on public transport. “Many Omicron cases are going to be asymptomatic,” Rochelle Walensky, director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said on Monday after halving the recommended isolation time for asymptomatic people to five from 10 days. We want to make sure there is a mechanism by which we can safely continue to keep society functioning, while following the science. The UK’s Health Security Agency (UKHSA) on Wednesday cut the 10-day self-isolation period for vaccinated and unvaccinated people in England who have tested positive for coronavirus from 10 days to seven if they get the all-clear from lateral flow tests. The World Health Organization has described the decisions to cut isolation and quarantine periods as part of a delicate balancing act between controlling the transmission of the virus and keeping national economies up and running. “It is a trade-off between the science and being absolutely perfect in what you try to do, but then having the minimal disruption you can possibly have,” Michael Ryan, the WHO emergencies director, said. “Governments are struggling to find that balance.” Read the full story here: EU countries cut Covid isolation periods in Omicron balancing act Germany’s leading coronavirus expert has expressed optimism that his country could expect a “relatively normal” winter in 2022, after data from other countries firmed up the impression that infections with the Omicron variant could be milder than Delta. Christian Drosten, who heads up the institute of virology at Berlin’s Charité hospital, told public broadcaster ZDF that Omicron had the potential to take the pandemic into an “endemic situation”, where the virus that has brought the world to a standstill could be more comparable to a common cold or flu virus. Of course, it is a good situation if you have a virus that no longer makes you ill but transmits easily so that it can seek out and find all of the immunity gaps among the population and still trigger regular updates in immunity. Nonetheless, the coronavirus expert said he expected indoor mask-wearing mandates and an updated top-up dose of a vaccine to be necessary to protect vulnerable people over the course of the coming year. Germany was at a particular disadvantage because it had a higher percentage than other European countries of people who had neither attained immunity through vaccination or infection with the virus, Drosten said. We have too many unvaccinated people in Germany, especially over 60. And those are of course seriously at risk. More on this story here: Germany buoyed by data from abroad amid Omicron spread Almost one in five frontline ambulance staff in Wales are off sick or isolating with the numbers expected to continue to grow over the next week or so. Jason Killens, the chief executive of the Welsh Ambulance Services NHS Trust, said that 322 people were off because of Covid – around 12% of frontline staff. Adding in “normal” sickness absenteeism, the number off work rises to around 17%. Killens told the Guardian: We are starting to feel the pinch because of the absence rate. We are expecting that to grow over the next 10 days. More armed services personnel are joining the ambulance service in January, bringing the number driving on the frontline up to around 250, with more doing backroom roles. Killens said the service had its most numbers of referrals from the NHS 111 service on Monday and Tuesday. The pressure is also still being increased by delays in patients being admitted, leading to queues of ambulances at hospital A&amp;E departments. We expect it to get very challenging in the next 10-14 days. Some patients are waiting much longer than we would like. One in 25 people in England had Covid last week, rising to one in 15 in London, official figures have revealed. According to figures from the Office for National Statistics, based on swabs collected from randomly selected households, an estimated 4% of people in the community in England had Covid in the week ending 23 December – about 2,024,700 people. The week before, about one in 35 people in England were estimated to have had Covid. The study revealed infections have increased across all regions of the UK as the Omicron variant continues to fuel record numbers. “The highest rates of infections were seen in London, where one in 15 would have tested positive, and the lowest in the north-east of England, where one in 45 would have tested positive for Covid-19,” the report notes. Infection levels also rose in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland in the most recent week, with the latest estimates suggesting that for all three countries about one in 40 people had Covid in the week ending 23 December. The study also reveals that Omicron is now the dominant variant in England and Scotland. “Infection levels have continued to increase across the UK, with England’s increase driven largely by London, which has the highest rate of infection seen in this survey,” said Sarah Crofts, the head of analytical outputs for the Covid-19 Infection Survey. “Omicron is now the dominant variant in both England and Scotland, and has been growing rapidly in Northern Ireland and Wales,” she added. “We’ve also seen infections rise in all age groups, with school-aged children and young adults seeing the highest rates.” Boris Johnson must be ready to restrict social mixing to stop hospitals being overwhelmed by an Omicron-driven surge in Covid cases, a senior NHS leader has said. The rapid spread of the new variant means the prime minister may have to introduce “tighter restrictions, at real speed” to reduce the number of people falling ill with Covid. But any new curbs would take two weeks to cut the number of people needing hospital treatment, added Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers. His comments came as a leading scientist predicted that the sharp increase in Covid infections seen in recent days means that the NHS will be overwhelmed “quite quickly”. Prof Peter Openshaw, a member of the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), warned exposure to only “a whiff of infected breath” could lead to catching the Omicron variant. He also said that mingling during new year celebrations may well lead to a further increase in those testing positive. Read the full story here: UK must be poised to introduce swift Covid curbs, says NHS leader The UK has become “one of the first in the world” to approve the use of Pfizer’s Covid-19 antiviral after it was found to help prevent the virus from multiplying in at-risk sufferers, PA reports. A potentially “life-saving” treatment called Paxlovid has been approved by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) for use among adults who could be vulnerable to coronavirus due to age, weight or a prior chronic illness. The decision comes after the regulator found the drug - which can be taken at home - was safe and effective at reducing the risks of being admitted to hospital and death in people with mild to moderate coronavirus infection and who are also at an increased risk of developing severe disease. In a clinical trial in high-risk adults with symptomatic coronavirus infection, it was found to reduce the risk of being admitted to hospital and of death by almost 90%. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said: The UK has been a world leader at finding and rolling out Covid-19 treatments to patients. This is further proved by the MHRA being one of the first in the world to approve this life-saving antiviral. The booster campaign, testing and antiviral defences ensure our country is in the strongest possible position to deal with the threat posed by Omicron as we head into the new year. Developed by Pfizer, Paxlovid is an antiviral medicine with a combination of active ingredients, PF-07321332 and ritonavir, that works by inhibiting a protease required for virus replication. This prevents it from multiplying, keeping virus levels low and helping the body to overcome the viral infection. The two active substances of Paxlovid come as separate tablets that are packaged together and taken together, twice a day by mouth for five days. Dr June Raine, MHRA chief executive, said: Today we have given our regulatory approval for Paxlovid, a Covid-19 treatment found to cut Covid-19 related hospitalisations and deaths by 89% when taken within three days of the start of symptoms. We now have a further antiviral medicine for the treatment of Covid-19 that can be taken by mouth rather than administered intravenously. This means it can be administered outside a hospital setting, before Covid-19 has progressed to a severe stage. I hope the announcement today gives reassurance to those particularly vulnerable to Covid-19, for whom this treatment has been approved. For these individuals, this treatment could be life-saving. Based on the clinical trial data, MHRA said it had found Paxlovid is most effective when taken during the early stages of infection and so recommends its use as soon as possible and within five days of the start of symptoms. It has been authorised for use in people aged 18 and above who have mild to moderate Covid-19 infection and at least one risk factor for developing severe illness. Such risk factors include obesity, being over 60, diabetes mellitus, or heart disease. Ben Osborn, country manager at Pfizer UK, said: This milestone is an important moment in our continued fight against Covid-19, offering the NHS another possible treatment option as cases continue to rise. This at-home therapy, shown in clinical trials to reduce hospitalisations and save lives, has the potential to lessen the devastating impact of a virus that has now taken over five million lives globally. Almost forgot to say, good morning from New Orleans! I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share - your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ The number of NHS hospital staff in England absent due to Covid has nearly doubled since the start of the month, new figures show. PA reports that some 24,632 staff at NHS hospital trusts were ill with coronavirus or having to self-isolate on Boxing Day, up 31% from 18,829 a week earlier and nearly double the 12,508 at the start of the month. The new NHS England data comes after separate figures showed that the number of Covid patients in hospital in England had climbed to 11,452 on Thursday, the highest level since 26 February. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said the NHS is facing a “perfect storm” of rising Covid hospital admissions and illness alongside increasing numbers of frontline workers being off sick. The NHS is putting in plans to step up once again for patients with the new Nightingale surge hubs, extra support from community services and virtual wards, but there is no doubt the whole system is running hot. While the government seems determined not to increase restrictions in England, it is vital we all behave in ways that will not exacerbate an already dangerous situation. NHS England national medical director Prof Stephen Powis said the health service is “on a war footing” and minimising absences on the frontline would be “essential” in the coming weeks. We don’t yet know the full scale of rising Omicron cases and how this will affect people needing NHS treatment but, having hit a 10-month high for the number of patients in hospital with Covid while wrestling with sharply increasing staff absences, we are doing everything possible to free up beds and get people home to their loved ones - and in the last week hundreds more beds were freed up each day compared to the week before. The NHS is on a war footing, and, while staff remain braced for the worst, with Covid absence for NHS staff almost doubling in the past fortnight, keeping as many colleagues as possible at work on the front line and minimising absence, will be essential in the next few weeks. Meanwhile, ministers have been warned they must be ready to apply restrictions “at pace” as the NHS puts itself on an emergency footing to deal with a possible surge in patients with Covid. Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, said trust leaders recognise that the UK government’s threshold for introducing extra measures in England “hasn’t been crossed yet” but that additional capacity is being created in case hospital pressures increase. Even if extra restrictions are put in place to control the Omicron variant, it will take two weeks to reduce the hospital admission rate, he said. Hopson told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: It is the government who sets the rules on restrictions, not the NHS, and we know that the government has set a high threshold on introducing new restrictions. So, on that basis, trust leaders can see why the government is arguing that, in the absence of a surge of seriously ill older patients coming into hospital, that threshold hasn’t yet been crossed. But we still don’t know if a surge will come, and indeed we are exactly talking about the preparations we are making for that surge right now. So, in terms of restrictions, I think we are in exactly the same place we’ve been for the past fortnight, which is the government needs to be ready to introduce tighter restrictions at real speed should they be needed. So-called Nightingale hubs are being established at some hospitals to deal with a “super-surge” in patients with Covid in a move that Hopson said would require the NHS to “go into an emergency mode” amid staff shortages, partly due to high coronavirus infections. He said recently retired health workers and volunteers would be asked to staff the hubs, which would be used for patients “who are effectively over the worst” and being readied for discharge. It came as a leading scientist said it is likely that the NHS will be overwhelmed by the spread of Omicron. Prof Peter Openshaw, who sits on the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), told BBC Breakfast: I think we haven’t quite reached the threshold that was set by government in terms of the NHS being overwhelmed, but it looks like that will be reached quite quickly. What I’m very concerned about is our NHS staff, my dear colleagues who have worked so, so hard all through the repeated waves of this infection. How are they going to cope? The World Health Organization has issued a message of hope while urging renewed action for the year ahead. WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said: “With the curtain closing on 2021, we are faced by a somber milestone, and a stark choice. The power is in our hands to change the course of the Covid-19 crisis once and for all.” South Africa, the first country to report the Omicron variant, says a dip in infections in the past week indicates the peak of the current wave has passed. UK prime minister Boris Johnson claims Britain is in an “incomparably better” position in the fight against Covid than it was at the end of 2020, in his new year’s message. The number of patients in hospital with Covid in England is up from 7,166 on Christmas Day, to 11,452. That is the highest figure since February. A huge number of people in England are not turning up for their Covid vaccine appointments, health leaders have said, saying as many as 40% of bookings are missed. Amid a shortage in the UK, National Pharmacy Association chairman Andrew Lane said more lateral flow tests are being distributed to pharmacies but supply is “still very patchy.” Chris Hopson, the head of NHS Providers, has said “In terms of restrictions, I think we are in exactly the same place we’ve been for the past fortnight, which is the government needs to be ready to introduce tighter restrictions at real speed should they be needed. It is worth remembering that it does take about a fortnight for any new restrictions to affect the level of hospital admissions, so the pattern of hospital admissions for the next fortnight has already been set.” Schools and parents across Wales are preparing for some children to return to home and online learning when the new term begins. First minister Mark Drakeford said teacher and staff illness meant some pupils would return to home learning with decisions would be made by individual schools and councils, rather than the Welsh government. Hogmanay in Scotland will be marked for a second consecutive year with restrictions in place on the hospitality sector. Pubs will be able to stay open provided they have table service in place, but there will be no nightclubbing. First minister Nicola Sturgeon has praised healthcare workers in her new year’s address, and said “this is not the Hogmanay we all wanted and hoped for. But I believe that we can still look ahead to 2022 with optimism.” Israel’s health minister Nitzan Horowitz said the country will extend the offer of a fourth vaccine dose to elderly people in care facilities, citing their high exposure and vulnerability to infections. Hong Kong authorities have discovered cases of infection of the Omicron coronavirus variant in the community, Health Secretary Sophia Chan said. It marked the first local cases in about three months. Daily Covid cases in New South Wales, Australia, almost doubled overnight, raising pressure on the state’s health system. The Victorian and New South Wales governments are scrambling to organise the distribution of rapid antigen tests to vulnerable people amid short supply, confusion over who should use them and skyrocketing Covid case numbers. A US woman has told how she confined herself to an aeroplane toilet cubicle after testing positive for Covid halfway through a flight from Chicago to Iceland. New Zealand has eased rules on public gatherings in time for New Year’s Eve after a scare over community cases of the new Omicron variant. That is it from me, Martin Belam. I will see you here next week, and in the meantime I wish you all the best for the new year. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to take you through the rest of the day. A couple of statistics derived from the NHS England figures that have been released this morning. Dan Bloom, a former colleague of mine at the Mirror, points out that the number of patients in hospital with Covid in England is up from 7,166 on Christmas Day, to 11,452. That is the highest figure since February. The Spectator have a slightly different take on this, with their data journalist Michael Simmons highlighting that “a third of Covid positive hospital patients in England are not primarily being treated for Covid.” This is a matter of some contention between those who say Covid cases risk overwhelming the NHS, and those that argue that a significant proportion of those in hospital “with Covid” only have it as a side issue, and it isn’t the primary reason they are occupying an NHS bed. In fact, much earlier this morning on Sky News, Chaand Nagpaul, who is chair of the Council of the British Medical Association, was asked about this. He had said: Whilst the proportion of people who end up in hospital as a result of Omicron is smaller, we’re definitely seeing significant increases. And the trouble is that those increases in hospitalisation mean that other patients – and there are 6 million people are on a waiting list at the moment, it’s a record for the NHS, 312,000 have been waiting more than 12 months – it means that they can’t then be treated in hospital because their beds have been occupied by other patients. You know, 25,000 patients were admitted with Covid in a four week period before Christmas, those are 25,000 beds that could have been available for other patients. He was then asked to clarify whether that was 25,000 people admitted with Covid, or 25,000 people in hospital who now have Covid, which isn’t quite the same thing. Dr Nagpaul said it was a good question, but he didn’t have the data. The argument here boils down to, on the one hand, if you are not in favour of further restrictions or precautions, arguing that incidental cases of Covid caught in hospital mean the numbers being admitted with Covid are over-stated and the NHS isn’t under as much pressure as people claim. On the other hand, the argument runs that these people are still in NHS beds and, presumably, need to be moved into more Covid-secure wards, be treated as Covid-positive, and have the potential to still get seriously ill with the novel coronavirus. Opposition parties in Wales have been calling for the Labour-led Welsh government to publish the advice from scientific advisors it used to introduce the “alert level two” restrictions Wales is living under. It has now published two reports from its Technical Advisory Group (TAG) that show that the advice changed significantly between 15 and 17 December. A TAG report dated 15 December said introducing very strong alert level four restrictions (measures such as staying local and non-essential shops shutting) would have a “material effect” on reducing the peak of cases. It said anything below alert level four would have “some dampening effect” but may not prevent “material harm to NHS and care services” and added it was “not advisable” to start off with “light touch” mitigations. Then a report dated 17 December said no matter what measures were taken peak cases would far exceed previous heights. Significantly, it said the size of the peak would be similar whether Wales moved to alert level two or four for a maximum of two weeks, the only difference being the timing of the peaks. Being in alert level four could delay peak hospitalisations from mid-late January to early February 2022. The report concluded that if restrictions were going to be applied for two weeks only, there may be “negligible benefit” but a “high cost” of imposing stricter rules. However, if bringing in restrictions for four weeks, alert level four “could have a significant impact”. A huge number of people in England are not turning up for their Covid vaccine appointments, health leaders have said, saying as many as 40% of bookings are missed. The revelation comes as the government claimed to have met its coronavirus booster jabs target, and that every adult in England had been offered a top-up shot. The NHS Confederation said it was “encouraging” to see people coming forward and getting their Covid-19 jabs but that it was receiving reports that some sites were only a third full. Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said it had been informed by some primary care leaders that people were not showing up to as many as 40% of their scheduled bookings. “It is encouraging to see people still coming forward for their first and second doses, as well as the massive achievement on boosters,” he said. “However, cases of Omicron are rising rapidly … Health leaders are worried about the level of illness and demand that their staff across the NHS could have to respond to in January and so, it is vital that everyone who is eligible takes up the offer of a jab or booster shot.” Read more of Sarah Marsh’s report here: Huge numbers of people in England ‘not turning up for Covid booster jabs’ Schools and parents across Wales are preparing for some children to return to home and online learning when the new term begins. The first minister, Mark Drakeford, said teacher and staff illness meant some pupils would return to home learning with decisions would be made by individualschools and councils, rather than the Welsh government. He told BBC Wales: “We’ve asked schools to prepare for how they can reopen and have children back in the classroom - what level of protections do they need to build in for that? “But in some places, because teachers are ill and other school staff aren’t able to be there, they will have to plan for some period where some children will have to be taught remotely again.” Drakeford has told people thinking of travelling to England from Wales for New Year’s Eve celebrations to “think consciously and carefully,” but is not asking people to remain in Wales, where nightclubs are closed and pubs and restaurants are operating under restrictions. “If you are travelling, make sure you have taken a lateral flow test before you go and think about the people you will be mixing with when you return,” he said. Leaders of a group of protesters who set fire to the facade of Old Parliament House in Canberra, Australia are closely linked to a complex network of anti-vaccination and conspiracy groups which have been accused of spreading misinformation in Indigenous communities during the Covid-19 pandemic. The fire, which broke out during a protest at the entrance to the building on Thursday, caused extensive damage to the doors and portico. There have been a series of demonstrations by Indigenous groups as well as elements of the anti-vaccination movement and sovereign citizen groups at Old Parliament House over the past days. Among the protesters are Indigenous land rights activists, anti-vaccine groups and so-called sovereign citizens. The latter is a fringe conspiracy group rooted in antisemitism and organised around a haphazard collection of pseudo-legal beliefs broadly grouped around the notion that modern government is an illegitimate corporation. Before the fire on Friday, a piece of paper was taped to a door at Old Parliament House labelled a “notice of acquiescence by default”. It was addressed to, among others, “The Australian Commonwealth de facto Corporate Administration” and contained a garbled set of legalese mirroring sovereign citizen beliefs. Read more of Michael McGowan’s report here: Old Parliament House fire protesters linked to anti-vaccine and conspiracy groups My colleagues Alfie Packham and Rachel Obordo have spoken to three people about their plans for New Year’s Eve, posing the question – is it time to self-isolate or to party? If you were thinking of heading out to celebrate New Year’s Eve tonight, this quote from Nervtag’s Prof Peter Openshaw on BBC Breakfast might give you pause for thought. PA Media quote him saying: Omicron is so infectious. We’re lucky really that it wasn’t this infectious when it first moved into human-to-human transmission. We’ve had several iterations of this virus going through different stages of its evolution. It has ended up being so infectious that it almost needs just a whiff of infected breath and you could get infected. We’re in a relatively good position in countries like the UK but I think you have to remember that in many parts of the world the vaccination rates are only about 5%, and they’re being exposed to this very infectious virus with very little protection. Omicron spread through Europe has sent Spain’s infection rate spiralling to record highs and decimated reservations at restaurants that had pinned their hopes on holiday season trade. Reuters spoke to Juan Lozano, head waiter at the La Querida restaurant in Madrid’s Pozuelo neighbourhood, which was almost fully booked in early December. He said that now just four tables out of La Querida’s two dozen booked on New Year’s Day. “We all thought... we’d be able to make some money and pay off many things that are overdue,” he said. Unlike other Spanish regions, which have imposed capacity limits, mandatory COVID passes and even a curfew in Catalonia, Madrid has not introduced any restrictions on eating out and socialising. But restaurants are still feeling the pinch. “The outlook is horrendously bad,” said Lozano, insisting that the government must give more support to the sector. He complained that state-backed soft loans were not enough. “People say ‘can’t you get a state credit?’ Yes but that’s a debt I have to pay back, isn’t it?” Part of the reason that the airwaves in the UK this morning have featured a lot of chatter that things aren’t so serious with the Omicron variant is because The Times lead their front page today with a story “No need for more Covid curbs, say NHS chiefs”. They opened: NHS chiefs do not believe that the threshold for new Covid-19 restrictions has been crossed despite a surge in hospital admissions. The number of patients with the coronavirus on wards in England rose to 11,452 yesterday, the highest since February and up 61 per cent in a week. While concerned by the increase in admissions, NHS leaders have been reassured by the fact that serious illness among the elderly has not risen significantly. They then quoted Chris Hopson, the head of NHS Providers, saying: Although the numbers are going up and going up increasingly rapidly, the absence of large numbers of seriously ill older people is providing significant reassurance. But they are aware that this may change after the Christmas period. Trust CEOs know that the government has a high threshold to cross before it will introduce extra restrictions and can see why, in the absence of that surge of severely ill older people, that threshold hasn’t been crossed yet. Hopson has been asked about this on the BBC Radio 4 programme this morning, and this is what he said, according to PA Media (with my emphasis on the two key lines): It is the Government who sets the rules on restrictions, not the NHS. We still don’t know if a surge will come, and indeed we are exactly talking about the preparations we are making for that surge right now. So, in terms of restrictions, I think we are in exactly the same place we’ve been for the past fortnight, which is the government needs to be ready to introduce tighter restrictions at real speed should they be needed. And just to make the point that that is somewhat different to a headline that states NHS leaders think there is no need for more curbs - they may be needed at pace if the evidence warrants it. And just one more important point, I think - it is worth remembering that it does take about a fortnight for any new restrictions to affect the level of hospital admissions, so the pattern of hospital admissions for the next fortnight has already been set. Amid a lot of optimistic noises about evidence of the “mildness” of the Omicron variant and the modest rise in hospitalisations compared to cases so far in the UK, Professor Peter Openshaw, who sits on the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), has struck a more cautious note this morning on BBC Breakfast. PA Media quote him saying: The latest figures show extraordinary rises in infection rates and this is before we’ve had time to see the full effect of what’s happened over Christmas. The people currently who are very sadly dying of Covid were probably infected on average about 35 days ago, so this was really before Omicron really started to transmit. It’s therefore too early to say what the impact of Omicron is going to be on more severe disease. It’s mostly been circulating in children, in people in contact with children, and it’s now going to spread into older adults at much higher risk of severe disease and those with pre-existing illnesses. I’m very, very glad that a very large majority of those have been triple-vaccinated because that gives you very good levels of protection, admittedly probably not for good but at least for a while. Here’s a little bit more detail from Reuters on the moves in Israel to offer a fourth vaccine shot. Dan Williams reports that health minister Nitzan Horowitz said today the country will extend the offer of a fourth shot to elderly people in care facilities, citing their high exposure and vulnerability to infections. An Israeli hospital administered fourth shots to a test group of health workers on Monday, in what it called the first major study into whether a second round of boosters will help contend with the Omicron coronavirus variant. Results are expected within two weeks. A health ministry expert panel last week recommended that Israel offer a fourth shot of the vaccine developed by Pfizer/BioNTech to medical workers and those over 60 or with compromised immune systems. You may recall British prime minister Boris Johnson’s words from 12 December, when he told the UK in a televised address: A fortnight ago I said we would offer every eligible adult a booster by the end of January. Today, in light of this Omicron emergency, I am bringing that target forward by a whole month. Everyone eligible aged 18 and over in England will have the chance to get their booster before the New Year. There then ensued a minor kerfuffle about the exact semantics of that. It certainly seemed to give the impression in some quarters that the prime minister was promising those booster jabs would be administered to everyone who wanted one, not just offered, although as you can see it was very tightly worded. The government’s own Covid dashboard indicates that as of 29 December, 58.3% of those aged 12 and above have had a third booster jab. Bipasha van der Zijde is a marketing and communications adviser at KIT Royal Tropical Institute, and she writes for us today that we can vaccinate 70% of the world against Covid by mid-2022: According to the WHO vaccine strategy, published in October, the goal is to have 70% coverage across the world by June 2022. How can this target be achieved? Will freeing up intellectual property rights, often cited as a possible solution, bridge the widening gap? For a country to start producing vaccines from scratch would be a massive challenge. According to Benjamin Ongeri, a health supply chain specialist with Crown Agents in Kenya: “Countries like Kenya have begun this journey by targeting the final filling of vaccine vials locally which is still quite challenging given the need for state-of-the-art pharmaceutical manufacturing plants that will guarantee safe production with no chance of contamination.” A lot more will be required in terms of technology transfer and building the expertise needed to fully produce vaccines locally, these cannot be achieved in the short to medium term. The answer lies in global funding mechanisms such as Covax – provided they can guarantee a pre-planned availability of vaccines. More equitable distribution of the jabs on a structural basis with longer shelf lives will allow for realistic and efficient planning. Read more here: Bipasha van der Zijde – We can vaccinate 70% of the world against Covid by mid-2022. Here’s how Chris Hopson, the head of NHS Providers, which represents health trusts, has said on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the use of extra capacity hubs at hospitals would be a recognition that there was an “emergency” situation needed to deal with Covid-19 admissions. PA Media quotes him saying: The hubs are there to have super-surge capacity on top of that, so we really would be in an emergency if we were having to use them and therefore we would have to use an emergency staffing model, because we are very clear in the NHS: we don’t have the staff, the existing staff, to be able to staff these beds, so we would have to go into an emergency mode. The important thing to understand is that what we would be using these hubs for - we wouldn’t be using these hubs for the most critically ill patients. What we would be doing is using them for patients who were effectively over the worst, heading towards discharge for home Earlier Dr Azeem Majeed, the head of primary care and public health at Imperial College London, cast some doubt on the ability to staff the hubs that were announced by NHS England yesterday. He told Times Radio: We saw when these hubs were established in March and April last year when the NHS struggled to find the staff to man those hospitals. Hopefully those won’t be needed, but if we do need those extra beds it will be a struggle to find the staff to deal with those patients - I’m not quite sure where those staff will come from given the fact hospitals are struggling now with their current workload. NHS England has said it is creating new small-scale “Nightingale” facilities with up to 100 beds each at eight hospitals across the country. The first sites will be at Preston, Leeds, Birmingham, Leicester, Stevenage, St George’s in London, Ashford and Bristol. In the UK, National Pharmacy Association chairman Andrew Lane said more lateral flow tests are being distributed to pharmacies but supply is “still very patchy”, and he expects the test packs to be picked up “within the first few hours” of them being delivered today. He added that pharmacy staff are facing abuse from patients frustrated by being unable to find a test. PA Media quote him telling BBC Breakfast: I spoke to the managing director of Alliance Healthcare who are our wholesalers that distribute the tests into pharmacies, and she assured me that they are putting out two million a day and we are starting to see that come through. It is still very patchy though, so I will say that not every pharmacy today will have a box but most pharmacies in the country will be having a box so we just ask the public to persevere, and also treat us with respect. We have had a lot of abuse over the last couple of weeks when the tests haven’t been there, but teams are doing their very best to help the public with this. A box will contain, I think, 54 tests and many of our members are reporting that that box is gone within the first couple of hours of arriving within the pharmacy. In December 2019 the World Health Organization was told of a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, China. My colleagues Ashley Kirk and Pamela Duncan have produced these charts which show how Covid-19 has spread across the world since then. Hong Kong authorities have discovered cases of infection of the Omicron coronavirus variant in the community, Health Secretary Sophia Chan said. It marked the first local cases in about three months. Chan told reporters, including Marius Zaharia of Reuters, that one of four air crew members testing positive after their return to Hong Kong had breached home quarantine rules by going to a restaurant, where he passed the virus to his father and a client sitting at another table. Hong Kong had not recorded any coronavirus cases spread by community transmission since October. Schools in Wales are being asked to prepare for the possibility of reopening in January for remote learning. Yesterday First Minister Mark Drakeford explained in an interview with Wales Online that: The first two days of term are planning days. What the education minister Jeremy Miles has asked schools to do is to plan for two possible futures: the one in which children can still be in the classroom, where there are sufficient staff to be there to be able to provide face-to-face learning, but to maximise the protection that can be put in place inside the classroom to keep students and staff as safe as possible. But we recognise that there will be some schools where, because Omicron is so transmissible, there will be staff who will be ill so it won’t be possible for every child to be in the classroom and therefore that a return for some students for a shorter period of time as possible to online learning may have to be there as well. This morning Cathy Owen reports for Wales Online that Laura Doel, director of head teachers’ union NAHT Cymru, has described remote learning as a “last resort”, and called for tests to be prioritised for schools. She said: The availability of staff is the biggest threat to education in January. Without the workforce fit and well, learners cannot go back to the classroom. If regular LFTs are to be part of the package of mitigations it is vital that schools have a supply ready for reopening. Another doctor, Dr Azeem Majeed, head of primary care and public health at Imperial College London, has also been on the airwaves in the UK this morning to say that NHS workers are struggling to access Covid-19 tests, and the government should prioritise key workers when distributing them. PA Media quote him telling Times Radio: I struggled to get a test recently. I am required to test twice a week as an NHS worker but when I log on to the online site, there’s often none in stock. It’s not just NHS staff but other key workers too, such as social care workers, police, fire service and so on, who need these tests as well so it is worrying that they’re in such short supply at the moment. My view is that people in key groups, whether they’re healthcare workers or other key workers like public transport should be prioritised to ensure our NHS can function, our schools can function, that our society can function well. Testing capability is also making the headlines in Australia. Ben Butler reports for us: The Victorian and New South Wales governments are scrambling to organise the distribution of rapid antigen tests to vulnerable people amid short supply, confusion over who should use them and skyrocketing Covid case numbers. Amid a national shortage of the tests, both governments said they were working out how best to distribute tens of millions of kits they have ordered, most of which will not arrive until the end of January. NSW and Victoria have watered down previous commitments to provide free tests after a national cabinet meeting with the federal government on Thursday. Adding to the confusion, on Friday morning the prime minister, Scott Morrison, issued a statement removing a requirement that confirmed Covid cases who are in isolation but don’t have symptoms take a test on the sixth day. This directly contradicted statements, also made on Friday, by the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, and Victoria’s health minister, Martin Foley, that a day-six rapid test was required. Read more of Ben Butler’s report here: NSW and Victoria unable to explain how Covid rapid antigen tests will be distributed to vulnerable Chaand Nagpaul, who is chair of the Council of the British Medical Association, has been on Sky News this morning in the UK outlining what he sees as one of the significant issues with the lack of availability of lateral flow or PCR tests in the UK at the moment – the knock-on effect for staffing in the NHS. He said: We’ve seen up to about a three times increase in staff absence from either infection or isolation in some London hospitals. Now that’s creating huge pressure on the system, when we already are short-staffed at the busiest time of the year. And to add to that problem, we now have a situation where many staff cannot get their lateral flow tests, or a PCR test, which means they can’t return to work. Because what they need to return to work is to demonstrate a negative lateral flow test on day six and seven, which was specially introduced so that we can shorten the period of isolation. So this is creating enormous problems for us. And for the workforce that remains, they’re having to carry out the work of their absent colleagues. And that’s adding additional strain and stress, and patients are therefore going to suffer as a result. Hogmanay in Scotland will be marked for a second consecutive year with restrictions in place on the hospitality sector. Pubs will be able to stay open provided they have table service in place, but there will be no nightclubbing. In her new year message, Scotland’s first minister Nicola Sturgeon has praised healthcare workers, saying: Throughout this year, our health and care workers have continued to do an absolutely magnificent job. And those working on our vaccination programme have provided all of us with an incredible service. Thanks to their efforts – and also thanks to the sacrifices of people right across the country – earlier this year businesses were able to reopen. The Omicron variant is a very significant threat. It means that at the moment, we need above all to keep each other safe. We all need to stay at home, far more than we would want to at this time of year. And we have asked that you minimise new year socialising as much as you can. So this is not the Hogmanay we all wanted and hoped for. But I believe that we can still look ahead to 2022 with optimism. Queensland in Australia is due to change travel restrictions into the state despite a surge in fresh Covid cases and criticisms the new requirements are “pointless” in states with large outbreaks. From 11.59pm on Friday 31 December, travellers entering Queensland will be required to return a negative rapid antigen test (RAT) result within 72 hours before travel, rather than a negative PCR test. The change in rules comes as the state recorded 3,118 new cases overnight, with the number of active infections rising to 11,697. Evidence of a negative test result has to be uploaded to the Queensland Health website when applying for a border pass, with applicants making a declaration the information is correct. However, the change raises questions about the accuracy and reliability of test results, as unlike PCR tests, the tests are not performed by trained professionals or analysed by and reported to a central authority. Police commissioner Katarina Carroll said on Wednesday that from January those caught lying about a RAT result on their border declaration would face a heavy fine. Read more of Royce Kurmelovs’ report here: Queensland’s new travel rule labelled ‘pointless’ as state faces fresh Covid surge A lot of the noises coming from politicians and health experts in the UK seems cautiously optimistic across much of the media this morning. One concern though is the continued shortage of Covid tests, which may impact people’s ability to test themselves before going out tonight. To give you an idea of the availability issue, one web developer Russ Garrett has been monitoring the situation on the government’s own booking website, and the picture looks pretty grim from the last few days. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London taking over from Samantha Lock. Here’s a recap of the latest Covid figures for the UK. Over the last seven days there have been nearly 1 million new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK – 984,147. Cases have increased by 45.1% week-on-week. There have been 701 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have decreased by 10.6% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have increased by 32.3% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 11,898 people in hospital in total, of whom 868 are in ventilation beds. There’s some considerable caveats over those numbers though, due to data collection issues over the holiday period. With the constraint on the availability of tests, that record number of new cases may be an undercount. Nevertheless, the large number of cases is yet to translate into a significant increase in deaths or hospitalisations, which many will see as a positive sign and a vindication of the decision in England not to impose significant new Covid restrictions. The World Health Organization has issued a message of hope while urging renewed action for the year ahead. WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said: With the curtain closing on 2021, we are faced by a somber milestone, and a stark choice. The power is in our hands to change the course of the Covid-19 crisis once and for all.” In a statement titled ‘My hope for ending the Covid-19 pandemic’ Tedros outlined a series of resolutions including a global target of vaccinating 70% of people in all countries by the middle of 2022, building a stronger global framework for global health security and investing in stronger primary health care. I believe that if we can make progress on these goals, we will be gathering again, at the end of 2022, not to mark the end of a third year of pandemic, but to celebrate a return to pre-Covid norms, when we gathered with our families and communities to celebrate together and cherish each other’s company and love.” In series of video messages shared to Twitter, he added: If we end inequity, we end the pandemic, and end the global nightmare we have all lived through. This will be the year we end it [the pandemic] … When health is at risk everything is at risk.” If you’ve just joined us here’s a quick rundown of the latest developments: UK prime minister Boris Johnson claims Britain is in an “incomparably better” position in the fight against Covid than it was at the end of 2020, in his new year’s message. South Africa, the first country to report the Omicron variant, says a dip in infections in the past week indicates the peak of the current wave has passed. Daily Covid cases in New South Wales, Australia, almost doubled overnight, raising pressure on the state’s health system. Israel has approved a fourth vaccine shot for vulnerable and immunocompromised people, becoming one of the first countries to do so. China is set to impose new import restrictions over virus contamination fears in a move that has worried foreign businesses providing goods to the world’s largest market for food and drink. South Korea said on Friday it will extend stricter social distancing rules for two weeks until 16 January. The curbs ban gatherings of over four fully vaccinated people, and require restaurants, cafes and bars to close by 9pm and movie theatres and internet cafes by 10pm. A US woman has told how she confined herself to an aeroplane toilet cubicle after testing positive for Covid halfway through a flight from Chicago to Iceland. New Zealand has eased rules on public gatherings in time for New Year’s Eve after a scare over community cases of the new Omicron variant. New York City will go ahead with New Year’s Eve celebrations in Times Square as planned despite record numbers of Covid-19 infections. Foreign revellers on Indonesia’s resort island of Bali have been warned they could be deported if they are caught violating Covid-19 health rules during New Year celebrations. US health experts are urging Americans to prepare for severe disruptions in coming weeks due to the rising wave of Covid cases led by the Omicron variant. Hello and thanks for joining us for our final Covid blog of 2021. I’m Samantha Lock and I’m certainly hoping for a more promising new year ahead and end to the pandemic. UK prime minister Boris Johnson claims Britain is in an “incomparably better” position in the fight against Covid than it was at the end of 2020, in his new year’s message. “We can say one thing with certainty - our position this December the 31st is incomparably better than last year,” Johnson said, while admitting there was still anxiety about the Omicron variant and growing numbers of hospital admissions. However, he hailed the success of the government’s vaccine programme as the “one overriding reason” that tougher restrictions were not needed in the face of daily case numbers hitting record levels. “Precisely because of that huge national effort that we can celebrate tonight at all,” he said. More promising news has also emerged from South Africa, the first country to report the Omicron variant. Health officials say a dip in infections in the past week indicates the peak of the current wave has passed. “All indicators suggest the country may have passed the peak of the fourth wave at a national level,” a statement from the special cabinet meeting held earlier on Thursday said. New cases detected in the week ending 25 December fell 29.7% compared to the previous week, government data showed. Daily Covid cases in New South Wales, Australia, almost doubled overnight, raising pressure on the state’s health system. Cases have likely exceeded 25,000 a day, a month earlier than the government was predicting a fortnight ago, an acceleration likely to bring forward the strains on the health system, experts say. The NSW government reported 21,151 new cases in the 24 hours to 8pm on Thursday, almost a 90% jump on the previous day’s tally. Kerry Chant, the state’s chief health officer, said in a video briefing it’s “likely” the increase is higher than reported. Michael Lydeamore, an infectious disease modeller at Monash University said tests were probably catching about 80% of actual cases, meaning NSW will already be at the 25,000 cases a day rate flagged by health minister Brad Hazzard on 15 December. Read the full story here. The World Health Organization has shared an optimistic message ahead of the New Year. Dr Maria Van Kerkhove, infectious disease epidemiologist and WHO Covid-19 Technical Lead, said: We can take the death out of Covid-19 and we can also reduce the spread. It will end. This pandemic will end. I’m incredibly hopeful for 2022 in the fact that we can regain control over this.” Germany is reporting a daily rise of 41,240 confirmed coronavirus cases and 323 deaths, according to recently released data from the Robert Koch Institute. China will impose new import restrictions from Saturday in a move that has worried foreign businesses providing goods to the world’s largest market for food and drink. Under laws set to kick in on 1 January, all producers of food shipped to China will have to register with the customs authority. The extra hurdle was previously required only for products posing potential health risks, such as seafood. But now coffee, alcohol, honey, olive oil, chocolate and several other products will also be scrutinised, Agence France-Presse reports. On New Year’s Day, “the import curtain will fall”, Alban Renaud, a China-based lawyer with the firm Adaltys, told AFP. Food companies and importers have already been battered by control measures included in Beijing’s strict zero-Covid strategy, with China linking the virus to food ever since a Beijing outbreak last year was blamed on imported salmon. Products entering China are now subject to extra screening and repeated disinfection, with products often banned when a Covid outbreak is discovered at the point of packing overseas. The World Health Organization has said the chances of Covid-19 being transported in food are slim. South Korea said on Friday it will extend stricter social distancing rules for two weeks amid a persistent surge in serious coronavirus infections and concerns over the spread of the Omicron variant. The government reinstated the curbs on 18 December, six weeks after easing them under a “living with Covid-19” scheme, as record-breaking numbers of new infections and serious cases put a huge strain on the country’s medical system. The extension is also aimed at bracing for a further spread of Omicron cases by using the time to secure more hospital beds and encourage a booster vaccine shot campaign, Prime Minister Kim Boo-kyum said. “We should reserve sufficient beds that can cover some 10,000 cases a day, and we should also speed up booster shots and children’s vaccinations,” he told an intra-agency meeting. The curbs, which will be effective until 16 January ban gatherings of over four fully vaccinated people, and require restaurants, cafes and bars to close by 9 pm and movie theatres and internet cafes by 10pm. Unvaccinated people can only dine out alone, or use takeout or delivery services. South Korea also cancelled its traditional midnight bell-ringing ceremony. A US woman has told how she confined herself to an aeroplane toilet cubicle after testing positive for Covid halfway through a flight from Chicago to Iceland. Marisa Fotieo, a teacher from Michigan, said her throat began to hurt halfway through the trip so she went to the bathroom to perform a rapid Covid test which confirmed she was infected. “I just took my rapid test and I brought it into the bathroom, and within what felt like two seconds there were two lines [indicating a positive test],” Fotieo told NBC News. Sharing the news over TikTok, Fotieo posted a short video from inside the cramped quarters, writing: “POV you test positive for Covid while over the Atlantic Ocean.” Read the full story here. Stock markets in Asia are looking mixed today with the Nikkei, Australia’s ASX200 index and Kospi in Seoul all down. This is despite the Nikkei finishing at its highest point since 1989 – just before its bubble burst – in Thursday’s session. It was more positive in China and Hong Kong where all the induces were up helped by positive figures about China’s giant manufacturing sector and an easing of commodity prices. New Zealand has eased rules on public gatherings in time for New Year’s Eve after a scare over community cases of the new Omicron variant. The country is set to lead the world’s celebrations of the new year at midnight on Friday and crowds will be allowed to gather in Auckland for the first time since August to join in the party after the city’s Covid traffic-light settings were moved from red to orange. New Zealand is traditionally one of the first countries to bring in the new year before time differences usher in midnight elsewhere but the festivities had been threatened by tight coronavirus restrictions in place for months. Under orange settings, the bars, restaurants and cafes that enforce vaccine pass requirements can remove crowd size limits and the requirement to sit down, allowing people to dance the night away. Read the full story here. New York City will go ahead with New Year’s Eve celebrations in Times Square as planned despite record numbers of Covid-19 infections. Mayor Bill de Blasio confirmed the news on Thursday, saying the city’s high Covid-19 vaccination rate makes it feasible to welcome masked, socially distanced crowds to watch the ball drop in Times Square. We want to show that we’re moving forward, and we want to show the world that New York City is fighting our way through this. We’ve got to send a message to the world. New York City is open.” City officials previously announced plans for a scaled-back New Year’s bash with smaller crowds and vaccinations required. Other US cities such as Atlanta have cancelled New Year’s Eve celebrations, New York City reported a record number of new, confirmed coronavirus cases — almost 44,000 — on Wednesday, according to New York state figures. Foreign revellers on Indonesia’s resort island of Bali have been warned they could be deported if they are caught violating Covid-19 health rules during New Year celebrations, authorities warned on Thursday. Bali immigration office head Jamaruli Manihuruk warned that health rules must be observed in an interview with AFP. Get ready to be kicked out.” Bali’s governor has barred carnivals, fireworks and gatherings of more than 50 people over the Christmas and New Year period. Malls, restaurants and cafes must shut by 10pm, and only operate at 75% capacity. Bali has taken a tough stance on tourists who violate Covid-19 protocols. Almost 200 tourists were deported from Bali in 2021, Manihuruk said, with seven booted out for violating health protocols. Indonesia has been seriously hit by the coronavirus pandemic. As of Wednesday, it had reported more than 4.2 million confirmed Covid-19 cases, and more than 144,000 deaths. Bali alone reported more than 110,000 confirmed cases with over 4,000 deaths. Vaccination rates remain relatively low and country is vulnerable to new outbreaks. US health experts are urging Americans to prepare for severe disruptions in coming weeks due to the rising wave of Covid cases led by the Omicron variant. Dr Michael Osterholm, an infectious disease expert at the University of Minnesota, told MSNBC: We are going to see the number of cases in this country rise so dramatically, we are going to have a hard time keeping everyday life operating. The next month is going to be a viral blizzard,” he added. “All of society is going to be pressured by this.” Dr Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease official, also warned cases will likely rise throughout January. The governor of Louisiana, where hospitalisations have more than tripled in the past two weeks, said January would be “very challenging”. “We are still at the very beginning of this current surge,” John Bel Edwards told a news conference on Thursday. “January is going to be very, very challenging.” The warning comes as the United States reached a record high in Covid-19 cases for the second day in a row. South Africa has lifted a nighttime curfew on people’s movement with immediate effect, believing the country has passed the peak of its fourth coronavirus wave driven by the Omicron variant. The government removed the midnight-to-4am curfew based on the trajectory of the pandemic, vaccination levels and available capacity in the health sector, the government said on Thursday. A statement from a special cabinet meeting held earlier on Thursday said: All indicators suggest the country may have passed the peak of the fourth wave at a national level. While the Omicron variant is highly transmissible, there has been lower rates of hospitalisation than in previous waves.” Data from the Department of Health showed a 29.7% weekly decrease in new cases detected in the week ending 25 December, the government said. Hospital admissions have declined in eight of South Africa’s nine provinces. South Africa, with close to 3.5 million infections and 91,000 deaths, has been the worst-hit country in Africa during the pandemic on both counts, and was where the Omicron variant of the coronavirus was first detected last month. The country is at the lowest of its five-stage Covid-19 alert levels. Israel has approved a fourth vaccine shot for vulnerable and immunocompromised people, becoming one of the first countries to do so, amid a surge in Covid in cases driven by the Omicron variant. The country also received its first shipment of Pfizer’s anti-Covid pills. Health ministry director-general Nachman Ash told reporters: Today I approved giving the fourth vaccine for immunocompromised people. I did this in light of studies that show the benefit of the vaccine, including the fourth vaccine, to this population, and in light of the fear they are more vulnerable in this outbreak of Omicron.” Health authorities reported on Thursday more than 4,000 new cases, a high not seen since September. Health Minister Nitzan Horowitz said Israel was in “a fifth wave”, with most cases probably related to the Omicron variant. Prime Minister Naftali Bennett said Israel, which was among the first countries in the world to offer a third shot to the general public, would be a trailblazer for the fourth jab. “Israel will lead the way in administering a fourth vaccine to the Israeli people,” he said. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as we count down the final hours until 2022. Regions across the world are battling to stem a surge in Covid infections driven largely by the Omicron variant. However South Africa, the first country to report the variant, appears to be bucking the trend. Health officials say a dip in infections in the past week indicates the peak of the current wave has passed. “All indicators suggest the country may have passed the peak of the fourth wave at a national level,” a statement from the special cabinet meeting held earlier on Thursday said. New cases detected in the week ending 25 December fell 29.7% compared to the previous week, government data showed. Meanwhile in the United States, health experts are urging Americans to prepare for severe disruptions in coming weeks due to the rising wave of Covid cases led by the Omicron variant. “We are going to see the number of cases in this country rise so dramatically, we are going to have a hard time keeping everyday life operating,” Dr Michael Osterholm, an infectious disease expert at the University of Minnesota, told MSNBC. “The next month is going to be a viral blizzard,” he added. “All of society is going to be pressured by this.” Dr Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease official, also warned cases will likely rise throughout January. Here’s a quick summary of the latest Covid developments: The number of people to die from Covid in Eastern Europe has reached 1 million, as Russia climbed above Brazil to become the country with the second-highest deaths behind the US. South Africa said the country had passed its Omicron peak without a major death surge, offering hope to countries hit hard by the mutated variant. France reported 206,243 new confirmed Covid cases, a tally above 200,000 for the second day running. The UK reported 189,213 new Covid cases, smashing Wednesday’s record-breaking tally of 183,037 positive tests. The UK is dogged by a shortage of tests, as Wales assists England with 4m tests amid fears of New Year’s Eve celebrations turning into breeding grounds for the virus. Scotland’s first minister urged people to avoid household mixing after a record high of nearly 17,000 cases. India fears it is entering a new wave after cases surge, as confirmed Omicron cases also climb. Portugal cuts Covid isolation from ten days to seven, after the World Health Organization said on Wednesday slashing isolation was a trade-off between transmission and economic concerns. Germany will drop quarantine demands for UK travellers from 4 January after seeing its own Omicron cases jump above 3,000 recently. Malaysia detected 3,997 positive Covid cases, with the number among survivors of its recently deadly floods rising to 442 in total. Japan recorded over 500 new infections for the first time in two months. Five Bulgarian regions moved from yellow to red zones as the country recorded 3,449 new infections, a 139% jump on two weeks ago. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said all people should avoid cruises, following a rise in onboard Covid cases in a major blow to the industry.US prosecutors have dropped charges against the two correctional officers on duty the night Jeffrey Epstein killed himself on their watch in August 2019 while he was awaiting trial on sex trafficking charges. The officers, Tova Noel and Michael Thomas, had allegedly falsified government records, indicating that they had made their rounds every 30 minutes to check on inmates when they had not, and instead had fallen asleep on the job, according to an indictment. Earlier this year, the two officers entered into a deferred prosecution agreement – contingent on completing community service and good behavior. The justice department is expected to release a report on Epstein’s suicide next year. A Bureau of Prisons report obtained by news outlets in December showed that Epstein had previously attempted suicide in late July 2019, but had told an examining psychologist: “I have no interest in killing myself.” The records, first obtained by the New York Times, also revealed that an inmate at the facility had emailed prison administrators, stating: “Jeffrey Epstein definitely killed himself. Any conspiracy theories to the contrary are ridiculous. “He wanted to kill himself and seized the opportunity when it was available,” the inmate added. Ghislaine Maxwell, a British socialite and long-term associate of Epstein, was found guilty this week of facilitating the abuse of underage girls at the hands of the disgraced financier. New York City’s chief medical examiner ruled Epstein’s death a suicide, but members of his family claimed his injuries indicated homicide. The Metropolitan correctional center in Lower Manhattan, the grim detention center where Epstein was held, had long suffered staff shortages. Thomas and Noel had done several shifts of over time that week when Epstein was found dead early on 10 August 2019. A video obtained from the jail’s internal video surveillance system showed that no one visited the tier where Epstein was being held between 10.30pm the previous evening until 6.30am when they went in to give him breakfast and found him dead. The two officers later claimed they were being scapegoated for institutional failures. “Unfortunately, the decisions that led to the death of Mr Epstein were not only because of what my client did or did not do,” Montell Figgins, a lawyer for Thomas, told the Times. “It was because of a system that failed completely.” In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 800-273-8255. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.• A property in Rossington was described as being “a few streets south” of Doncaster Museum and Art Gallery and a 15-minute walk from the train station (Fantasy house hunt, 18 December, p61); Rossington is a 15-minute drive from Doncaster. • The bunny ears cactus, or Opuntia microdasys, can survive at 7C, but not -7C (Houseplant of the week, 11 December, Saturday magazine, p97). • We used “English champagne” when English sparkling wine was meant (Holy water, 18 December, Saturday magazine, p75). • Other recently amended articles include: How did I survive care and being homeless? I was luckier than the sharp, funny kids I grew up with Luxury homes, short lets and shacks: inside Lisbon’s housing crisis Why am I being abused for trying to improve the gender recognition process? Polish president vetoes media law criticised by US and EU ‘Air rage’ and personality tests: our favorite illustrations of 2021 Vegan yule: plant-based Christmas recipes from Zacchary Bird China berates US after ‘close encounters’ with Elon Musk satellites Judy Murray wins battle to build £40m tennis and golf complex Soldier on Tower of London patrol filmed knocking over child Aqua aerobics! Awkward sex! Justin Bieber! The best movie moments of 2021 Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Betty White, who had one of the longest careers in TV history playing ditzy blondes, was actually one of the toughest and most wised-up brunettes in showbiz. Yet such was her skill in shaping her public image – through talkshows, gameshows, sitcoms and multiple autobiographies – that from early on she was seen as something more than a mere TV personality: an actual type. In her later years, she was held up by many as the ultimate example of how to be an older person. Amy Poehler, in her book of essays Yes, Please, recalls the time White appeared on Saturday Night Live in 2010: “I asked her what she was going to do after the show. ‘I’m going to fix myself a vodka on the rocks and eat a cold hotdog,’ she said. It confirmed for me that growing old was awesome,” Poehler writes. By then, White had already spent almost 70 years cannily making herself into a recognisable genus. In 1973, when The Mary Tyler Moore Show was in the ascendant, an episode was written featuring a new character, Sue Ann, whom the script described as “a sickeningly sweet Betty White type”, White recalls in one of her memoirs, Here We Go Again. But, White writes, “They couldn’t find anyone sickening enough.” And so the casting director gave the part of Sue Ann Nivens, the seemingly dopey blonde with a not-very-hidden vicious and nymphomaniac streak, to White herself. White played it to such perfection she became a regular in the show and promptly won her second and third Emmys for the role. White worked for so long that looking back on her career is like taking a Zelig-like tour through the history of American TV, in which she pops up in each of the medium’s most seminal genres through the decades. (Her beloved third, last and late husband, TV gameshow host Allen Ludden, used to introduce her at parties with, “Meet my wife – one of the pioneers in silent television.” “And it was practically true,” she agreed.) White, who was born in Illinois but grew up in Los Angeles, got her first job in TV in 1949 as the sidekick to Al Jarvis on his live variety show, Hollywood on Television, on which she and Jarvis would chat amiably between playing new records. However, TV viewers wrote in to complain that they were more interested in White and Jarvis’s chat than the records, so the music was promptly ditched. Her appealing personality meant she was there in the early days of gameshows and talkshows, then throughout the 1950s and 60s worked with everyone from Jack Paar to Johnny Carson. Fans got to see her deeply in love in her many appearances on her husband gameshow, Password, which Ludden hosted from 1961 to 1967. When the two appeared on the show shortly after their honeymoon they could hardly stop giggling and saying one another’s name in lovestruck delight. Paar, a friend of the couple and another guest on the show, stared at them in wonder: “What kind of a honeymoon did you two have?” he asked, affecting bemusement. They never had children, although White was stepmother to Ludden’s children from an earlier relationship, and she was a noted devoted lover of animals and wrote about her long work with zoos and conservation in yet another memoir, Betty and Friends: My Life at the Zoo. She turned down a role in the hit 1997 film As Good as it Gets because in one scene a character dropped a puppy down a laundry chute. “I said as long as that scene was in the film, I wouldn’t do it,” she said. And she didn’t. White was one of the first and still relatively few women to have creative control in front of and behind the camera, with her 1950s sitcom, Life With Elizabeth. While not an obvious trailblazer like Joan Rivers, White was a quiet revolutionary in her way – a gloved knife rather than a Rivers-like axe smashing down walls, whose onscreen jibes came with a sweet smile instead of a sneer. Her two signature roles played on this contrast – the sweetness overlaying the sting – to brilliant effect. She became prominent in sitcoms in the 70s and 80s – arguably the genre’s two greatest decades. As Sue Ann Nivens on The Mary Tyler Moore Show, she satirised her own twinkly eyed appearance, shooting the most cutting of jabs at Moore while she wafted around holding a souffle. A new generation came to know her as Rose Nylund, the seemingly dopey Nordic blonde from St Olaf, Minnesota, on the wildly successful 80s sitcom, The Golden Girls, about a group of older women living in Florida, co-starring Bea Arthur, Rue McClanahan and Estelle Getty. They were all, as one TV critic said, “comedy black belts”, but few shows demonstrated better White’s genius at comedy: her timing, her rhythms and even just her facial expressions turned Rose from a potentially one-joke pony into a three-dimensional character, one especially beloved by children. “It tickled me whenever some very small person, tugging at mother’s sleeve, would point and say, ‘There’s Wose!’ Too young to pronounce it, they still knew the character,” White recalled. Any arguments about how audiences don’t want to watch old people on TV are disproven by a glance at The Golden Girls’ records. The show was in the Top 10 most-watched shows in the US every week for its first five years. During those years, all four stars were nominated for Emmys every single year. While seemingly a generic sitcom with a laugh track, the show was astonishingly bold about everything from geriatric sex to death in a way no show has been since, and it was beloved by the mainstream of all ages. White summed up the show’s appeal by saying, simply and correctly, “I think we were just truly funny.” It could be argued that anyone who hangs around long enough in the entertainment business becomes a legend and beloved treasure. But this simply isn’t true, as a skating glance at the many forgotten legends of TV past proves (when Mary Tyler Moore died in 2016 many were surprised she was even still around). White’s longevity is undoubtedly remarkable – when her last sitcom, Hot in Cleveland, ended she was 93. But she represented a lot more than mere good genes. She was a real trouper in the old showbiz sense, happy to go along with anything for the joke, whether it was tap dancing (brilliantly) in shorts on The Golden Girls in her 60s, or making jokes about her “salty muffin” on Saturday Night Live in her 90s. She was, she often admitted, a workaholic, whose love for work was partly why her second marriage ended in 1949 after two years, and it was how she got herself through the grief when Ludden died in 1981. But she was also an early adopter of the concept of celebrity: she understood before many others the value of making her personality her brand, and how close it was to reality became moot. With talent like hers, reality was by the by.The Lib Dems have identified 30 Tory seats mostly in the south of England where they want to “turn the blue wall yellow” at the next election, including Dominic Raab’s constituency of Esher and Walton. Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, said the party was looking to take seats off the Conservatives, and hoped to have candidates in place in most of these constituencies by the end of January. While not describing the seats as a target list, the party has pinpointed 30 constituencies where the Lib Dems would need just a 12% swing to topple the sitting Tory. This is around a third of the historic 34% swing to the Lib Dems that saw them win the North Shropshire byelection. The list includes the Lewes seat of health minister Maria Caulfield, the Sutton and Cheam seat of business minister Paul Scully, the South West Surrey seat of former cabinet minister Jeremy Hunt. The first two are former Lib Dem seats but the Surrey constituency is a Tory heartland. Davey stressed that “almost all of our marginal fights are against the Tories or in Scotland against the SNP”. Since the success of the Lib Dems in recent byelections, there has been a resurgence in speculation about the potential for a partnership between Labour and the Lib Dems after the next election if each can take enough seats off the Conservatives. The Lib Dems also won a shock victory in Chesham and Amersham, the former seat of the late Dame Cheryl Gillan, a former Tory cabinet minister. The party is now hoping to replicate that success in dozens of marginal Conservative seats across the country, making early preparations for the next election. Davey said there would be a new Lib Dem fighting fund, which is taking donations to expand ground operations in key marginal Conservative seats, as well as a “blue wall summit” later in 2022 to learn from its campaign byelection successes. He said it was “simply a fact that the seats we have the best chance in are held by Conservatives”. “But I want to get Boris Johnson out of No 10,” he added. “That is my strategic aim and it is increasingly clear there is no route to removing Boris Johnson’s Conservatives from power without us winning many, many more seats. We are the only credible challengers to them in many of their heartlands. Although we were third in North Shropshire in 2019, it was really clear that disaffected Tories would not vote Labour but they did see us as an alternative.” There is only one byelection planned for early 2022, in the Southend West seat of the murdered Conservative MP David Amess, which is not being contested by candidates from the other major parties. The next general election is scheduled to be held in May 2024 under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, but it would be possible for one to be called earlier and many politicians believe it is more likely to be in May 2023.João Cancelo is available for Manchester City’s game at Arsenal on Saturday despite a violent assault on the Portuguese at his family home that left him with facial injuries. The 27-year-old is travelling with Pep Guardiola’s squad to London after informing the manager on Friday he wishes to be considered for selection after the incident on Thursday evening, during which Cancelo confronted four intruders and was left with a scar and bruising around his right eye. After the attack, which police are investigating, the defender posted a picture of himself on Instagram and said: “Unfortunately I was assaulted by four cowards who hurt me and tried to hurt my family.” Kyle Walker has returned to training after injury so should Guardiola choose to rest Cancelo, who can operate as either full-back, City could play the England international at right-back, with Oleksandr Zinchenko and Nathan Aké options at left-back. Guardiola believes Mikel Arteta has produced the best Arsenal team he has faced since arriving at Manchester City in 2016. Arteta, Covid-positive and isolating, will not be at the Emirates on Saturday when fourth-placed Arsenal face the Premier League leaders. Guardiola has sent his best wishes and praised his former City assistant. “The most important thing is for him to stay well – the symptoms were low, everything is under control – and he recovers,” said Guardiola. “But I know exactly which Arsenal is going to play, with or without Mikel. It will be, since I arrived here, the best Arsenal I have ever seen.” Arsenal have won their past four league matches, winning 4-1 at Leeds and 5-0 at Norwich either side of Christmas. Improvement has coincided with Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang being dropped by Arteta. In August City beat Arsenal 5-0 after Granit Xhaka was sent off in the 35th minute. “Mikel is the most important player they have,” said Guardiola. “I know his charisma and ideas and especially his personality to do what he believes is the best for the team and the club.” City are coming off 10 successive Premier League wins, the latest Wednesday’s 1-0 victory at Brentford. Beating Arsenal would increase pressure on Chelsea and Liverpool, eight and nine points behind respectively and due to face each other at Stamford Bridge on Sunday. “It’s an unexpected situation,” said Guardiola. “Not even a month ago we were four or five or six points behind Chelsea and Liverpool but we have 54 points more to play for.” Riyad Mahrez and Raheem Sterling, scorers in Boxing Day’s 6-3 defeat of Leicester, sat out the win at Brentford and seem likely to play at Arsenal. “Raheem and Riyad were the best players against Leicester and they didn’t play one minute [against Brentford],” Guardiola said. “But in this kind of period everyone will be involved.” City are chasing a fourth title in five seasons, but Guardiola reluctantly compared this team with their predecessors. “It would be unfair on the previous ones to say this was the strongest because of what they did together, the generation with Vincent Kompany, Sergio Agüero, making 100 points, 98 points, facing the best team I ever faced, like Liverpool, in this period. They were the big rival for us. “I am not thinking about what is going to happen in the future. I am thinking: ‘OK, what’s next?’ What’s next is Arsenal.”Romelu Lukaku has no intention of leaving Chelsea despite angering Thomas Tuchel with an interview in which the striker said that he was “not happy” with his situation at Stamford Bridge this season. Lukaku, who became Chelsea’s record signing after joining from Internazionale for £97.5m last summer, stumbled into a controversy of his own making when comments about his dissatisfaction with his role under Tuchel were released by Sky Italia on Thursday. The interview took place three weeks ago and was intended to help the Belgian build bridges with Inter fans. However, Lukaku ended up risking his relationship with Tuchel after questioning the manager’s system and adding that he wants to return to San Siro while still at “a good enough level”. Lukaku is not thinking about quitting Chelsea now and sources said there was “zero chance” of a reunion with Inter in January. The forward revealed that he had turned down an offer from Manchester City in 2020 and, when Inter rejected his request for a new contract last summer, decided that Chelsea were the only team he would contemplate joining. Nonetheless the interview has irritated Tuchel, whose problems increased after Reece James was ruled out for at least two months with a torn hamstring. James’s absence could prompt Chelsea to try to sign Kieran Trippier, who wants to return to the Premier League from Atlético Madrid and is being pursued by Newcastle. Tuchel would not confirm whether Lukaku would face disciplinary action and said the 28-year-old had hurt Chelsea’s focus before they try to revive their ailing title challenge by beating Liverpool on Sunday. “We don’t like it,” Tuchel said. “It brings noise that we don’t need and it’s not helpful. We don’t want to make more out of it than it actually is. It is easy to take lines out of context, shorten lines, make headlines and then realise later that it is not so bad. We need a calm environment and focus and this does not help.” Tuchel said he would speak to Lukaku, who fired Inter to the title last season. “I don’t feel him unhappy,” the German said. “I feel the exact opposite. That’s why it’s a surprise. If there is something to discuss it’s behind closed doors. It does not reflect his daily work. “But you need to ask him. Everything you say is out there if you are such a big player like Romelu. He is experienced and should know what kind of value it has when he speaks out like this.” Lukaku, who has seven goals in 18 appearances in all competitions, has endured a frustrating time since returning to Stamford Bridge. He had gone seven games without a goal before suffering an ankle injury in October and had a further spell on the sidelines after testing positive for Covid-19 just before Christmas. Lukaku had given a less explosive interview after making a goalscoring return in Chelsea’s win over Aston Villa on Boxing Day. Lukaku, who also scored in Chelsea’s 1-1 draw with Brighton on Wednesday, described himself as “multidimensional” and said he had asked Tuchel for clarity about his role. “This is the problem because you have a quote in another direction and he says he had a chat with me,” Tuchel said. “Then the suggestion comes and it seems the chat was about how he was not happy how we used him. But maybe that was not the chat. We have chats with a lot of players. This is a normal chat. “We have a discussion now where it seems that we benched him because other players suited our style better. Romelu played when he came, then he got injured, then he caught Covid and when he came back, he played with no training in Aston Villa. That’s why I’m surprised. There is absolutely zero going on. Maybe he has a problem so he needs to speak up. I don’t have one.” Tuchel was asked how Lukaku could best function in his system. “Training, training, playing,” he replied. “Training, playing, training, sleeping, eating good, training, playing, sleeping, eat good, drink a lot of water, sleep, train and don’t give interviews.” Chelsea, eight points behind Manchester City, have injury problems. Ben Chilwell is out for the season and scans have confirmed that James suffered a torn hamstring against Brighton, leaving Tuchel without his first-choice wing-backs. Tuchel, who could also be without Andreas Christensen, Thiago Silva and Timo Werner against Liverpool, needs cover at left wing-back. Chelsea are looking into recalling Emerson Palmieri from his loan at Lyon, but the French club do not want to break the agreement. If Emerson stays, Chelsea could target Everton’s Lucas Digne or Barcelona’s Sergiño Dest.Leading figures of science and medicine during the coronavirus pandemic have been feted in the Queen’s new year honours list, including the chief medical officer for England, Prof Chris Whitty, who is to receive a knighthood for his role in battling Covid-19. The CMOs for Scotland and Wales, Dr Gregor Smith and Dr Frank Atherton, are also to be given knighthoods, as is the deputy medical officer for England, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, and the head of the UK Health Security Agency, Dr Jenny Harries, who becomes a dame. The UK chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, is elevated to the Order of the Bath. The teenage tennis star Emma Raducanu – praised for her “remarkable achievement at such a young age” by the Queen after her remarkable US Open win – is to be awarded an MBE, after also being crowned the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year. After a successful Tokyo Olympic Games – in which Team GB equalled its London 2012 medal haul to come fourth in the table and excelled in new sports including BMX, skateboarding, and weightlifting – 78 Olympians and Paralympians are celebrated for services to sport this year. Among them are the married Olympians Laura and Jason Kenny who have received a damehood and knighthood for services to cycling. Jason Kenny became Britain’s most decorated Olympian after winning gold in the men’s keirin at Tokyo 2020, while Laura Kenny became the first British woman to win gold at three Olympics. The wheelchair sprinter Hannah Cockroft, who took her Paralympic gold medal tally to six this summer after a decade at the top of her sport, receives an OBE. The swimmer Adam Peaty and the diver Tom Daley receive OBEs not only for coming home with gold medals but also for raising awareness of mental health and LGBT issues, while the sailor Hannah Mills gets an OBE for her prowess on the water and continued campaigning on marine pollution. Other Olympians and Paralympians recognised include the cyclist Jody Cundy, who gets a CBE, and the sprinter and cyclist Kadeena Cox, who receives an OBE. There are MBEs for the diver Matty Lee, the BMX racer Bethany Shriever and the boxer Lauren Price, who said she was “gobsmacked” to receive the award. Price, a champion footballer turned kickboxer turned boxer, dedicated the honour to her grandparents, with whom she has lived since she was a baby. “My gran and grandad have always supported me and encouraged me. If it wasn’t for them then I wouldn’t have achieved what I have today,” she said. The actors Joanna Lumley and Vanessa Redgrave become dames for their services to drama, entertainment and charity, while John Boorman, the director of Hollywood films including Excalibur, Point Blank and Deliverance, is also knighted. In a move that may raise eyebrows in Whitehall circles, the actor Daniel Craig receives the Order of Saint Michael and Saint George (CMG) for outstanding contribution to film. It is the same award given to the fictional character he is best-known for playing, and one normally reserved for professional diplomats and intelligence officers. The veteran soap stars June Brown and William Roache receive OBEs, and the actor Cherylee Houston gets an MBE for services to drama and to people with disabilities. The Loose Women star and activist Katie Piper, who sustained life-changing burns in an acid attack in March 2008, receives an OBE for her services to charity and victims of burns and other disfigurement injuries. Elsewhere in the cultural sphere, Alistair Spalding, the artistic director of Sadler’s Wells, is awarded a knighthood for services to dance, saying the award is an indication “that our vibrant dance culture goes from strength to strength”. John Gilhooly, the artistic director of Wigmore Hall, is honoured with a CBE for services to music, while the songwriter Bernie Taupin, best known for his long-term partnership with Sir Elton John, is awarded a CBE. Melanie Brown of the Spice Girls has been made an MBE for her work with the domestic violence charity Women’s Aid. In the art world, Peter Murray, who founded Yorkshire Sculpture Park in 1977, is knighted while the large-scale installation artist Es Devlin, the first woman to design the UK Pavilion for Expo since its inception in 1851, is awarded a CBE. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, paid tribute to the 1,122 individuals celebrated – 361 at BEM, 508 at MBE and 253 at OBE – thanking them for their contribution to the nation. “These recipients have inspired and entertained us and given so much to their communities in the UK or in many cases around the world,” he said. “The honours are an opportunity for us to thank them, as a country, for their dedication and outstanding contribution.” The former prime minister Tony Blair is appointed a Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, the oldest and most senior order of chivalry. Trevor Phillips, the former chair of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, has been knighted for services to equality and human rights. Frank Field, the MP for Birkenhead from 1979 to 2019 who now sits in the House of Lords, is made a companion of honour – where membership is limited to 65 people – along with Nobel Prize-winning geneticist Sir Paul Nurse. In business, knighthoods go to Nigel Wilson, the chief executive of Legal &amp; General, and Ian Livingstone, the co-founder of Games Workshop. The veteran broadcaster Moira Stuart, who was the first African-Caribbean woman to read the news on British television, is recognised for her services to media. She said “it hasn’t been easy” but she was “moved and lifted” to be made a CBE. The continued fight against coronavirus once again featured heavily in this year’s honours list, with vaccine chief Dr Emily Lawson made a dame for her work on the rollout programme, while June Raine – whom the committee said as head of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency had ensured that laboratories stayed open and carried out viral work through the pandemic – also becomes a dame. After a summer in which the men’s England football team reached a Euros final for the first time – only for key players to be subjected to racist abuse – the list honours the work of Gary Bennett, a former Sunderland footballer and one of the first three patrons of the charity Show Racism the Red Card. “I’ve been overwhelmed and thankful for it, proud and honoured,” said Bennett. But he added that 30 years after he experienced racist abuse as the first black captain of Sunderland, it was time that social media companies faced sanctions for allowing similar racist abuse on their platforms. “Social media [firms] need to be accountable and some form of punishment needs to be put out there,” he said. In the 2022 new year honours list, women represent 47.9% of the total honours (dropping to 35.9% of recipients at CBE level and above); 25.5% are from a lower socio-economic background; 15.1% come from a BAME background; 13.3% have a disability; and 3.5% identify as being LGBT. Of those honoured, 799 (63%) have worked in their communities, including the youngest people ever to be included in the list: 11-year-old Tobias Weller and 12-year-old Max Woosey, who are recognised for their fundraising efforts during the pandemic. The oldest person on the list is 102-year-old Henry Lewis, the honorary vice-president of the magicians’ society The Magic Circle, who is given an MBE for services to fundraising and charitable causes. • This article was amended on 1 January 2022. Based on external information provided, an earlier version said that Laura and Jason Kenny were believed to be the first married couple to be recognised on the same list at the same time. This is not the case.Having been there, done that, just fallen short and finally succeeded, Jürgen Klopp knows exactly what it takes to compete with Manchester City for the title and there was no mincing of words by the German as he outlined the task facing Liverpool in their latest battle with Pep Guardiola’s men. “You have to be perfect,” he said. “And if you’re not perfect you have to hope City are not perfect.” Both parts of that statement could be deemed wishful thinking at the end of a week in which the gap between the sides stretched to nine points on the back of Liverpool suffering a shock 1-0 defeat to Leicester and City winning by the same scoreline at Brentford to make it 10 league victories in a row for the champions and leaders. They are looking relentless again, whereas for Liverpool there is the very real threat of a stumble becoming a full-on fall given their next assignment is Sunday’s trip to Chelsea. It will not be easy against the team one place and point ahead of them and defeat, coupled with City winning again at Arsenal on Saturday, really would make Liverpool’s title hopes feel terminal. Some may deem that a case of bleak exaggeration clashing with the fresh hope of a new year but the truth is that, under Guardiola, City have become a side who do not panic and pull up when they have their noses out in front, and in the process of winning three out of the previous four titles have racked up a huge amount of points, most notably a league-record 100 in 2017-18. Liverpool could not outdo them the following season even after reaching 97 points and had to go to 99 points in 2019-20 to finally take their crown. It is hard work and with City on course to break the 90-point barrier again, little wonder Klopp feels perfection is needed to prevail. “The problem is not the motivation, the problem is the quality of City,” he said. “We had a couple of years where we really could catch up with them and be close but they are able to do ridiculous things, like win their last 15 [games] or whatever. That is the situation, but we want to have that competition; it’s fine, City are there to be beaten, and during a season, usually, each team has a problematic phase. The shorter that phase is, the better it is, and the more likely it gives you the chance to win something. And we will really give it [winning the title] a go.” Liverpool’s commitment under Klopp has never been in question and it should be noted that the loss to Leicester was only their second of the season, the same as City have suffered. It is frustrating draws, such as against Brentford and Brighton, that are truly hurting the Reds and if they can cut those out then there is no reason why a team brimming with quality, experience and nous cannot remain in the title mix. For that to be the case, they really could do with beating Chelsea and will feel that is a realistic proposition given their opponents’ lack of form with one win in their past four league games, lack of resources due to injuries and a Covid outbreak, and internal strife caused by Romelu Lukaku’s interview to Sky Italia in which the £97.5m striker declared he was “not happy” at the club. “We don’t like it,” Thomas Tuchel said in response. “It brings noise that we don’t need.” Liverpool should smell blood, but it hardly helps that they have selection problems of their own with Thiago Alcântara among a host of players out injured – according to Klopp, the Spain midfielder has a “hip issue which we have no idea where it’s coming from” – and three fresh Covid cases confirmed within the squad, all currently unnamed. As things stand, Liverpool have not asked for Sunday’s game to be postponed but, speaking on Friday, Klopp did not rule that out. “We never had this proper outbreak where 15 to 20 players had it [Covid],” he said. “For us it is every day, another one, stuff happens more and more often. It’s like a lottery waiting for the results. “We deal with difficulties like this every day, which is challenging. But in the end, when the lineup is out there, when the meeting is finished, the boys are ready to go. And we try again.” City have been warned.Young people who have acted as tutors, community leaders and fundraisers are among those honoured in the Queen’s new year honours list. The youngest recipients – and the youngest people ever to receive an honour – are 11 and 12. Max Woosey, 12, has captured the imagination of outdoors-loving young people by camping out for what is now 21 consecutive months to raise nearly £600,000 and counting for the North Devon Hospice, which cared for his neighbour Rick Abbott who died of cancer aged 74 in March 2020. Max, who inspired thousands of children around the world to camp in their own back yards, said receiving the honour felt “unreal”. “Getting an award like this for not being famous but for doing good things I think shows that we do have a good future, that young people can be role models, and it is all going to be all right,” he said. Yet Max is not the youngest on the list, an accolade that goes to 11-year-old Tobias Garbutt Weller, from Sheffield. Inspired by Captain Sir Tom Moore, Tobias has completed two marathons and an Ironman challenge despite being unable to walk unaided. Starting when he was nine years old in March 2020, Tobias, who is autistic and has cerebral palsy, has raised more than £150,000, and he is awarded the British Empire Medal (BEM). As well as feats of endurance, young people are also recognised for stepping up to help their communities, such as 16-year-old Sahil Usman who delivered essential items to vulnerable people in Blackburn while undergoing treatment for leukaemia. As well as raising awareness about the impact of cancer on young people in presentations in schools, Sahil has hosted a radio show for local minority ethnic communities to encourage understanding of coronavirus. In Luton, Muhammad Kamil Ali turned himself into a tutoring machine during the pandemic. The 19-year-old, who is applying for medical school, taught every day for periods through the BCPD Trust, and still regularly teaches young people whose education was disrupted as a result of Covid out of school hours. “It’s a good feeling,” he said, on being awarded a BEM. “I’ve been doing it a long time now so it feels nice to have that recognised.” Asked what the awards to young people said about the UK, he added: “I think it shows that everybody has a skill, everyone is good at something. In life you should give back, and everyone can find their own way of doing that.” Alice Jackson, 21, from Andover in Hampshire, said her BEM – awarded after she became a leading member of a group of volunteers helping their rural community in lockdown – was a reflection of a bigger group effort. “[The award] is a reflection on the whole community coming together and looking out for other people,” she said. “At the time it just had to be done – I just thought it was an issue that needed solving and I had the time to do it.” A Cabinet Office spokesperson said the 2022 list was one of the most diverse on record, and included a greater number of awards for young people. They said: “Young people have done some extraordinary things during the pandemic and it’s important that the country recognises that service.”A billionaire hedge fund founder who has given nearly £1.5m to the Conservatives has been knighted in the new year honours list, prompting accusations that Boris Johnson has “the wrong priorities”. David Winton Harding, who has been funding the Tories since 2006, was given the award for services to philanthropy. The founder and chief executive of Winton Group is well known for supporting research and science projects, having given the largest single donation to the Science Museum, as well as multimillion pound donations to the University of Cambridge. A physics graduate from Cambridge, Harding pledged that some of the funds would be used to promote access for students from disadvantaged and minority ethnic backgrounds. A financial backer of the remain campaign during the EU referendum, Harding most recently gave £100,000 to the Tories in April and handed £300,000 to the party in the autumn before the 2019 election. Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, said: “During the pandemic the public has rightly come together to celebrate the real heroes from all those keeping our NHS going, our vaccine volunteers, key workers and all those who went above and beyond to keep our communities thriving. This [Harding’s knighthood] just shows that once again the Conservatives have the wrong priorities.” Anneliese Dodds, chair of the Labour party, said: “It seems the Conservatives are ringing in the new year in exactly the same way they’ve seen out the old: by rewarding their chums with gongs instead of our key worker heroes. “If you want Boris Johnson to recommend you for a knighthood, don’t bother working long hours on low wages to help others – just become a hedge fund manager and donate half a million pounds to the Tories.” Two longstanding Tory MPs – Bill Wiggin and Robert Goodwill – were also knighted for their “political service”. Wiggin has been an MP since 2001, largely as a backbencher, and previously served as a whip. He is now a member of the liaison committee that scrutinises the work of the prime minister. Goodwill has served as a minister in four departments. In previous years, the Tories have given many more honours to donors, aides and politicians, prompting cronyism rows. Harding and No 10 have been approached for comment. Harding has previously suggested he would back state funding of political parties. “I’ve given a bit of money to politics. I rather wish I didn’t have to,” he said in 2015. “I rather wish it was all funded some other way and that would remove the whole issue. “I’m sympathetic to the Tories and their approach to raising money but I’m also sympathetic to people who don’t like that in the UK. The Lib Dems said it should all be state funded and I’d be perfectly fine with state funding.”Boris Johnson has named returning the crown stamps to pint glasses and scrapping a ban on selling goods in pounds and ounces on his list of the “key successes” of Brexit this year. The prime minister set out his views on the opportunities created by Brexit in 2021 a year after the signing of the UK-EU trade and cooperation agreement. However, he made no mention of Northern Ireland in his new year’s message about Brexit, where there are still huge trade problems with the operation of the agreement and ongoing talks with the EU about how to proceed. The prime minister also omitted mention of the resignation of David Frost, the Tory peer overseeing Brexit. Frost is leaving the government after frustrations over Brexit negotiations and broader concerns over the government’s Covid policies and tax increases. His brief will be taken over by Liz Truss, the foreign secretary. In his anniversary message, Johnson said the UK had “used Brexit freedoms” to create a new immigration system and to strike new trade deals around the world with countries such as Australia. Johnson also claimed Brexit had helped secure the vaccine rollout, although some have challenged that claim. On cutting red tape, the prime minister listed ending VAT on sanitary products, simplifying complex EU alcohol duty rates, and forging ahead to remove the ban on selling in pounds and ounces as well as restoring the crown stamp on to the side of pint glasses as successes during the year. “We’ve replaced free movement with a points-based immigration system. We’ve secured the fastest vaccine rollout anywhere in Europe last year by avoiding sluggish EU processes. And from Singapore to Switzerland, we’ve negotiated ambitious free trade deals to boost jobs and investment here at home,” he said. “But that’s not all. From simplifying the EU’s mind-bogglingly complex beer and wine duties to proudly restoring the crown stamp on to the side of pint glasses, we’re cutting back on EU red tape and bureaucracy and restoring common sense to our rulebook.” Looking ahead to 2022, Johnson pledged the government would go “further and faster” to maximise the opportunities of Brexit. He said officials were reviewing thousands of individual EU regulations automatically kept on the statute book after Brexit with a view to repealing those that do not act in the best interests of people and businesses. Johnson also highlighted reviews of the regulatory regimes around artificial intelligence, self-driving vehicles, data rights, genetically modified food and medical devices as areas where the UK could deviate from the EU. “The job isn’t finished and we must keep up the momentum. In the year ahead my government will go further and faster to deliver on the promise of Brexit and take advantage of the enormous potential that our new freedoms bring,” he said. Truss held talks with her EU counterpart, Maroš Šefčovič, in the week before Christmas amid renewed calls to rip up the controversial Northern Ireland protocol. The cabinet minister, who is also the foreign secretary, said she wanted to negotiate “a comprehensive solution” to the agreement, which requires post-Brexit checks on goods arriving in Northern Ireland from Great Britain.