Teenagers whose parents or caregivers smoke are four times as likely to take up smoking, medical experts have warned. The statistic was one of many released as part of the Better Health Smoke Free campaign to encourage smokers to make giving up their new year resolution. NHS and behavioural health experts discussed the link between adult smoking and the likelihood of children in their household becoming smokers. Other findings discussed by the group were that early teenagers whose main caregiver smoked were more than twice as likely to have tried cigarettes and four times as likely to be a regular smoker. Maggie Throup, parliamentary under-secretary of state and minister for vaccines and public health, said: “We know that many people make a quit attempt in January, and while there are so many good reasons to stop smoking for yourself, we hope that this new campaign – by highlighting the intergenerational smoking link with parents influencing their children – will be the added motivation many need to ditch the cigarettes for good this year.” Other statistics included research from NatCen Social Research, which had also shown children aged 10 to 15 were more likely to smoke if either their mother or father currently smoked. Children were also more likely to smoke if either parent had smoked in the past, even if they were not a current smoker, the same research showed. The Better Health Smoke Free campaign comes from the new Office for Health Improvement and Disparities (OHID) in the Department of Health and Social Care. Deputy chief medical officer for England and joint lead for the OHID, Dr Jeanelle de Gruchy, said: “Smoking is terrible for your health but it also has a negative impact on people around you. Most people know the dangers of secondary smoke but we should not overlook the impact that parents have as role models.” Prof Nick Hopkinson of Imperial College London added: “Our research findings are clear – adult smoking has a tangible impact on children. Children whose caregivers smoke are four times as likely to take up smoking themselves. “The most effective way to help prevent this would be for adults to quit smoking – clearly not only does this have enormous benefits for them but it will also benefit their children both now and in later life.” Data from the Office for National Statistics shows that one in eight adults in England are smokers.The last three winners of the Grade One Savills Chase – A Plus Tard, Kemboy and Delta Work – are all in the hunt for a second success at Leopardstown on Tuesday, but there is no doubt where the punters will be placing their faith as A Plus Tard and Rachael Blackmore are certain to start favourite, probably at odds-on. Henry de Bromhead’s chaser has raced only twice since powering past Kemboy and Melon in the final strides 12 months ago, but both runs strongly suggested that A Plus Tard is improving all the time as a close second behind Minella Indo in the Gold Cup was followed by a deeply impressively success in the Betfair Chase in November. Galvin, the National Hunt Chase winner at Cheltenham in March, is a potentially high-class opponent but still has plenty to find with the favourite, while Janadil, second in the John Durkan on his first start in an open Grade One, is also interesting as he steps up to three miles for the first time. A Plus Tard (2.20), though, is the only horse at single-figure odds for the Cheltenham Gold Cup after Minella Indo’s disappointing run at Kempton on Sunday and it will be a major disappointment if he cannot deliver the goods. Leopardstown 1.10 Ardhill will be popular here to follow up a recent easy success at Ascot when blinkered for the first time but he has taken a hike in the weights and the headgear is off today. As a result, A Great View could be a fair alternative at around 12-1 after an eye-catching run into second at Navan earlier this month. Catterick 1.25 Representing Bob is two-from-two over fences and still on a fair mark with further improvement likely. Leopardstown 1.45 A fascinating match-up between former star novice Klassical Dream and the 1-2 from last season’s Stayers’ Hurdle, Flooring Porter and Sire Du Berlais. Willie Mullins’s seven-year-old has had plenty of problems but he is top-class on his day and a repeat of his form – off a 487-day break – at Punchestown in April could well be enough. Catterick Bridge 2.00 Findthetime needed every yard of two miles to get his head in front at Sedgefield in November and this step up in trip should suit for his handicap debut. Leopardstown 2.55 Several of these were useful over hurdles but none more so than Grade One winner Galopin Des Champs, who should make a winning start over the bigger obstacles here.Britain’s housing market is to slow dramatically in 2022 as borrowing costs rise and household budgets come under mounting strain, property experts have predicted. After a year of booming prices driven by stamp duty holidays across the UK and changes in the types of properties being bought and sold, forecasters typically suggest house price growth of between 3 and 5% next year. The most recent figures from Nationwide building society showed annual price growth running at 10%. In London’s wealthiest boroughs, however, price rises are expected to outstrip those recorded this year, and could beat the figure for the UK as a whole. The property firm Savills said it expected growth of 6% in prime London neighbourhoods in 2022, up from 3.2% in 2021, but that renewed uncertainty over Covid could push that growth into later in the year. Savills said prices had started to rise again for flats in prime areas, as people began to return to the city or looked for a pied-à-terre to use while there. Frances Clacy, an associate director at Savills, said: “Activity levels have picked up significantly over recent months, but the renewed Covid-19 uncertainty adds an unwelcome additional layer of doubt that will likely push the expected bounce in values further into 2022. “Still, we believe it’s a question of when and not if prices rebound, particularly as more pent up demand builds, so prime central London remains a market to watch closely. Its bounce can be surprisingly rapid.” The London market had fallen as wealthy buyers left the capital during months of home working, and overseas travel restrictions dampened the interest of buyers from other countries. The market elsewhere has been boosted by a “race for space” during the pandemic along with government initiatives such as stamp duty holidays, the last of which ended in September in September, and cheap mortgage deals thanks to record low interest rates. The Bank of England unexpectedly lifted interest rates for the first time in three years in December in response to growing concerns over inflation, which reached a decade high of 5.1% in November. Borrowing costs, however, are still lower than before the pandemic, and analysts believe any future rate increases will be limited because it appears far from over. Savills has forecast house price growth across the UK market of 3.5% next year as the economy rebounds from the pandemic and a shortage of homes for sale continues to underpin prices. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors predicts that house prices could end next year 3-5% higher than at the start of the year. Tarrant Parsons, an economist at Rics, said: “2021 has been an exceptionally active year for the housing market, with transactions close to record levels. However, despite more homeowners seeking more space and various incentive programmes … transaction activity for the coming 12 months will inevitably slow. “All else being equal, higher borrowing costs will dampen demand across the market to a certain extent. The major challenge will be around the lack of stock on the market with inventory back close to historic lows, and shows little sign of easing.” Halifax, one of the biggest mortgage lenders, said earlier this month that it expected price growth to slow considerably as a result of rising living costs. It forecast price growth of zero to 2% in 2022. This compared with increases of 8% recorded so far this year and 6% in 2020. It estimated the average house price in December at £272,992, almost £34,000 higher than at the start of the pandemic. The property website Rightmove has predicted house prices will rise by 5% nationally and 3% in London. Zoopla, a rival site, expects 3% next year and forecast 1.2m transactions, down from 1.5m in 2021 but in line with the average number of transactions over the last five years. Robert Gardner, the chief economist at Nationwide building society, has not put a figure on how much he expects prices to move in 2022. He said: “The outlook remains extremely uncertain. The strength of the market surprised us all in 2021 and could do so again next year.”The festive programme in the Premier League is fabled for its surprises, but for Manchester United this was an unwelcome dose of déjà vu. From the start at St James’ Park, this game called to mind the early days of Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s reign, with this exact fixture his fourth game in charge – and fourth win – three years ago and precisely two weeks into his tenure at Old Trafford. On that occasion at least club and fans were still basking in their escape from the José Mourinho psychodrama, and a sense of goodwill towards Solskjær was clear. The Norwegian had his fingerprints smeared generously over the victory too, his double substitution just after the hour – bringing on Romelu Lukaku and Alexis Sánchez – swinging a game of high tension and low quality. It seemed feted, Lukaku breaking the deadlock 38 seconds after coming on as a second-half substitute and Sánchez at the hub of Marcus Rashford’s goal which wrapped things up. It all added up to an underwhelming but successful performance, which mapped out with reasonable accuracy what we could come to expect from United for the next few years. This time at Newcastle, Manchester United’s double change couldn’t wait that long, such had been the sheer emptiness of the display offered by Ralf Rangnick’s side before the break. Jadon Sancho and Edinson Cavani played their second-half part in turning the tanker around, and really looked United’s only real hope of doing so. Sancho provided for Cavani only for the Uruguayan to scuff a presentable opportunity badly wide. It turned out to be a rehearsal for the equaliser: a kind deflection returned to Cavani from his first shot – from Diogo Dalot’s cross this time – and the the visitors caught a needed break on a hitherto barren night. Cavani is clear as the perfect partner for Cristiano Ronaldo, sharing only an age bracket and a plentiful history of goals with the Portugal captain. At nearly 35 Cavani brings the hustle and the urgency which Ronaldo has rarely been required to provide in his career, and which United have lacked all over the pitch for way too long. It stood out like a sore thumb here, with United pedestrian in possession in their own half even after the leveller. Without the post and David de Gea’s upstretched right hand, which denied the home side twice in a handful of seconds with three minutes to go, the vistors would have headed back to Manchester with the defeat that this miserable performance deserved. No feature of Manchester United’s game in the first 45 minutes had been as notable as the frequent sight of Rangnick’s downturned bottom lip plodding back through the technical area. He was shaking his head disapprovingly in the direction of his bench, with his side in his familiar 4-2-2-2 shape but with none of the zip that typically characterises his teams. It was always going to be a steep climb for the players to get where their new coach really wants them to be mid-season, with so little time to work. The problems of adaptation are clear. Newcastle escaped the press too easily throughout – a Bruno Fernandes sprint here and a Rashford saunter there – and when United lost the ball, they were consistently overexposed. Manchester United losing possession was commonplace, even before Raphaël Varane was caught dawdling on the ball by Sean Longstaff on the way to Allan Saint-Maximin’s opener. Rangnick’s side had been given their warning. A Harry Maguire slip in the second minute had let in Ryan Fraser, fortunately without consequence for the visitors. Individual quality covered a multitude of sins under Solskjaer, right up until it couldn’t anymore. Here that innate aptitude flickered far too briefly to give Manchester United a chance to snatch the points. There was one sliver where you saw how it might come together, when Ronaldo’s round-the-corner flick found Fernandes late in the first half. The latter’s sidefoot was comfortably smothered by Dubravka, but Ronaldo had been lingering offside in the first instance anyway. It was typical of the torpor with which Rangnick has his hands full.David Lammy has apologised for nominating Jeremy Corbyn to be Labour leader in 2015 and said he is “staggered” that some individuals with deeply antisemitic views remain in the Labour party. Speaking at this year’s Limmud festival, a Jewish event, the shadow foreign secretary said he “never believed” Corbyn would become leader and that his nomination was “a mistake”. “I regret nominating Jeremy Corbyn and if I knew what I do now, I never would have nominated him,” Lammy told an online audience of about 300, in comments first reported in Jewish News. “I never believed he would become leader. That was a mistake and I am sorry for that.” Lammy went on to say he was “fully behind” Keir Starmer and said of his leadership: “I don’t believe the overall culture is toxic any more … but until the party is genuinely welcome for everyone, we remain on a journey.” His comments came after a recent survey of members of the Jewish Labour Movement, a Labour party affiliate, found strong support for Starmer’s efforts to tackle antisemitism since he became leader last year. Roughly 70% of the survey’s 363 respondents said Labour was a safe space for Jewish people under Starmer’s leadership, compared with just 4% who felt the same under Corbyn. But Lammy said Labour was still “on a journey” when it came to improving relations with Britain’s Jewish groups and that certain individuals with antisemitic views remained in the party. “I’ve met some of these individuals and am frankly staggered some are still in the party,” the Tottenham MP said. “But as a lawyer, I understand that people appeal and go to court. There is a process, which can feel slow and tortuous sometimes, but it must be undertaken.” Describing himself as a subscriber to the “rainbow coalition approach to politics”, he said he was proud of the Jewish community for standing “shoulder to shoulder” with leaders including Nelson Mandela and Desmond Tutu in their fight against apartheid. “The Jewish community understood the fascism that was at the heart of apartheid and the pernicious evil of discrimination. The tradition that I’m from is Jewish friends recognising and being active alongside historically discriminated groups. “It means black communities like mine understanding prejudices existing against Jewish communities.”Here’s a quick roundup of what’s been happening so far: Boris Johnson will not introduce further Covid restrictions in England before 2022, giving mass events the go-ahead and leaving nightclubs open for New Year’s Eve – in contrast with all other UK nations. Scientists criticised the decision, describing it as the moment of “the greatest divergence between scientific advice and legislation” seen since the start of the pandemic. There were no walk-in PCR tests available to book anywhere in England for a few hours on Monday due to “high demand”. Appointments had been unavailable in every region of the country, although there were some in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. Social media users said the lack of availability of tests could affect travel plans, sports fixtures and business appointments. The number of patients in England admitted into hospital with Covid-19 has reached its highest level since mid-February after a 74% rise in a week. In London, hospital admissions have increased by 73%. A total of 8,474 people were in hospital in England with Covid-19 as of 8am today – the highest number since 5 March. France has narrowed the delay for a third booster shot to three months from four in response to the rapid spread of Omicron but there will be no curfew for New Year’s Eve. From Monday, all public gatherings will be limited to 2,000 people for indoor events, and to 5,000 people for outdoor events. Consumption of drinks and food will be banned in long-distance transport and home working will become mandatory for at least three days per week where possible. Denmark and Iceland, both of which had some of Europe’s lowest infection rates before the arrival of Omicron, reported record daily Covid cases today. Denmark now has the world’s highest infection rate, with 1,612 cases per 100,000 people. Europe recorded the most cases and deaths in the past seven days, according to statistics compiled by Agence France-Presse. The five countries with the highest case rates over the last seven days were all European. People who test positive for Covid in the US can self-isolate for just five days, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said – down from the 10 days the agency previously recommended. In a statement, the CDC said these changes reflect the latest data on when the virus is most contagious. Scotland has recorded a record number of Covid cases over the Christmas weekend, hitting a high of 11,030 new cases on Boxing Day, the Scottish government has said. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, is due to update a specially-reconvened sitting of the Scottish parliament on Wednesday about the spread of the virus and the impact on hospitals. Paraguay has confirmed the country’s first Omicron cases, health officials said. The cases were detected in people who had travelled outside the country this month but the government has not taken immediate action on travel. Flight cancellations that disrupted Christmas travel stretched into Monday, with major US airlines each cancelling dozens of flights. According to FlightAware, which tracks flight cancellations, airlines have cancelled roughly 4,000 flights to, from or inside the US since Friday. Greece has announced further restrictions effective between 3 and 16 January to contain a further surge in Covid infections. Bars and restaurants will have to close at midnight and no standing customers at entertainment venues will be allowed. There will also be a maximum limit of six people per table. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, for today. Goodbye. Goldman Sachs has told employees that all individuals coming into the bank’s US offices will be required to show proof of a booster shot. The new policy will come into effect on 1 February and applies to both employees and visitors. In addition, Goldman Sachs plans to double mandatory testing to twice weekly, beginning on 10 January. Brazil’s president Jair Bolsonaro has said he will not vaccinate his 11-year-old daughter against Covid-19. “Children have not been dying in a way that justifies a vaccine for children,” he told reporters in the southern state of Santa Catarina. Bolsonaro himself has refused to get vaccinated and has repeatedly called into question the safety and efficacy of Covid vaccines, Reuters reports. Vaccinating children against coronavirus has been a hot topic in Brazil. More than 300 children between the ages of 5 and 11 have died of Covid-19 in Brazil, according to a government coronavirus advisory body. Ministers have confirmed that no new Covid-19 restrictions will be imposed in England before the new year. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, told reporters there will be “no further measures before the new year”, adding: “Of course people should remain cautious as we approach new year celebrations and take a lateral flow test if that makes sense, celebrate outdoors if you can, have some ventilation indoors if you can.” It puts England at odds with the rest of the United Kingdom in how people will be allowed to ring in the new year. Here is what you can, and cannot, do: The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have shortened its recommended time for isolation for people who test positive for Covid-19 from 10 days to five days if they don’t have symptoms. The reduction follows the CDC’s decision last week to cut its isolation period for infected health care workers assuming they are asymptomatic and later test negative. Health officials have similarly shortened the recommended time for people to quarantine if they are exposed to the virus to five days if they are vaccinated, and often to no time if they are boosted. CDC Director Rochelle Walensky said the country is about to see a lot of Omicron cases. “Not all of those cases are going to be severe. In fact many are going to be asymptomatic,” she told The Associated Press. “We want to make sure there is a mechanism by which we can safely continue to keep society functioning while following the science.” Hospitality bosses have welcomed news that the government has ruled out additional Covid restrictions in England before the busy New Year’s Eve trading period. Businesses had been calling for certainty, with bars and restaurants saying they had been left in limbo at a time of potentially lucrative bookings – or costly cancellations. The industry had feared that Boris Johnson and ministers would toughen up Covid-19 measures in England, after the Omicron variant led to a surge in Covid infections. Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland have already imposed tougher Covid rules on physical distancing and the number of people who can meet, including the closure of nightclubs. Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of UKHospitality, the industry body, said the confirmation by Sajid Javid, the health secretary, that no further clampdown would come in England until early 2022 was welcome news for businesses. She said that the government had taken a “pragmatic and proportionate approach” which would “give a real lifeline for many who have struggled with the loss of trade in the run up to Christmas. “Losing new year on top of December would have been devastating, and keeping restrictions to a minimum helps protects businesses and jobs,” she said. Read the full article here: Spain’s Covid infection rate has exceeded 1,000 cases per 100,000 people for the first time, Reuters reports. The rate, measured over the preceding 14 days, rose to 1,206 cases following the Christmas weekend, according to health ministry data. That compares with 911 reported on Thursday. The figures have added 214,619 new cases and a further 120 deaths since Thursday. Daily deaths have been hovering below 100, far lower than the 1,000 mark at the peak of the first wave last year or about 600 in January. “We are obviously going to see high numbers of infections, but not hospitalisations and ICU admissions compared to previous waves,” the country’s prime minister Pedro Sanchez told reporters earlier today. The number of patients in England admitted into hospital with Covid-19 has reached its highest level since mid-February after a 74% rise in a week. NHS figures updated for the first time since the Christmas break show here were 1,281 Covid-19 hospital admissions in England on 25 December. This was up 74% week-on-week and the highest number since 16 February. During the second wave of coronavirus, admissions peaked at 4,134 on 12 January. In London, hospital admissions increased by 73% with 364 admissions reported on 25 December. A total of 8,474 people were in hospital in England with Covid-19 as of 8am today – the highest number since 5 March. France has narrowed the delay for a third booster shot to three months from four in response to the rapid spread of Omicron but there will be no curfew for New Year’s Eve, Reuters has reported. Jean Castex, the French prime minister, also said that from Monday and for the next three weeks, all public gatherings will be limited to 2,000 people for indoor events, and to 5,000 people for outdoor events. Consumption of drinks and food will be banned in long-distance transport and home working will become mandatory for at least three days per week where possible, Castex said. Mask wearing will also become mandatory in city centres. The announcement comes as France reported 30,383 new cases today, compared with 27,697 the previous day. On Saturday, the country reported a record high of 104,611 infections, breaking the 100,000 threshold for the first time since the pandemic began. Speaking to state governors on Monday, Joe Biden said the dramatic surge in US Covid cases caused by the Omicron variant “should be a source of concern but it should not be a source of panic”. “If you’re fully vaccinated and got your booster shot,” Biden said, “you’re highly protected. If you’re unvaccinated, you’re at a high risk of getting severely ill from Covid-19, being hospitalised and in some cases dying.” The president outlined plans to help states tackle the rising caseload. But he did so as uncertainty and disruption continued to spread, particularly in the aviation industry, and as his chief medical adviser said Americans should avoid large New Years events. Federal officials have said people can safely gather with their families if they are vaccinated but say larger celebrations are riskier. On Monday, Anthony Fauci, the top US infectious disease official, urged Americans to avoid large gatherings. “When we are talking about a New Year’s Eve party … I would recommend strongly stay away from that this year. There will be other years to do that, but not this year,” Fauci told CNN. Fauci added that he hoped the surge in cases would subside in January. But he said infections could still overwhelm hospitals, especially in highly unvaccinated areas. Read the full article here: Italy reported 142 Covid-related deaths on Monday, compared with 81 deaths the previous day, according to health officials. The number of daily cases rose to 30,810, up from 24,883 on Sunday, Reuters reports. Patients in hospital with Covid – not including those in intensive care – stood at 9,723 on Monday, up from 9,220 a day earlier. There were 100 new admissions to intensive care units, up from 85 on Sunday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,126 from a previous 1,089. Three confirmed cases of the Omicron variant have been recorded, Paraguay’s health ministry said today. The cases were detected in people who had travelled outside the country this month and the patients were quarantined, Reuters reports. An official said the government would not take immediate action on travel, but urged people to plan safely. Here’s the UK health secretary Sajid Javid confirming that no further measures will be introduced in England before the new year. Speaking to reporters this afternoon, Javid said the prime minister had decided not to bring in fresh curbs this week, but said ministers would look again in January at whether measures were needed. Good evening, I’m Léonie Chao-Fong taking over from my colleague Tom Ambrose to bring you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic. Denmark and Iceland reported record daily Covid cases today as the fast-spreading Omicron variant makes Europe the global hotspot for infections and deaths. Europe recorded the most cases and deaths in the past seven days, according to statistics compiled by Agence France-Presse. The five countries with the highest case rates over the last seven days were all European. In Denmark, authorities registered 16,164 cases in 24 hours, the first time the daily caseload has exceeded 15,000 since the pandemic began. Denmark now has the world’s highest infection rate, with 1,612 cases per 100,000 people. Iceland reported 672 cases today. Until mid-December, the country had never reported more than 200 cases and daily cases never exceeded 100 during last year’s autumn wave. Both Denmark and Iceland had some of Europe’s lowest infection rates before the arrival of Omicron. England will have no further Covid restrictions over New Year’s Eve, Boris Johnson has ruled, meaning nightclubs and mass events can continue but people will be urged to test before seeing those who are vulnerable. After a virtual briefing with England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, and the government’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, No 10 said the data would continue to be reviewed but that no new steps would be taken before the new year. The decision makes England an outlier in the UK, after Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland put limits on social gatherings and mass events. Instead, Johnson and the health secretary, Sajid Javid, will put an emphasis on personal responsibility, despite warnings from health bosses and trade unions, stressing the needs to wear masks indoors, keep areas ventilated and to take tests before seeing elderly or vulnerable relatives. Greece has announced further restrictions effective between 3 and 16 January to contain a further surge in Covid infections, targeting mainly night-time entertainment venues. As confirmed new Covid cases surged to a record of 9,284 on Monday, resulting in 66 deaths, the health minister said that under the new measures, high-protection masks would be compulsory at supermarkets, public transport and eating establishments. Bars and restaurants will have to close at midnight and no standing customers at entertainment venues will be allowed. There will also be a maximum limit of six people per table, Reuters reported. “If we find that these measures are not complied with we will ban music [at entertainment venues],” the health minister, Thanos Plevris, told a news conference. The government also moved to restrict attendance of sports events to 10% of capacity or an upper limit of 1,000 people. Visitors at care facilities for the elderly will be permitted if they can furnish a negative PCR test taken within the previous 48 hours. Authorities had already tightened existing regulations last week, mandating mask wearing in open spaces and banning Christmas and new year festivities. Flight cancellations that disrupted holiday travel stretched into Monday, with major US airlines each cancelling dozens of flights. Staff calling in sick because of Covid, particularly since the emergence of the Omicron variant, have left airlines short in recent days. According to FlightAware, which tracks flight cancellations, airlines have cancelled roughly 4,000 flights to, from or inside the US since Friday. Delta, United, JetBlue and American have all said that coronavirus was causing staffing problems, and European and Australian airlines also cancelled holiday-season flights because staff were infected, but weather and other factors played a role as well. Winter weather in the Pacific Northwest led to nearly 250 flight cancellations to or from Seattle on Sunday, said Alaska Airlines, and the airline expects more than 100 flight cancellations on Monday. United said it cancelled 115 flights Monday, out of more than 4,000 scheduled, due to crews out with Covid. Covid cases in the UK have remained high, with 98,515 new confirmed cases reported on Monday as the Omicron variant continues to fuel a winter wave of infections. The latest official data also reveals figures for Christmas Day and Boxing Day, for which 113,628 and 108,893 daily cases have been reported respectively. However, as experts have noted, figures around Christmas may not give a true picture of the situation – not least as people may be less likely to have a Covid test. “Data will be unreliable over the festive period as testing and hospital admission patterns change. This will make it difficult to interpret any apparent trends over the next few days,” documents released on Thursday by the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) warned. The numbers of in-person Boxing Day shoppers in Britain fell to almost half of pre-pandemic levels. Footfall at shopping sites across the UK on Boxing Day was 41% below the 2019 level, data from industry analyst Springboard shows. In contrast to bustling bargain hunters normally filling shops on Boxing Day, the footfall in high streets was 37.7% lower than in 2019, while it dropped 48.4% in shopping centres and 40.2% in retail parks. Diane Wehrle, insights director at Springboard, said: A major reason for the significantly lower footfall compared with 2019 will be due to consumers’ ongoing nervousness about the Covid infection rate. This will have been compounded by the fact that a few multiple retailers opted not to open on Boxing Day which will have deterred some shoppers. In addition, Sunday generally has the lowest footfall on any day in the week so a comparison with 2019 when Boxing Day fell on a Thursday will always have meant that footfall would be lower than two years ago. Despite this, most multiple retailers still opened their doors to shoppers, and the mild weather should have meant that it was easy for shoppers to visit stores and destinations. In central London, footfall was 41% lower than 2019 numbers, while it was 42% below in other major UK cities. This had improved during the day, however, as at noon in the capital, footfall was 67% lower than pre-pandemic levels. Footfall dropped by 61.6% in Northern Ireland, 48.3% in Scotland, 51.3% in Wales and 39.7% in England. Israel’s health ministry said on Monday it was shortening the time between offering the second and third doses of Covid-19 vaccine to three months from five months. The health ministry said the decision was based on a ”steep rise” in infections as the Omicron variant spreads, Haaretz reports. The new timeframe would be applied to vaccines made by Pfizer, Moderna and AstraZeneca. Israel on Monday also introduced tougher regulations on public access to shopping and commercial centres. Israel recorded 1,760 new infections on Monday and logged 87 active serious cases, a slight decline from Sunday’s 96. The number of new seriously ill Covid patients however has been steadily climbing over the past five days. Scotland has recorded a record number of Covid cases over the Christmas weekend, hitting a high of 11,030 new cases on Boxing Day due to the highly-infectious Omicron variant, the Scottish government has said. The Scottish government said provisional data showed that 8,252 fresh cases were confirmed on Christmas Day, 11,030 on Sunday 26 December and 10,562 on Monday. These are the highest daily figures reported in Scotland since the pandemic began in March 2020. It said a majority of those cases came from tests carried out before Christmas Day and warned that data and reporting would be inconsistent over the holiday weekend. “With the longer turnaround time for test results at the moment, the actual number of positive Covid-19 cases may be higher,” it said. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, is due to update a specially-reconvened sitting of the Scottish parliament on Wednesday about the spread of the virus and the impact on hospitals. She said these data were expected, and urged people to continue using facemasks in public, observe distancing rules and take all booster jabs on offer. Earlier on Monday, Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, said nearly 74% of eligible Scots had received their boosters, bringing the country close to its revised target of 80% of the population getting boosters by 31 December. Sturgeon said: These figures underline how important it is that we don’t underestimate the impact of Omicron - even if the rate of hospitalisation associated with it is much lower than past strains of the virus, case numbers this high will still put an inevitable further strain on NHS. This level of infection will also cause a significant and severely disruptive level of sickness absence across the economy and critical services. So even though we are all thoroughly fed up with the impact of Covid on our lives, it is really important that over the new year period we follow guidance to help slow the spread of the virus while we complete the accelerated booster programmes. Health experts urged the Italian government on Monday to relax Covid-19 quarantine rules, warning that the country otherwise risked paralysis as the highly infectious Omicron variant spreads. Reuters reports: Under current rules, people who have come into close contact with a Covid-19 sufferer have to self-isolate for seven days if they are vaccinated and for 10 days if they have not had a shot. Nino Cartabellotta, head of the Gimbe health foundation, said each positive person had, on average, five to 10 close contacts, and predicted that within two weeks 1 million people in Italy might have come down with Covid-19. “That would mean there could be five to 10 million contacts to be sent to quarantine, and this is not possible,” Cartabellotta told Radio Cusano Campus. Fabrizio Pregliasco, a virologist, echoed his comment: “It’s clear that at this stage and with this diffusion of Omicron, we must consider changes in the way we intervene, otherwise we’re heading for a generalised lockdown.” Boris Johnson is not expected to announce further restrictions for England on Monday after he is briefed on the impact Christmas had on Covid infections and hospital pressures. The prime minister delayed any new cabinet summit on restrictions until after his regular data briefing with England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty – expected to be knighted in the new year honours – and the chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance. Here is my colleague Jessica Elgot’s story. There were no walk-in PCR tests available to book anywhere in England for a few hours on Monday due to “high demand”. Appointments had been unavailable in every region of the country, although there were some in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. However, later on in the afternoon, bookings were available in every region, with the UK Health Security Agency saying the reduced availability was merely temporary, PA reports. A UKHSA spokesperson said: Appointments for PCR tests are available but high demand can lead to temporarily reduced availability in some areas. More appointments are made available for people to book every afternoon. Testing is playing an integral role in keeping people safe and managing the spread of Covid-19. We are very grateful to everyone who is following the government’s guidance and getting tested to protect themselves, their loved ones and their communities. Everyone with symptoms or who is directed to get a PCR test should continue to come forward to get a test delivered to their home or at a test site. Twitter users said the lack of availability of tests could affect travel plans, sports fixtures and business appointments. Professor Alison Leary, chair of healthcare and workforce modelling at London South Bank University, said as much as 40% of the NHS workforce in London could be absent because of rising coronavirus infections under her worst-case scenario workings. She told BBC Radio 4’s World At One programme: The NHS is in a fairly fragile state in terms of workforce anyway – that’s fairly well documented – and the increased absence rate due to Covid and Omicron in particular are putting a lot more strain on the system. Christmas Eve is the last data we have – there is more data due out today – but, essentially, London’s absence rate is up by about 30%, depending on the organisation. That’s not just people off sick with Covid but also people isolating because of positive tests. It is kind of going up every week. Normal sickness rate runs around 4%-5% in the NHS, and we are looking more now at 8%-9%. Asked whether that pattern was likely to be replicated elsewhere, Leary said there were similar signs in the north-west of England and that the Midlands was showing “increased rates of absence”. Asked what was likely to happen over the coming weeks, she said: One of the scenarios we’ve modelled is around 40% of the workforce being off, absent in London. We’d hope that’s a worst-case scenario, but because we are already seeing an increase, I think it wouldn’t be unrealistic to expect that to go up significantly. US airlines cancelled about 800 more flights on Monday after nixing thousands of flights during the Christmas holiday weekend, as Omicron cases across the country rise, forcing crews to isolate. Shares of American Airlines Group Inc, United Airlines Holdings Inc, Delta Air Line Inc and Southwest Airlines Co were down between 2% and 3% in trading before the opening bell, Reuters reports. Nearly 740 flights were cancelled within, into, or out of the US by early on Monday morning, a tally on flight-tracking website FlightAware.com showed. The flight cancellations on Monday were on top of over 3,000 cancellations during the Christmas holiday weekend, typically a peak time for travel for Americans. With rising infections, airlines have been forced to cancel flights, with pilots and cabin crew needing to quarantine. Delta, United, Southwest and American did not immediately respond to Reuters’ requests for comment. Over the weekend, at least three cruise ships were forced to return to port after Covid-19 cases were detected on board, according to media reports. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, is not expected to announce further restrictions to control the Omicron variant in England after being briefed on the impact Christmas had on Covid infections and hospital pressures. Cabinet ministers remained sceptical of further Covid curbs on Monday morning as Johnson prepared to receive his post-Christmas briefing on the latest infection data by chief medical officer for England, Profe Chris Whitty, and Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser. The PA news agency understands no announcement is expected to come out of the meeting, potentially leaving England at odds with other parts of the UK, where post-Christmas restrictions have been deployed. Conservative MPs have urged caution in going beyond plan B in England, with veteran Tory Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, the treasurer of the 1922 Committee of backbench Conservatives, calling for a “wait-and-see” approach to the impact of infections on hospital admissions and saying he hoped the prime minister would be “very cautious before introducing further measures”. The latest UK infection data currently in the public domain is from Christmas Eve, when more than 122,000 people tested positive in the previous 24 hours, while hospital data on the government dashboard has not been updated since 20 December. Curbs on hospitality and large events were reintroduced in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, with the Scottish government ordering nightclubs to be closed from Monday while hospitality businesses will need to return to offering only table service if serving alcohol. Johnson had previously indicated he would not hesitate to introduce tougher measures after Christmas if rising cases of the Omicron variant threatened to overwhelm the NHS. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, is expected to announce new Covid measures on Monday as the country braces for a new wave of infections driven by the Omicron variant. Officials fear that hospitals could become overwhelmed after a record 100,000 cases were reported Saturday, the highest daily level in France since the pandemic began. Macron will hold a crisis meeting at 4pm (1500 GMT) via video conference from his Mediterranean holiday retreat at Brégançon with key members of his cabinet and representatives of French public health bodies. One measure under consideration is to restrict the country’s Covid health pass, which is required to enter restaurants, cinemas and other public venues, only to people who are fully vaccinated - and no longer also to those with a recent negative test. The pass as well as a negative test could also be required for bars or cafes without table seating, and possibly for nightclubs if they are allowed to reopen in January after a four-week closure ordered on 6 December, Reuters reports. Doctors have also clamoured for a New Year’s Eve curfew, while a group of health workers have urged the government to postpone the return of students to schools currently set for 3 January. Masks could also be required when outside, a measure already imposed in the Savoie region in the French Alps, and in other European countries. Officials have been urging people not to hold parties or large family gatherings over the holidays, and some 22 million people out of an eligible 40 million have received Covid booster shots. Travel plans of people in England over the festive period are being badly affected by industrial action, planned closures and pandemic-related staff shortages. Several rail services are currently experiencing disruption due to staff being ill with Covid-19, with TransPennine Express, ScotRail, Avanti West Coast, Northern Rail, LNER and Greater Anglia all having reported an impact on services caused by a lack of available staff. East Midlands Railway services continue to be affected by industrial action by the RMT union, with an amended service expected to run on 2 January, PA reports. A number of routes are also being hit by planned engineering works. Southern’s Gatwick airport trains are operating to and from London Bridge instead of London Victoria until 3 January. In the north, Leeds will have a reduced service between 27 December and 3 January, including a “very limited” service on 2 January. In the west, CrossCountry trains will not call at Bristol Parkway between 27 December and 31 December, while Some Great Western Railway services to and from Bristol Temple Meads will also be affected. Despite the closures, National Rail said that 95% of Britain’s rail network will remain open during the festive period. It added that the 370 engineering projects it is carrying out over Christmas were planned “months, and in some cases years, in advance”. The London Underground and Overground will also be hit by planned closures. Enough coronavirus booster jab appointments have been booked to put the Scottish government’s target of 80% of the adult population by the new year within tangible reach, Scotland’s national clinical director, Jason Leitch, has said. Prof Leitch said around 72% of the adults in Scotland had received their booster shot before Christmas Eve. Discussing the government’s “get boosted by the bells” target on the BBC’s Breakfast programme, he said: We’re at 72-point something before Christmas Eve. We’ve got appointments to get to 80%. What we need now is that final push to get people to come to fill those appointments. That honestly is the best present you could give to any of your relatives, to get yourself protected so that you then protect others. Prof Leitch also said he was “very, very hopeful” schools would return on time in January. An Israeli hospital administered fourth Covid-19 vaccine doses on Monday to a test group, as the country considers approving the extra jab for clinically vulnerable populations in a bid to stem a surge in infections fuelled by the Omicron variant. Reuters reports: The Sheba Medical Centre study in Ramat Gan outside Tel Aviv “will zero in on efficacy of the vaccine in producing antibodies, and safety, in order to ascertain if a fourth vaccine is needed in general”, a spokesman said. The 150 subjects are all medical staff. A health ministry expert panel last week recommended that Israel become the first country to offer a fourth vaccine dose - also known as a second booster - to those aged over 60, those suffering from compromised immune systems, and medical workers. The proposal was welcomed by the Israeli government, which has struggled against a plateauing of turn-out for vaccines. But the fourth shot awaits final approval by the ministry’s director general, Nachman Ash, a medical doctor whose decision, officials say, will be made without government intervention. Given concern about the lack of test data, Ash may amend the eligibility criteria by raising the age threshold to 70 and dropping medical workers from the roster, Israeli media said. The health ministry has neither confirmed nor denied that, nor said when Ash’s decision is due. Some 63% of Israel’s 9.4 million population have received the first two vaccine doses, according to ministry data. Almost 45% have also received a third dose, or booster shot. Close to 2,000 confirmed or suspected Omicron cases have been logged. Israel was the fastest country to roll out initial vaccines a year ago, and became one of the first to observe that immunity waned over time, responding with a widespread booster programme. Hello everyone, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be helming this blog for the next few hours. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter @JedySays or via email. Oman will not allow employees in the public or private sectors to enter their workplace without a vaccination certificate that proves they are fully vaccinated, Reuters reports. The health minister made the announcement during a news conference on Monday. We will have more on this story as it develops. The Democratic Republic of Congo is battling a fourth wave of the coronavirus that is threatening to put greater pressure on its health system than at any time during the pandemic. Congo is the least vaccinated country against Covid-19 in the world with just 0.06% for the population fully vaccinated, Agence France Presse reported earlier this month. Fewer than 300,000 people out of a population of 90 million have received at least one dose, or just 0.33%, Reuters data indicates. The vaccine rollout was hindered by a lack of funds and supplies, remote populations and rumours claiming that vaccination made people sterile or that Africans were to be used as “guinea pigs”. Now Covid patients fill hospital wards and tents are needed to cope with the overflow, Reuters reports. “We have experienced the three previous waves gradually, but in the fourth wave cases have jumped overnight,” said Francois Kajingulu, the head of the St Joseph Covid Treatment Centre in Kinshasa. “On Monday we had 5-6 cases and on Saturday we went straight from 30 to 36.” Congo registered 6,480 new cases in the week of 13 December - more than double the number hit during its previous record week in June, World Health Organization data show. The Netherlands is suggesting a rather innovative approach for those hesitant to receive the Covid-19 vaccine. Health minister and deputy prime minister, Hugo de Jonge, has recommended those with “injection anxiety” to use virtual reality glasses in vaccination centres run by the the Public Health Service of Amsterdam (GGD). “Do you suffer from injection anxiety, but still want the (booster) injection?” de Jonge asked over Twitter. “The GGD is happy to help you. For example, there are more and more locations where they work with VR glasses that make it easier to relax during the injection. They also work with it in Rotterdam.” As US regional health authorities reacted with alarm to a jump in child Covid infections that caused some school districts to announce returns to remote learning, a leading public health official questioned the need for schools to close, saying: “We know how to keep schools open, we know how to keep them safe.” Over the past three weeks, as Omicron-related cases soared in New York City and elsewhere, the number of children hospitalised in New York with Covid-19 quadrupled, the state health department said. The California state epidemiologist Dr Erica Pan wrote on Twitter: “Unfortunately New York is seeing an increase in pediatric hospitalisations (primarily amongst the unvaccinated), and they have similar [five - to 11-year-old] vaccination rates.” Across New York state, about 16% of five- to 11-year-olds and 71% of 12- to 17-year-olds are fully vaccinated. Rising numbers of pediatric cases have convinced officials in some states to order a return to remote learning after the winter break. Around 300 schools in Maryland, New Jersey, New Mexico and New York will remain closed. Read the full story from our reporter Edward Helmore in New York here. Ukraine has just released its daily Covid report, confirming another 1,864 coronavirus cases recorded on Sunday. Another 133 deaths were also reported, according to a statement from the ministry of health. There is trepidation in Australia over how New Year’s Eve celebrations will contribute to rising case numbers. Donna Lu reports that experts are urging caution: South Korea has confirmed it has approved for emergency use Pfizer’s oral coronavirus treatment Paxlovid and will introduce the drug for treatment in January next year. The treatment is expected to reduce hospitalisation and death of high-risk mild/moderate patients, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCPA) said in a press release. In Britain, those who are still eligible to receive their coronavirus jabs are being urged to start 2022 by getting the vaccine as more than 1.5 million appointments are available to book over the festive season. PA reports that the NHS said there were 1,551,187 slots still available to be booked between Monday and January. NHS national medical director Professor Stephen Powis called on people to get boosted in time for the New Year. He said: “The evidence is clear that two Covid jabs is not enough, and with the Omicron variant, there is no time to delay getting your booster. “Staff and volunteers up and down the country are working incredibly hard to make sure that anyone who wants to get boosted between now and the new year can do, so start 2022 by protecting yourself, your friends and family and book your jab today.” Australia has surpassed the unwanted milestone of 10,000 new Covid-19 infections in one day, spurred by high case numbers in NSW, Victoria and South Australia, according to the Australian Associated Press. The state of New South Wales reported 6324 new cases while Victoria had 1999, with the two states forming the bulk of the country’s near 10,200 new infections. There were 784 new cases in Queensland, three-quarters of which are the Omicron variant the state’s premier said. There were also a record 842 in South Australia, the Australian Capital Territory’s highest daily tally of 189 new cases, 35 in Tasmania, 12 in the Northern Territory and one in Western Australia. As the sun begins to rise in the UK and many wake up after a weekend of Christmas and holiday festivities, here is a quick visual snapshot of how Covid is currently unfolding in Britain. A major Israeli hospital will begin administering a fourth Covid vaccine shot to 150 medical workers on Monday in a trial aimed at gauging whether a second booster is necessary nationwide. Sheba Medical Centre near Tel Aviv said its trial would shed light on the efficacy of a fourth dose and help decision-makers set health policy in Israel and abroad, Reuters reports. A Health Ministry panel of experts has recommended offering a fourth dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine to Israelis aged 60 and over who received a booster shot at least four months ago. But final approval by the ministry’s director-general is still pending amid public debate as to whether sufficient scientific information is available to justify a new booster drive. Sheba Medical Centre did not say how long its trial would last. Gili Regev-Yochay, the study’s director, said: We will examine the fourth dose’s effect on the level of antibodies and morbidity and we will gauge its safety. We will understand whether it is worthwhile to administer a fourth shot, and to whom.” Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog as we go through all the latest coronavirus developments. I’ll be reporting from Sydney, Australia before one of my colleagues joins from London. Christmas might have put a pause on any new Covid curbs or announcements but this may all change with ministers in the UK set to meet sometime this week to discuss whether additional measures are needed to protect hospital capacity. Boris Johnson is expected to examine crucial hospital data before making any new announcement on Covid measures. Another blunder has emerged from Sydney’s St Vincent’s pathology lab after almost 1000 people were sent the wrong Covid test information. A total of 995 people were contacted over their ‘negative’ tests, which may have been incorrect as the results are yet to be determined. This is in addition to the 400 people who were told on Sunday they were negative when they were in fact positive. US airlines called off nearly 1,200 flights on Sunday as crews remain grounded amid surging Covid-19 infections, causing misery for thousands of Christmas travellers. A total of 997 flights were scrapped on Christmas Day and nearly 700 on Christmas Eve. Thousands more were delayed. On the other side of the world, lockdown restrictions have been tightened in the Chinese city of Xi’an, which is battling the largest community outbreak the country has seen since the initial months of the pandemic. Authorities reported 162 new community infections on Monday, up from 158 on Sunday. All but 10 of Monday’s new cases were reported in Shaanxi province, where 13 million residents of the capital Xi’an have been locked down for five days. Here’s a quick rundown of the latest global developments: Europe: UK prime minister Boris Johnson is expected to examine crucial hospital data on Monday before making any new announcement on Covid measures across England which could include a ban on socialising with another household indoors and a return to the rule of six outdoors. New restrictions are being introduced in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. Coronavirus vaccination teams could go door-to-door in the UK to reach those yet to have their jabs, reports have suggested. France recorded a record high of 104,611 Covid-19 infections at the weekend, breaking the 100,000 threshold for the first time since the pandemic began. Germany also recorded 10,100 Covid cases. Italy reported a third successive record tally of Covid-19 cases on Christmas Day. The Omicron variant has become the dominant strain in Portugal. United States: US airlines called off nearly 1,200 flights on Sunday as crews remain grounded amid surging Covid-19 infections. It was a third straight day of travelling pain and more cancellations were likely as Covid infections soar. Asia: China’s Covid cases hit a 21-month high as the northern city of Xi’an announced tightened restrictions on Sunday. China recorded 200 new coronavirus cases for 26 December, a slight decrease on the 206 cases reported a day earlier. The northwestern province of Shaanxi, home to the recently locked down city of Xi’an, accounted for 150 new cases. Bangkok, Thailand, is cancelling its new year celebrations amid growing concerns about a surge in Covid cases. South Korea’s daily Covid cases fell below 5,000 for the first time in 20 days. South Korea has approved for emergency use Pfizer’s oral coronavirus treatment Paxlovid, Yonhap news is reporting, citing the country’s ministry of food and drug safety. The ministry convened a panel of experts to review the safety and efficacy of Paxlovid, and concluded that the oral pill is needed to deal with the public health crisis, the agency reports. The ministry said trial results showed Paxlovid significantly reduced the risk of hospitalisation or death in patients at high risk of severe illness. If you have just joined us, welcome to our live coronavirus blog covering all the latest Covid developments. Health officials warn a post-Christmas jump in Australia’s Covid-19 infections is expected after lower testing rates and a batch of falsely negative results. More than 9,600 cases were recorded across the country on Sunday after New South Wales and South Australia recorded new daily case highs, with 6,394 and 774 infections respectively. Numbers fell in Victoria, which recorded 1,604 daily infections, down about 500 cases from the day before. Here is a quick snapshot of the Covid situation unfolding in Australia. Sydney’s St Vincent’s pathology lab say another 995 people have been contacted over their ‘negative’ tests, which may have been incorrect as the results are yet to be determined. This is in addition to the 400 people who were told on Sunday they were negative when they were in fact positive. Tasmania is seeking advice on whether rapid antigen Covid-19 tests can be used at its border for interstate travellers, instead of PCR tests, AAP reports. The state recorded 35 new Covid-19 cases on Monday, a slight drop on the 44 reported on Boxing Day. Queensland is also considering using rapid antigen tests instead of PCR tests for travellers’ day-five tests. The state detected 784 new Covid-19 cases. Western Australia has recorded just one new local Covid infection, while premier Mark McGowan warns the state is “not out of the woods yet” after a French backpacker was in the community while infectious. The Northern Territory detected 12 new Covid-19 cases in the past 24 hours as health authorities investigate a mystery case in Darwin. The Australian Capital Territory recorded 189 new Covid cases, a record number. Coronavirus cases in Germany have just surpassed seven million. The country reported another 13,908 cases over the past 24 hours, taking the cumulative Covid tally to 7,005,289 confirmed cases. Another 69 deaths were also recorded, according to data released by the Robert Koch Institute. India is reporting a daily rise of 6,531 coronavirus cases and 315 deaths, according to a recently released statement from its ministry of health. Tasmania is seeking advice on whether rapid antigen Covid-19 tests can be used at its border for interstate travellers, instead of PCR tests, AAP reports. The state recorded 35 new Covid-19 cases on Monday, a slight drop on the 44 reported on Boxing Day. About two-thirds of Tasmania’s new cases were acquired in another state, 20% spread within families and close contacts and two cases do not have a specific source yet. Premier Peter Gutwein said the Tasmanian government is seeking advice on whether rapid antigen tests can be used for interstate arrivals. Gutwein told reporters in Hobart on Monday: We have a 72 hour pre-test requirement for PCR test if you’re looking to travel to Tasmania and, I want to be clear, that will remain in place for the time being. But we are considering other options such as where the rapid antigen testing can be used as a safeguard. We’ll have more to say on this, I’ll speak later in the week about what the requirements will be in terms of our borders, as we approach the New Year.” The move aims to take pressure off testing sites in other parts of the country, as demand continues to impact queue lengths and turnaround times in the eastern states. Western Australia has recorded just one new local Covid infection, while premier Mark McGowan warns the state is “not out of the woods yet” after a French backpacker was in the community while infectious. The new infection is a woman in her 20s, in quarantine since 23 December, who was a close contact of an earlier case. “This is good news and another encouraging result from this Delta outbreak,” McGowan told reporters on Monday. McGowan said the health department had identified 608 close contacts, and 1,089 casual contacts, and was in the process of tracking and testing them all. Current restrictions will remain in place until 4 January, and a new proof of vaccination app will be released soon. More on the Covid situation unfolding in Australia’s Northern Territory. Australia’s least populous region detected 12 new Covid-19 cases in the past 24 hours as health authorities investigate a mystery case in Darwin. The mystery case was detected overnight with NT Health saying little except the source of infection is under investigation, the Australian Associated Press reports. Both are people from the Tennant Creek area and household contacts of previous cases, NT Health said on Monday. They were not infectious in the community and are in quarantine. The other nine new cases include a close contact of two workers from Yulara who acquired their infections in Queensland. They were not infectious in the community and are in quarantine at The Centre for National Resilience in Howard Springs, near Darwin. Five cases are interstate arrivals and are all in isolation at home or at the Howard Springs facility. Three cases are close contacts of interstate arrivals. There are currently 15 people with Covid-19 in hospital, including one in intensive care. Sydney’s St Vincent’s pathology lab say another 995 people have been contacted over their ‘negative’ tests, which may have been incorrect as the results are yet to be determined. This is in addition to the 400 people who were told on Sunday they were negative when they were in fact positive. The hospital issued an apology for the first blunder yesterday and now say the additional 995 results will be delivered by Monday night. A media statement shared with the Guardian read: Yesterday SydPath confirmed that more than 400 people were incorrectly advised they had tested negative to COVID when in fact they had tested positive. As soon as SydPath became aware of the issue it immediately commenced a process to contact those impacted. This morning SydPath can confirm that all people within this group have been contacted and advised of their positive result. The emergency response team investigating the cause of this error, has now identified approximately 995 more people, tested on 23 and 24 December, were prematurely sent an SMS advising them their test was negative when in fact their true result had not yet been determined. All of these people have been contacted and advised of the error. They have been advised they will receive their accurate test results by tonight (Monday). Once again, we are sincerely sorry for this error and acknowledge the significant impact it has had on those involved. We have identified what occurred and can confirm it was related to a specific human error. SydPath have put procedures in place to ensure this cannot happen again. This event comes at a time of unprecedented COVID-testing activity and SydPath’s people, as with all pathology teams throughout NSW, are working around the clock to respond.” Bangkok is cancelling its new year celebrations amid growing concerns about a surge in Covid cases. Thailand’s government said in a statement: The Bangkok Metropolitan Administration (BMA) and relevant government agencies regret to announce their cancellation of the New Year celebration events hosted by the BMA in 50 districts, including prayer and chanting ceremonies. The private sector will reportedly still be allowed to host new year countdown festivities under strict precautions. A post-Christmas jump in Covid-19 infections is expected after lower testing rates and a batch of falsely negative results, according to health officials. Australia dodged the unwanted milestone of 10,000 new daily cases on Boxing Day only due to a significant drop in cases in Victoria compared with Christmas Day. More than 9,600 cases were recorded across the country on Sunday after New South Wales and South Australia recorded new daily case highs, with 6,394 and 774 infections respectively. The NSW record came despite a drop of 40,000 tests on Christmas Day. Numbers fell in Victoria, which recorded 1,604 daily infections, down about 500 cases from the day before. There were two deaths in the state. St Vincent’s hospital in Sydney also admitted it accidentally told more than 400 people on Christmas Day they had tested negative to the virus when they had in fact tested positive. The hospital has since notified those who received the wrong results, but concerns remain over people who would have been infectious in the community after being reassured by their initial negative test. The more than 400 false-negative cases are yet to be officially recorded. Annastacia Palaszczuk has also hinted at possible upcoming changes in Covid testing while chief health officer John Gerrard said the state’s quarantine rules were also being reviewed, indicating these may be relaxed. Palaszczuk said the government was considering using rapid antigen tests instead of PCR tests for travellers’ day-five tests. The measure could be introduced within the next 48 hours. The rapid tests could replace all PCR tests for travellers, with Palaszczuk saying a policy change was unlikely before 1 January. Covid-19 testing centres in Brisbane, the Gold Coast and Cairns have been given more resources to increase capacity and reduce queuing times. Meanwhile, online vaccination bookings are open for children aged five to 11 years, with jabs set to start from 10 January. More on the Covid situation unfolding in Queensland. There are 3,621 active cases in the state and 24,515 people were tested in the past 24 hours, according to the Australian. About 75% of cases are the Omicron variant and 25% are Delta, with the majority of infections among people aged 35 and younger. More than half of the state’s 5,798 cases have been diagnosed since the borders reopened on 13 December. Annastacia Palaszczuk said the government had not expected the 400,000 interstate visitors and this, coupled with private testing clinics closing over the festive period, had added extra burden on Queensland Health’s testing facilities. Queensland has detected 784 new Covid-19 cases but the health system is coping, state premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has said. Quarantine and testing policies are being reviewed and rapid antigen tests may be introduced for some people within 48 hours to take pressure of testing facilities, AAP reports. There has not been a spike in case numbers on Monday with just 70 more infections recorded over the past 24 hours compared with the 714 on Sunday. But Palaszczuk warned Queenslanders case numbers would continue to climb: I don’t want people to be alarmed by that, the real issue here is what is the impact it is having on individuals in hospitals? We are not seeing any massive impacts on our hospitals, which is really good news. We are monitoring this very closely. Just four “significantly unwell” people were in a hospital receiving care for virus symptoms. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded 189 new Covid cases, a record number. The ACT has an extraordinary vaccination rate of 98.5% of people aged 12 and over. One person is in hospital but no one is in intensive care or on ventilation, AAP reports. The Chinese city of Xi’an, where 13 million residents are in lockdown and confined to their homes, announced tightened restrictions on Sunday as the country recorded its biggest Covid-19 infection numbers in 21 months. On Sunday the country reported 206 new Covid infections – the highest daily number since March 2020, according to the national health commission. “In the coming days, a number of cases are still likely to be detected,” Agence France-Presse reported Xi’an official He Wenquan as saying. The northern metropolis – about 900km (560 miles) from the Olympics venues – has so far recorded more than 500 Covid infections over the past few weeks. About 29,000 people have been placed in hotel quarantine, He Wenquan said. Xi’an residents have been tested several times, authorities said, and a “total” disinfection was to begin Sunday evening. Restrictions on movement have also been tightened. Each household can only send one member out to buy basic necessities once every three days – down from two days under previous rules. All businesses except supermarkets, convenience stores and medical facilities have been ordered to close. South Korea has also just released its latest coronavirus figures with some more promising news. New Covid-19 cases fell below 5,000 for the first time in 20 days on Monday, Yonhap News reports. The country added 4,207 new Covid-19 infections, raising the total caseload to 611,670 as well as 55 more deaths, according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA). The figure marked the first time daily cases fell below 5,000 since 7 December and represented a sharp decline from a daily record high of 7,849 on 15 December. The number of critically ill Covid-19 patients also slightly fell to 1,078 after reaching an all-time high of 1,105 on Saturday, the KDCA said. The decreasing infections are believed to be due partly to the newly introduced restrictions and possible fewer tests taken at the weekend. China has just released its daily Covid report, recording 200 new coronavirus cases for 26 December, according to newly updated data from the national health commission. The figure is a slight decrease on the 206 cases reported a day earlier. Of the 200 cases reported, 162 are believed to be from local transmission, with 38 imported cases from abroad. The northwestern province of Shaanxi, home to the recently locked down city of Xi’an, accounted for 150 new cases. The Boxing Day Ashes Test is also under way at the Melbourne Cricket Ground. The match got off to a delayed and chaotic start after Channel Seven, the host broadcaster, reported that the MCG press box had a confirmed case of Covid-19. A statement from the broadcaster read: The Seven Network confirms it is responding after a member of staff working on the Ashes broadcast at the MCG tested positive to Covid-19 on Sunday night. The staff member was asymptomatic at time of testing and has been in self isolation since the moment the positive result was returned. Seven is activating its Covid measures to ensure the health and safety of all staff, as well as the broader community, and is working in line with all relevant guidelines and regulations. We are working closely with the MCG operational team and Cricket Australia. The ECB also released a statement about an English touring family member testing positive. Cricket Australia later released a statement confirming four cases (so far) in the England tour party after rapid antigen tests this morning. Play is under way and you can also follow our live feed of the Ashes 2021-22 third Test, day two: Australia v England here. A small change to the hospital numbers in New South Wales: Just to recap on Australian Covid news: Three people have died in New South Wales – and the Sydney Morning Herald reports that one man died with the Omicron strain. That’s the first NSW Omicron death. NSW recorded 6,324 new cases, there were 35 in Tasmania and 784 in Queensland, where children aged five to 11 are now eligible for vaccinations. Three more people died in Victoria and there were 1,999 new cases. Stay tuned for more developments. US airlines called off nearly 1,200 flights on Sunday as crews remain grounded amid surging Covid-19 infections, causing misery for thousands of Christmas travellers. Commercial airlines had cancelled 1,171 flights within, into or out of the US by mid-afternoon, according to a tally on flight-tracking website FlightAware.com and as reported by Reuters. It was a third straight day of travelling pain and more cancellations were likely as Covid infections soar, driven by the highly transmissible Omicron variant. A total of 997 flights were scrapped on Christmas Day and nearly 700 on Christmas Eve. Thousands more were delayed. Read the full story here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog as we run through all the latest Covid developments from across Australia and the world. Let’s start with the news that US airlines have cancelled more than 1,000 flights as crews remain grounded and forced to quarantine amid surging Covid-19 infections. Flight-tracking website FlightAware.com recorded 656 cancelled flights either into or out of the US on Sunday. This comes after nearly 1,000 were cancelled on Christmas Day and nearly 700 on Christmas Eve. Meanwhile, Covid cases continue to rise to record levels in Australia. The nation’s most populous state of New South Wales recorded three deaths and 6,324 new cases while Victoria recorded three deaths and 1,999 new cases. But vaccination rates may offer some solace, with 92% of Victorians aged 12 and over fully vaccinated and 93.5% of people aged 16 and over in NSW having received at least two jabs. Europe: New restrictions are being introduced in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. New Covid measures in England could be in place until late March, including a ban on socialising with another household indoors and a return to the rule of six outdoors. Coronavirus vaccination teams could go door-to-door in the UK to reach those yet to have their jabs, reports have suggested. France recorded a record high of 104,611 Covid-19 infections at the weekend, breaking the 100,000 threshold for the first time since the pandemic began. Germany also recorded 10,100 Covid cases. Italy reported a third successive record tally of Covid-19 cases on Christmas Day. The Omicron variant has become the dominant strain in Portugal. US: More than 1000 flights were grounded on Sunday. Asia: China’s local Covid case count has reached a 21-month high driven by the Xi’an outbreak as the city remains in a strict lockdown. In South Korea, three members of K-pop sensation BTS test have tested positive after their return from the US. They are all fully vaccinated. Middle East: The Palestinian health ministry said on Sunday it had identified the first case of the Omicron variant in the Gaza Strip. An Israeli hospital will begin administering a fourth vaccine jab to 150 staff on Monday in a trial aimed at gauging whether a second booster is necessary nationwide. Israel has ordered 100,000 units of Pfizer Inc’s antiviral pill Paxlovid for people aged 12 and over at risk of severe illness. Israeli prime minister Naftali Bennett has started isolating at home after his daughter tested positive. Iran has banned the entry of travellers from Britain, France, Denmark and Norway for 15 days.One of my favourite blak linguistic devices is “a Murri”. Ask me what I am on a Tuesday and I’ll reply, “a Murri cashed up,” ask me where I’m headed and I’ll say, “a Murri heading to the shops.” A Murri happy, a Murri just got a feed, a Murri ran out of fuel and a Murri on his way (in Murri time of course). I use this turn of phrase quite a lot and it has never been lost on me that who I am is a Murri. My identity has been formed through many bloodlines and histories, Whether it be the South Sea Islander communities of Queensland or the small towns of south-west Queensland from which my mother comes, none describe me more than that title which, like many other mobs, Dharumbal people claim. And that is not a reflection on the many heritages from which I am formed but rather a crucial point about the power of Murridom, that it is at the core of all those who claim it. To be Murri is for one’s self-imagining to be intrinsically linked to not only Murri land but to Murris writ large. Being Murri is to not only share joy but to share pain and rage – and to feel all those emotions deeply. There is a conversation I remember having with my father at the age of 10 or 11. We were in Charleville shortly after my grandfather on my mother’s side had passed away. “Murris are happy-go-lucky” he told me, “A Murri could be in their worst times and still smile.” That capacity for joy is something I have always admired about Murridom. It is perhaps that one quality I have always sought to embody. That all-consuming joy that comes to Murris so innately – despite the violence the colony has wrought on us in both our past and our present, it is a great power that we still find those moments of sweetness to laugh with one another. And laugh we do. That big blak laugh when Murris are in communion is a great chorus – not of hope (as we have come to know from Dr Chelsea Watego) but of faith in each other, that together we will achieve freedom. That I believe is the great underpinning of us as a people, that we find comfort in one another. Whether it be Rockhampton, Meanjin, Woorabinda and so on, to be with another Murri is to be with someone you know. We may not know each other in a superficial sense, we may not know at first whether our families are connected or where our countries are in relation to one another, but in all cases we Murris know each other in a much deeper, timeless sense. Maybe to that timelessness it is owed that when Murris are together we so often lose track of time. When Murris yarn the only measurement of time we keep is in cups of tea. Gathering is something we have always done. Those times of gathering have meant a lot to me over these past years. As a fulla who has fought many battles with depression and anxiety, it has been Murridom that has sustained me at my lowest points. When I have torn all the pieces of myself apart, it has been Murris who put me back together – not as I once was, but as a more whole self. To be Murri is to know that even at your loneliest you are never truly alone. This month I had the honour of being a part of great gathering of Murris. Brisbane Blacks Live was a a free concert held by Triple A Murri Country at South Brisbane – it was an occasion that saw hundreds come together. It was a time for us Murris (and Brisbane Blaks generally) to gather before Queensland opened its border to New South Wales. I think it really showed the power of Murri community that even in a time of great uncertainty there was an incredible sense of ease. To watch aunties and uncles dance, to watch children laugh and play together and to shed tears in awe of our people and the culture that we have produced, it was a display of Murridom that I will never forget. As we push forward into this future I am not only thankful to be a part of Murridom but for Murridom to be a great part of me. • Jacob McQuire is a Dharumbal and South Sea Islander (New Caledonia, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu) man and a radio broadcaster with Triple A Murri CountryAnyhoo, I’m going to wrap this blog up now. There isn’t much more to say - Australia have hammered England for the eighth time in nine home series, the end. We’ll have reaction and features as the day/night progresses. In the meantime I’ll leave you with Ali Martin’s report - bye! “How has Silverwood not resigned yet?” says Dave Adams. “If Test quality sides were made of platitudinous interviews, we’d be world beaters. Given that they’re not, we should dispense with his services forthwith.” Empathy not eejitry. “Useful tip for English readers,” says Kim Thonger. “To reduce the OBO pain, toggle the ‘show key events only’ button, just under where it says Live Feed. It’s still not pretty but it’s over and done with quickly, like ripping a plaster off a wound.” “Hi Rob,” says Steph Cooper. “It’s difficult to know quite how county pitches can be improved while the bulk of the county championship matches are played in the Spring. The Summer seems to be given over to the one-day game, including T20 and now the dreadful Hundred.” Yes, it’s clearly not a quick fix, but I’d imagine it’s something the ECB will change over the next 3-4 years. And if they don’t, the hell with them. The closest thing England have to a quick fix is to take Eoin Morgan for dinner and pick his gigantic brain. Pat Cummins summed up Australia’s performance perfectly: relentless when they needed to be - when it really mattered - and patient with the bat when the going got tough. The result isn’t surprising, or even particularly exciting. It’s the manner of it that has so many people smiling. Australia have demolished England without some key players: Josh Hazlewood missed two Tests and Cummins one, while Steve Smith, who pretty much decided the last two Ashes series off his own bat, missed out in a couple. Hand in hand with that comes the excitement of watching new and emerging players thrive: Scott Boland, Travis Head, Alex Carey, Jhye Richardson, Cameron Green. When the dust settles, we might remember this series for the subtle evolution of an established Australian team - that and Boland’s day in the sun. After only two Tests, Cummins has given bowling captains a good name; Green already looks like Australia’s best top-six allrounder since Keith Miller; Marnus Labuschagne has proven beyond even unreasonable doubt that his form isn’t a fluke. It’s become a cliche to say this isn’t the greatest Australian team, and that’s probably true, but it’s still full of truly great players. There are tougher tests to come next year - all of them on the subcontinent, culminating in a humdinger in India - but this has been nigh-on the perfect start for Cummins. The emergence of Green is invaluable, as it allows Australia to play three seamers and two spinners in Asia, or even two seamers and three spinners should India prepare a particularly special pitch. This is what’s coming up next year, provisionally, for the men’s Test team: March: Pakistan (A) Three Tests June-July: Sri Lanka (A) Two Tests September: Afghanistan (N) One Test Oct-Nov: India (A) Four Tests Nov-Dec: West Indies (H) Two Tests Dec-Jan 2023: South Africa (H) Three Tests This is the link I was trying to post earlier “Greentops last April (all in the first round of Championship matches): Kent 455, Northants 434, Essex 490, Worcestershire 475, Lancashire 407, Hampshire 612,” writes Gary Naylor. “It’s not the pitches that determine batting difficulty, it’s whether the sun shines or not. The only thing wrong with the Championship is that they don’t play enough matches with the sun out (ask Marnus Labuschagne and Travis Head).” That’s an interesting theory. Either way, I suspect 99.94 per cent of us agree that better batting conditions = better Test teams. It’s probably no coincidence that New Zealand made a conscious effort to improve their pitches a few years ago. “Totally agree that Root should not be captain,” says Ben Skelton, “but who in this team is good enough to merit a guaranteed place and thereby qualify as a potential captain? Surely Anderson is too old. The only possible contender seems to be Stokes, but would he want the job?” Of course he would, and he’ll get it by default if Root resigns at the end of the series. Root, Stokes and maybe Robinson are the only players who are near certainties to be in the team throughout next summer. The Botham/Flintoff precedent isn’t so disturbing now that he is an occasional bowler, and you’d expect him to be more inspirational than Root. But he’s no Eoin Morgan – and even if he was, the system would still need fixing. “My England team for the next Test,” says William Vincent. Laurel Hardy Morecambe Root (c) Wise Little Large Marx G (w) Robinson Wood Anderson “Except, of course, that Robinson, Wood and Anderson will be rested for the more important fifth test and replaced by Marx H, French and Saunders.” Read all about it! I dare you, I double dare you. This is a cracking stat from Shankar Mony “Mitchell Starc, who didn’t even set the series alight with his batting, has scored more runs than anyone in the England team bar Root and Malan. That’s a damning stat.” I’m not sure the word ‘damning’ is damning enough. “Here’s a question: is there a moment/decision in recent years that led us here?” says Max Williams. “In less than a decade we’ve fallen from the world’s number 1 team to, well, this. We celebrate the decisions that brought about eventual success - Morgan’s impact on the ODI team post 2015 World Cup or the introduction of central contracts that helped create the 2005 Ashes side. Is there an inverse of those sliding door moments that resulted in this nadir (both series and 2021 as a whole)? Off the top of my head I’d say not giving the Test captaincy to Morgan after Cook resigned.” I’m not as clued up as some but I think this precedes 2015. Rob Key, who is really good on the subject, says that pitches in county cricket were getting much worse towards the end of his career. I have a feeling, though I’d need to LOOK AT THE GODDAMN DATA, that the system was already in decline when England were No1 in the world. That said, it certainly got worse once they made that Faustian pact to win the World Cup. England are still the fourth or fifth best team in the world, which doesn’t really compute after what we’ve seen in the last nine months. But they need a new captain, probably a new coach and certainly a change in the county system, especially the pitches. Chris Silverwood, the England coach, has his say “It’s disappointing for us all, but I’ve got to give some credit to the Australian attack. That said, we have to find of competing and pushing back against them. We want to take something away from this series.” To be honest he’s just spouting cliches, same as Joe Root in his post-match interviews. It’s understandable in the circumstances - they both look a bit shell-shocked - but doesn’t make for a great interview. And here’s an even happier Scott Boland “[Can you believe what’s happened?] Ha, no, not really. Coming here today, we thought we had a good chance of winning, but I didn’t think it was gonna happen that quickly! “I found out I’d be playing on Christmas Eve at about 5.30pm. Since then I’ve had great support from family, friends and teammates. I thought it would be really tough - it’s a big step-up from anything I’ve played before, so I was just hoping to make a little bit of an impact. “I’d like to thank the crowd so much for their support, I really appreciate it. [You’ve picked up the Mullagh Medal - what does this mean for indigenous Australia?] There was about 17 of us that went away a couple of years ago to commemorate the tour from 1868. We got to learn so much about that tour and what went on. My family would be very proud and I’m very proud to win this award.” And here’s a very happy Pat Cummins “It’s pretty insane [to be an Ashes-winning captain]. Just an awesome few weeks… I’m so proud of the group. Everything’s clicked. I’m so happy for Scotty in front of his home crowd today. It’s an amazing feeling. “I think we’ve been relentless with bat and ball when we’ve had to be. The bowlers have turned up and owned that good area around the top of off stump. The batters have really earned their runs. They’ve left well and when the opportunity has presented itself, they’ve been brave and taken the game on. “It’s a great sign of the health of Australian cricket that we’ve got so many players to choose from. We were really confident Scotty would do well – maybe not six-for in four overs!” Joe Root speaks “Credit to Australia, they blew us away last night and they’ve outplayed us in this series so far. We’ve got a lot of hard to work to do to make sure we come back strongly in the last two games. “It’s not ideal [the Covid outbreak in the camp] – I thought the way we bowled yesterday was outstanding, as good as we’ve been on this tour. We’ve just got to do things for longer. There have been small pockets [of playing well] but nowhere near long enough. We need to look at the next two games as a real opportunity to take something away from this tour.” That was England’s lowest total in Australia since 1902. There will be stats galore in the next few hours, most demonstrating the poverty of England’s batting. Here’s one: England’s average of 24.13 runs per wicket in 2021 is their lowest in a calendar year since 1950. England came to the ground today needing a miracle. Instead they were on the wrong end of a fairytale: Scott Boland, aged 32, took the cheapest debut five-for in Test history, and on his home ground as well. Look at these figures: 4-1-7-6. You’d have to be a seriously sour England fan not to find joy in that. (Also, given Boland’s figures, there’s a line about England being at sixes and sevens, but I can’t make it work.) Thanks Jonathan, morning everyone. If you had 15.4 overs in the sweep, congratulations. That’s how long it took Australia to pick up the last six England wickets. The daft thing is that England started pretty well - Ben Stokes and Joe Root played positively and with authority until Stokes was cleaned up by a jaffa from Mitchell Starc. Once that happened, the rest was just admin. I’m off for a lie down in a cool room. Rob Smyth is here to conduct the post mortem. But before the obituaries are drafted, let’s celebrate Australia. This is a serious bowling unit. Potent, deep, superbly led by Pat Cummins. Scott Boland was the hero today, but they have all dovetailed brilliantly all series. Anderson with the ball, Root with the bat, both deserve better. These are awfully dark days for English cricket. That Test lasted just 165 overs and ended inside seven sessions. Scott Boland will remember every second. Clinical from Australia. Abject from England. Full. Straight. Anderson misses. Green hits. Wicket. Ashes. 27th over: England 67-9 (Buttler 4, Anderson 2) Anderson sees off Boland’s remaining deliveries, and milks a couple of runs for his troubles. Boland has figures of four overs, six for seven. Lol. Rob Smyth (who is primed to take over here on the OBO) informs me that this is the best five-for on debut (and presumably the best six-for) in Test history by Boland. 6-15 Charlie Turner, 1886-87 5-15 Vernon Philander, 2011-12 Full list here. Make that a six-for! Another length delivery, thick edge from Robinson, straight to Labuschagne at third slip. Easy as that. This is grim from England. Even accounting for all the mitigating factors, form, quality of Australia’s attack etc etc, this is very very grim. Boland has a five-for on debut. Another length delivery, blocked back in his direction by Wood and the big Victorian holds onto the catch in his follow-through. 26th over: England 65-7 (Buttler 4, Wood 0) A rare bad ball from Green, allowing Buttler to punish a full toss through the covers for four. “If Joe Root does step down as captain (and he definitively should) I’d make Jos Buttler captain,” argues Peter Kelly. “Any runs he could get down the order would be a bonus. Would not want Stokes to take over captaincy. England seem to make their best batsman captain and it affects their batting. And there isn’t enough strength in depth to cope with that. There isn’t enough strength full stop. I think when Root steps down he can focus fully on his batting and he will end up as one of the top three run-scorers of all time.” 25th over: England 61-7 (Buttler 0, Wood 0) Magnificent over from Boland, every ball probing. Wood was mostly an onlooker from his share over the spell after Root’s dismissal. Four for five from three overs. Incredible figures on debut. No records for Root. No miraculous escape for England. Just the continuation of a dream debut for Scott Boland. Perfect seam bowler’s line and length from the Victorian, sending an RSVP for a cover drive that Root accepted a fraction late, sending the ball straight to David Warner at first slip. Who fancies a long lunch? 24th over: England 61-6 (Root 28, Buttler 0) Just a single to Root from Green’s latest over. I’m a bit dazed, to be honest. 23rd over: England 60-6 (Root 27, Buttler 0) Boland rips his first delivery at Buttler past the outside edge. The MCG is alive once more. Not like last night, but the tempo is back, and England are on their knees. Another block in the jenga tower of misery that is English cricket. Cheers from the parochial crowd inside the MCG as home favourite Scott Boland comes into the attack, and THERE’S A DROP FIRST BALL! Bairstow tries to cut a delivery too close to his body and it flies hard and fast just to the left of Cameron Green in the gully. The reaction is good from the fielder, but he can’t hold on. He is stood very very close. Following the single, Root shows his county colleague how it’s done, executing a textbook backfoot punch through the covers for three. But that only brings Bairstow back on strike, and he’s soon on his way. Squared up by a lovely delivery from Boland, the bat comes down heading to leg, instead of straight, and the ball thunders into the pad. Is it outside the line? Is it too high? Umpire Wilson gives the bowler the benefit of any doubt, and DRS backs him up. A couple of ‘umpire’s call’ orange lights, but Bairstow has to go. Poor Joe Root. The on-field decision is out... 22nd over: England 56-5 (Root 24, Bairstow 4) Cameron Green replaces his captain in the attack, Australia hoping to exploit his good record this series against Joe Root. But the England skipper is batting with intent and whips a shorter ball down to fine leg to get off strike. That means Bairstow is on strike for a jaffa from the big allrounder, a delivery that spits off a length, hits the splice, and lobs just out of reach of gully. “I don’t know where Simon McMahon (over 16) gets his 10 wicket victory from. He’s either very optimistic or very pessimistic. The only thing standing between England and an innings defeat is another Ollie Robinson cameo.” Andrew Cosgrove bringing the realness. 21st over: England 54-5 (Root 23, Bairstow 3) Starc moves around the wicket so that he can hurl more injurious thunderbolts at Jonny Bairstow. The Yorkshireman stands his ground for a maiden. “Now, really, all we can hope for is a Root century. And I’m an Aussie. It’s the only meaningful way I can watch this.” Thanks Geoff Prior, it’s good to know we’ve reached the sympathy ton stage of the series already. 20th over: England 54-5 (Root 23, Bairstow 3) Bairstow gets away with a wild attempted pull that misses the bat and connects instead with his left shoulder. That does not suggest a clear mind. A scampered single later Cummins finds that movement off the seam again and connects with Root’s gentleman’s agreement, not for the first time this series, poor guy. On comes the physio with the smelling salts while the England skipper gathers his thoughts, and like a hibernating squirrel, counts his hidden nuts. 19th over: England 53-5 (Root 23, Bairstow 2) Make that FOUR straight driven boundaries this morning. Starc too full, Root on it in a flash, the sound of a pure crack in the air, and four crisp runs from the moment it leaves the bat. Gorgeous. Otherwise Root was watchful to Starc, like Cummins, trying to entice the fish outside off. *Very Mr Robot narrator voice*: 18th over: England 49-5 (Root 19, Bairstow 2) Both Yorkshire right-handers work Cummins away for runs, but then the Australian skipper fires up for the first time this morning, inducing a thick outside edge from Bairstow, then finding some prodigious movement in off the seam to test his defences. That lateral movement off the pitch, at the pace of this Australian attack, is unplayable. “At this point, I’m starting to wonder if the best thing to do for English cricket would be to cut and run, citing the new wave of Omicron coronavirus,” suggests Sam Stevens. It just blatantly can’t be good psychologically for our players, going out and getting absolutely humiliatingly pasted time and again. At this point, only Jimmy, Robinson and Wood are coming away with any real credit.” 17th over: England 46-5 (Root 18, Bairstow 0) After a good 20 minutes or so for England, it’s back to the obits. Superb delivery from Starc mind you. Another straight driven four! This one was meatier than the previous two, Stokes throwing his hands at a fuller wider one form Starc and getting enough on it to send it back from where it came from, with interest. Aesthetically, that was Haydenesque. Oh boy. In response Starc rips through Stokes like he’s a hologram. That was Akramesque. Fast, length delivery, tailing in to the left-handed batter off the pitch, and Stokes was beaten before he could decide what his plan of action should be. A perfect delivery on this surface and a massive early breakthrough. 16th over: England 42-4 (Root 18, Stokes 7) To my untrained eye Cummins is a bit too short to Root in a straight up-and-down maiden over, but then Ricky Ponting (who is a superb analyst) explains how this is all part of Australia’s tactic to the England skipper, to entice him to play from the crease with his hands away from his body. That’s me told. “Hi Jonathan,” hello Simon McMahon. “If Root and / or Stokes are still batting by the time Rob takes up the OBO, England will lose by 9 wickets. Otherwise it’s Australia to win by 10 wickets. That’s my prediction.” 15th over: England 42-4 (Root 18, Stokes 7) Anything Root can do Stokes can do leftier. Starc is again too full and the England batter presents the full face of the bat, holds the pose with the high front elbow, and doesn’t bother leaving the crease as the ball clatters into the rope. Bright start by England. 14th over: England 38-4 (Root 18, Stokes 3) Stokes also gets into the runs early with a single off his hip as Cummins opens a little straight to the left-hander. Not the fire and brimstone of last night so far from the Australian quicks. 13th over: England 37-4 (Root 18, Stokes 2) Mitchell Starc is on the money straight away, beating Root’s tentative backfoot fend outside off. The England skipper aims a similar stroke to the following delivery, but this time it emerges as a crisp push into the covers for a couple of runs. Starc then overpitches and Root feasts on the length, punishing the half-volley down the ground for a confidence boosting boundary. Positive intent early from Root. Ok, on with the show. England’s two best batters are crouched by the boundary rope, bathed in morning sun, ready to climb their Everest. Australia stride out to the middle, smiling, joking, slapping backsides. Has there been a global dispersion of funny juice I’m not aware of? Some of the fanciful optimism is making me splutter on my double shot oat latte. Tom V d Gucht is channelling his inner Rick &amp; Morty to bring some jeopardy to this series. “This is my entire sporting philosophy: in an infinite universe, everything has got to happen at some point. No matter how improbable, how unlikely, how much the odds are stacked against you, sporting miracles statistically have to occur eventually. Why not today? Don’t answer.” Cast your eyes over the deck of doom. Despite all the doom and gloom, Andrew Benton has found reasons to be cheerful in 2021. “Despite the current Ashes predicament, and because it’ll all be over by mid afternoon if not sooner, I do think that the cricket year has been a pretty good one,” he emails, “especially given the Covid situation. The ECB have managed at least to keep things going pretty well. And I loved the free to watch county games. 2021 has been (almost) a blast, in fact.” Richard Chorley reckons today could prove seismic for this English group. “People should have been given advance notice to allow them to pause and celebrate Jos and Jonny’s final red ball contributions for England ahead of today’s innings,” he emails. It could well be the end of the road (at least for now) for a few members of this group. But as discussed yesterday, it’s hardly as if they are keeping out an army of contenders demanding selection. The Naylorfesto: ... but that final hour - oh, that final hour - it belong to Australia’s attack in the most brutal, thrilling fashion. Pat Cummins was magnificent. Mitchell Starc was on a hat-trick. But it is the impact of local debutant Scott Boland that caught Geoff Lemon’s eye. Boland’s story is in many ways representative of the treatment of Indigenous Australians in the nation’s modern incarnation. He did not know of his heritage until he was in his 20s, when his family learned that Boland’s grandfather was descended from the Gulidjan people of western Victoria. For so many people and for so long, that kind of heritage had been hidden or ignored. The Boland family embraced it instead, in a process of learning that is still under way. If the footballing cliche is ‘a game of two halves’, yesterday’s action at the MCG was a game of six hours. The first five belonged to England, and Jimmy Anderson... But, of course, Anderson can only do it in England. Never mind that he now averages fractionally better (a shade over 33) in away Ashes Tests than he does at home. Or that he averages 12 in away Tests this decade. The caricature of Anderson as a green-wicket phenomenon remains a stubbornly persistent myth, even within his own camp. Certainly you suspect it contributed to his omission in Brisbane and subsequent rustiness in Adelaide. By the time Anderson was finally up to speed, the Ashes had all but gone. Geoff is thinking like an Australian. In England we call this kind of logic fantasy. Rob Lewis wins the prize for the first email of the day. “Spare a thought for my son Josh - known to his friends as Duke. He married his Aussie love Ella in August, and they had plans to move from Cambridge to Melbourne soon after the wedding. So Duke bought tickets for several of the Ashes matches, being a fanatical cricket follower, sometime spinner and umpire. Flights were delayed by Covid until just before Christmas, and without quarantine, at last he will get to see some cricket today - Day 3 of the test! But it’s going to be some cricket, not an awful lot, I imagine. As if all the ribbing and the barracking from his new Aussie family is not enough, he will be witness to the witlessness of this total capitulation. Spare a thought for the lad.” As a dual citizen (born in the UK, now at home in Australia) I can empathise. Now, Rob, make sure when he’s backed into selecting an AFL team to follow he avoids St Kilda, or his pain will grow every winter too. We’re just under an hour from the start of play, plenty of time to enjoy the latest Final Word podcast. So, what will happen today? Will Joe Root and Ben Stokes combine for one of *those* days? Will Australia rip out England’s resistance before lunch? Could England eke out enough of a lead to set a nervous run chase? To give you an insight into thinking at Guardian Towers, Rob Smyth is already padded up ready to step into the fray, like an England No 7 watching his side’s openers take guard to the new ball. After a couple of cool and blustery days in Melbourne, day three will be warm, sunny, and glorious. To get you up to speed on where we are in this fast-moving Test, here’s Ali Martin’s report from stumps on day two. Root, who reached the close 12 not out with Ben Stokes for company, may well be reaching the point where he is done with the burdens of captaincy. And not least after a day when, despite news that two coaches and two family members in the touring party had tested positive for Covid‑19, his side displayed renewed fight on this green MCG pitch, only for this to then be undone by a top order still made of balsa wood. Hello everybody and welcome to live over-by-over coverage of day three of the Boxing Day Ashes Test. We’re underway at the Melbourne Cricket Ground at 10.30am local time (11.30pm UK). Just like Australia’s attack slicing into England’s middle order, we’re going to bypass any opening pleasantries and dive straight into news this morning. Following yesterday’s Covid outbreak in the England camp, further cases have been identified in the touring party following PCR tests, but for now, the match, and the series continues. Here’s Ali Martin’s report from this morning. There will doubtless be more news filtering out of the MCG as the day goes on as contingencies are discussed regarding the final two Tests of the tour. Asked on Monday if the tour was in danger, Nick Hockley, chief executive of Cricket Australia, replied: “No. This is what the protocols are for. We are being extra vigilant as there are increasing cases in the community but our protocols are designed for absolutely this set of events. I’ll be back with more shortly, but if you would like to join in, you can reach me by email or Twitter (@JPHowcroft).Aboriginal children in Western Australia have been kept in detention after being granted bail because child protection services did not know where to house them, the Aboriginal Legal Service has said. The Aboriginal Legal Service of Western Australia wrote to the state’s minister for children, Simone McGurk, as well as the attorney general and the Department of Communities this month saying it had “grave concerns” that the department had failed in its duty to find suitable accommodation for children who had been caught up in the criminal justice system. ALSWA has contacted the department about eight children since June 2019 who had been detained in Banksia Hill youth detention centre despite being granted bail, because suitable accommodation could not be found. In one case, a 14-year-old boy with just one charge on his criminal record was held in detention for three weeks despite being granted bail at his first appearance before the court because the department did not sign his bail undertaking. Children cannot be released on bail unless an adult, usually a parent or guardian, accepts responsibility for ensuring they comply with any bail conditions, including turning up to any future court dates. If a child is in the care of the state, the state is their guardian and must sign the undertaking. ALSWA’s director of legal services, Peter Collins, said the department’s decision not to sign the bail undertaking was contrary to the state’s obligations under the Children and Community Services Act, which requires the department to “regard the best interest of the child as the paramount consideration”, and also contradicted the principle that detaining a young person in custody must be the option of last resort. “We wish to express our frustration with the repeated failures on the part of the department to meet their obligations to find appropriate placements for young people in its care,” Collins wrote. “The fact that ALSWA lawyers have frequently been pivotal in ensuring young people are secured placements in these instances, and that these placements are often with family members who are already known to the department, beggars belief. “We urge you to act on the above concerns as a matter of priority.” The letter was dated 13 December. As of 24 December, ALSWA had not received a response. A spokesperson from the department told Guardian Australia there could sometimes be a delay between a child being granted bail and being released from custody, to arrange appropriate housing and transport. “There is often an expectation that once a child or young person is granted bail, they are released from custody immediately,” the spokesperson said. “A range of factors, including transport arrangements and care planning, must be coordinated before Communities can safely provide bail for children in care – both for the child or young person and the broader community.” The department said it tried to maintain the child’s previous foster placement, “however, there are occasions where the level of support required may not be available at the point that bail is granted and Communities cannot adequately ensure the safety of the young person or the community”. “The safety and wellbeing of children is always the Department of Communities’ number one priority.” Collins said it was the fourth time the legal service had written to the department about the matter since June 2019 and the department had had “ample opportunity to put procedures in place to provide suitable care for young people with complex needs”. He said many of the children involved had very complex needs, including cognitive and behavioural conditions and mental health considerations, which were best supported by a community-based detention order, not by being held in custody. The Western Australian Labor party passed a motion at its state party conference in September to raise the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 14. The state’s attorney general, John Quigley, led the working group of the national council of attorneys general, which in a leaked draft report recommended the age of criminal responsibility be lifted to 14, or failing that, to 12, with a minimum age of detention at 14. To date only the Australian Capital Territory has pledged to introduce the reform.Ralf Rangnick has been known throughout his career for his directness, without ever being a firebrand type of coach, and the Manchester United interim manager played true to form even if his team fell well short of expectation at St James’ Park. “I didn’t like the performance at all,” he said bluntly after a fortuitous 1-1 draw at Newcastle on Monday night, salvaged by the substitute Edinson Cavani’s second-half equaliser. “We had too many unforced errors when we had the ball.” Rangnick lamented a first-half display in which United teetered on the brink of total ruin, punctuated by Allan Saint-Maximin’s opener. “It was better in the second half,” he added. “But still not on the sort of level we need to control games.” Fans may have welcomed the arrival of a coach with a discernible philosophy, but there are few hints that anything other than a transitional season is in prospect, with no strides made to match those of Antonio Conte at Tottenham. “We didn’t play as aggressively as we needed to against the ball in terms of counter-pressing,” Rangnick said with an apparent degree of frustration. “It was not a problem of formation, but of energy and of intensity. This is something we need to get better at.” A half-time reshuffle from his 4-2-2-2 earned a point, at least. “We had two wingers [in the second half], and this is how we prepared our equaliser. But we were still too open and allowed them two or three good counter-attack situations, when David de Gea was outstanding again. We won a point – we didn’t lose two.” The German frequently used the word “physicality” to express where United had been lacking, and it is clear in which domain he is hoping for improvement before Burnley’s visit on Thursday. “Burnley will be a physical game,” he said, “and we have to be more physical.” Rangnick’s opposite number Eddie Howe, meanwhile, declared himself “desperately disappointed not to win” after a refreshing performance which continued his charm offensive on the local public. Yet, like Rangnick, the former Bournemouth manager is pressed by time and circumstance, with a trip to Everton on Thursday looming into view, Covid creeping into the squad and injuries to Callum Wilson and goalscorer Saint-Maximin. Wilson, who went down holding his ankle without contact, appears the bigger worry. “It’s too early to move my thought processes in that way,” Howe replied when asked if his No 9’s latest fitness issue would alter his January transfer plans, but he did have another fine performance from the repurposed Joelinton to lift his spirits. “First and foremost he’s given me everything,” enthused Howe. ”He’s bought into what we’re trying to do. He’s delivered a high level of performance based on a high level of understanding. He’s playing with real confidence. Hopefully that can continue and he can contribute even more.” Howe may have to rely on the Brazilian even more than anticipated.Acclaimed author and poet Keri Hulme, who was the first New Zealander to win the Booker prize, has died aged 74. The reclusive writer, who won the prestigious literary prize in 1985 for her first novel The Bone People, died on Monday at her home in Waimate in New Zealand’s South Island. Born in Christchurch in 1947 to a mother of Māori and Scottish ancestry and a father of English descent, Hulme was the eldest of six children. The seeds for her writing often came to her in dreams, and explored themes of identity and isolation. The protagonist in The Bone People, a solitary part-Māori artist named Kerewin Holmes, was “a clear stand-in for the author”, wrote Sam Jordison in the Guardian. Described as “a unique example of Māori magical realism”, The Bone People took Hulme 12 years to write, but New Zealand publishers either rejected it outright or demanded major edits. Hulme declared she would rather have the book “embalmed in Perspex” than reworked. In 1984 it was picked up by Spiral, a small feminist press, which gave it an initial print run of 2,000 copies. It has since sold more than a million copies and won the Pegasus prize for literature as well as the Booker. In 1985, Hulme was so unconvinced of her chances of winning the Booker prize she didn’t attend the awards ceremony in London. When she was notified of her win by telephone during the international broadcast, she responded: “You are pulling my leg aren’t you … Bloody hell – it’s totally unbelievable.” Speaking to New Zealand news website Stuff, Hulme’s nephew Matthew Salmons said his aunt never wanted to be perceived as a “literary giant”. “It was never about fame for her, she’s always been a storyteller. It was never about the glitz and glam, she just had stories to share. “She gave us as a family the greatest gift of all, which would be reconnecting us with our Whakapapa Māori and reigniting that passion for our history, our people that had been lost over a couple of generations.” Hulme lived for many years in Ōkārito, a settlement on the West Coast of New Zealand, where she dedicated herself to catching whitebait, painting and writing. She produced collections of poetry, short stories and a novella.With his narrow chin, small nose and curly hair he physically resembles his father, said radiologist Sahar Saleem. Perhaps surprisingly for someone who lived about 3,500 years ago, he also has strikingly good teeth. Saleem is talking about the mummified body of the pharaoh Amenhotep I, a warrior king who has been something of an enigma in that he is one of the few royal mummies not to be unwrapped in modern times. Until now, that is. Saleem, a professor of radiology at the faculty of medicine at Cairo University, is part of a team which has successfully unwrapped Amenhotep I not physically but digitally. The results, using 3D computed tomography (CT) scanning technology, are unprecedented and fascinating. They provide details about his appearance and the lavishness of the jewellery he was buried with. “We show that Amenhotep I was approximately 35 years old when he died,” Saleem said. “He was approximately 169cm tall [5ft 6in], circumcised, and had good teeth. Within his wrappings, he wore 30 amulets and a unique golden girdle with gold beads. “Amenhotep I seems to have physically resembled his father … he had a narrow chin, a small narrow nose, curly hair, and mildly protruding upper teeth.” Saleem is lead author of a study published on Tuesday in the journal Frontiers in Medicine. She said the fact his teeth were so good was testament to how “amazing” the mummification process was. “Mummified bodies were well preserved. Even the tiny bones inside the ears were preserved. No doubt Amenhotep’s teeth were well-preserved. Many royal mummies had bad teeth, but Amenhotep I had good teeth.” Amenhotep I was the second king of the 18th dynasty and ascended to the throne after the death of his father, Ahmose I. He ruled Egypt for about 21 years between roughly 1525 and 1504BC. His name means “Amun is satisfied”. His throne name was Djeserkare – “Holy is the Soul of Re” – and he is seen as having a peaceful reign which allowed him time to concentrate on administrative organisation and the building of temples. He may have co-reigned with his mother, Ahmose-Nefertari. Egyptologists know from decoded hieroglyphics that Amenhotep was unwrapped by priests in the 11th century BC – during the 21st dynasty – in order to repair damage done by tomb robbers. It had also been speculated that they unwrapped him in order to reuse royal burial equipment or steal ornaments. Saleem said their findings debunked those theories and showed the priests had the best of intentions. The original tomb of Amenhotep I has never been found. He was discovered in 1881 at a site in Luxor where it is known officials of the 21st dynasty hid the mummies of kings and nobles in order to protect them from tomb robbers. His home is the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. He has not been unwrapped because of the “perfect” linen wrappings covered by garlands of delphiniums, Egyptian riverhemp and safflowers, and the beauty of his painted burial mask. When the coffin was first opened a preserved wasp was found, probably attracted by the smell of the garlands. The research team has discovered Amenhotep’s brain is intact, unlike other kings including Tutankhamun and Ramses II. Saleem said the project had been an exciting one, “like unwrapping a gift”. The team had been hoping to find evidence of how Amenhotep died but that has proved elusive. “We couldn’t find any wounds or disfigurement due to disease to justify the cause of death, except numerous mutilations postmortem, presumably by grave robbers after his first burial,” said Saleem. “His entrails had been removed by the first mummifiers, but not his brain or heart. “We show that at least for Amenhotep I, the priests of the 21st dynasty lovingly repaired the injuries inflicted by the tomb robbers, restored his mummy to its former glory, and preserved the magnificent jewellery and amulets in place.”Just 30 years ago the IRA was bombing Downing Street, launching three mortar bombs at No 10 while John Major presided over a cabinet meeting. In 2021, Sinn Féin, the political party associated with the IRA for much of the Troubles, has moved into pole position to lead the Irish government in what could be the biggest shake-up of the state’s politics since its foundation 100 years ago. Ireland is three years out from the next general election and a victory for Sinn Féin or any other party is far from assured, but the slow seismic shift in Irish politics has barely merited a mention outside the country despite the change in dynamics it is already creating. “It is not a question of if, it’s when Sinn Féin will be in power,” said one prominent businessman who did not want to be named. Such is their transformation south of the border and the continued courting of the middle classes, that it is creating tensions over the party identity north of the border. Before Christmas one of its most respected TDs, the spokesperson for housing, Eoin Ó Broin, called on Gerry Adams to apologise for a Christmas sketch, joking about a slogan associated with the IRA. In a bygone era this subordination would have been a matter of discipline. Commentators have put the party’s remarkable growth south of the border partly down to the transformational powers of its leader, Mary Lou McDonald, who has no connection with the Troubles era and is perceived as a radical break with the past. But it is also down to a change in tactics – putting issues such as housing, the economy and health ahead of a united Ireland – that is seen as extending its appeal beyond the working-class estates that were formerly its stronghold. Poll after poll shows it stretching its lead after a breakthrough year over the two parties that have dominated Irish politics for a century. According to a mid-December Irish Times/Ipsos MRBI poll, support for Sinn Féin now stands at 35%, a seemingly unbridgeable gap for the two main parties of the coalition government – Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael – who were at 20% apiece. Previous polls have put Sinn Féin at 32% and 33%. The Labour peer Andrew Adonis, who went to Dublin in October to observe the party at its conference and has written a 3,000-word piece for February’s issue of Prospect on its rise, said: “You can see a political revolution taking place before your eyes. “This is going to sound like an amazing thing to say but it is true, the thirst for power and the discipline behind the leader to win power reminded me of New Labour in the 1990s.” The businessman spoke of how the party was polishing its electability day by day, making pronouncements to remove traces of links to past darkness and announcing policies deliberately aimed at “detoxifying” Sinn Féin for the middle classes. Notably, it did not fight the government on low corporate tax, and has said it will only increase taxes for “the top 3%”. McDonald told the party faithful gathered for the Ard Fheis that the pandemic had exposed the broken housing system, a dearth of rental accommodation, the inadequate health service, and the rising cost of living. Soon after she flew to the US, where she gave speeches to the National Press Club in Washington DC and the New York Bar Association on the impact of Brexit on Northern Ireland and the potential for the unification of the island of Ireland. The party has also been reaching out to business groups in an effort to detoxify its standing in corporate circles. A report in Ireland’s Sunday Business Post noted that while McDonald “likes to accuse the government of rolling out the red carpet for vulture funds and institutional investors”, its analysis of the lobbying register revealed that commercial entities who had previously avoided contact with the party were trying to open channels of communication. Sinn Féin is a secretive and highly disciplined party, with its members rarely out of step with what the leadership commands. The report also said McDonald instructed its members to reach out to businesses, unions and sectoral groups as part of preparations for government. The chance of a Sinn Féin in government in Dublin raises the prospect of the republican party in power both north and south of the border, something that could change the relationship with the UK dramatically and influence the debate, which is gathering pace south of the border, on the prospect of a united Ireland. Polls show that it has a chance of being the largest party in the May 2022 elections for the Stormont assembly. Its rise in the Republic was first signalled in 2020 when after a surge in support it won the most first preference votes in the February general election. The results did not translate into power because the party fielded 42 candidates in a race for 159, but “generated momentous shifts within the political landscape”, said Agnès Maillot, a politics lecturer at Dublin City University and author of Rebels in Government, a new book on Sinn Féin. “Until 2020, its progress could be described as a protest vote,” she said. The historian Diarmaid Ferriter said 2020 marked greater success with middle-class and affluent voters and the party had evolved by “compromising and adapting”. “This is the party of Gerry Adams’ legacy. In many respects he is the architect of this in the sense that he adapted Sinn Féin for constitutional purposes … He qualified their purist positions at various junctures from the 1980s onwards.” Ferriter said the expediency of Sinn Féin was nothing new. The party used to abstain from politics in Westminster and Dublin, abandoning its stance on the latter in the late 1980s. Another important juncture was the 1998 referendum removing an article in Ireland’s constitution claiming sovereignty over 32 counties to pave the way for the Good Friday agreement. “Their acceptance of the existence of Northern Ireland was another juncture as they were accepting the principle of consent. All these compromises made them more palatable,” said Ferriter. Sinn Féin’s future success will depend on how it fares in opposition over the next three years as popular policies on housing and health come under more scrutiny and the question of its past gets pushed to the fore. Ferriter drew parallels with Fianna Fáil in the wake of the civil war and independence in 1921. It was marked as a party “in the shadow of the gunmen” but “got over that fairly quickly by emphasising they had impeccable conservative credentials and they weren’t communist and they weren’t godless”, he said. “Sinn Féin will obviously be dealing with the legacies from the Troubles which crop up every so often but it doesn’t seem to dent their momentum, which suggests that this change is generational,” he added. Kevin Cunningham, a former targeting and analysis manager for the UK’s Labour party who is now a lecturer in politics at Technological University Dublin, sees Sinn Féin’s rise as a function of a nation growing in confidence and shifting away from the politics of civil war that created the two main parties on the island. “Since around 1980 and the decline in religiosity of Ireland, you see a fairly steady rise in the number of people voting for, or supporting, political parties that identify themselves on the left,” he said. “Fianna Fáil plus the Fine Gael vote stood at around 80% all the way up to 1980 and then decade after decade it just steadily declined. “Other parties existed on the left through those years. The [Social] Democrats and the Labour party, in particular, have been unbelievably weak but at the same time there has been a subset of the population self-identifying as being on the left and Sinn Féin’s capturing that and to some extent that is the kind of normalisation of politics in Ireland.”He added: “When we ask people why they vote for Sinn Fein the dominant reason is that they want a change from Fianna Fail and Fine Gael. Very few people cite anything that the party or its leader is promoting”. • This article was amended on 28 and 29 December 2021. In an earlier version the quote from Kevin Cunningham referred to “the Progressive Democrats” when “Social Democrats” was meant. A further quote from Cunningham was added. Also a reference to Sinn Féin being “founded in 1905” was removed. To clarify: The republican movement founded in that year evolved into a number of organisations which carried the name. The party now led by McDonald was founded in 1970.Queues of up to eight hours for PCR testing in New South Wales have led to calls to standardise interstate testing requirements and make rapid antigen tests the norm. The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, blamed interstate travel requirements for a significant increase in demand on an already overwhelmed system and the lengthy delays. Hazzard accused the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, of “passive-aggressive stupidity” over the issue. Wait times had blown out to the point the test results were no longer relevant, Hazzard said on Tuesday. “It is taking up to four days, sometimes five days, to get test results. “They might have been negative on day one when they had their test, but they could well be positive on day four or day five when they cross the border. “So on all fronts, there is no logic in continuing (this).” Testing delays in NSW, Victoria and the ACT were expected to continue until at least New Year’s Eve. Melbourne resident Gabriela, who did not want her last name used, said she waited six hours for a test on Tuesday morning. “They were supposed to open the testing site at nine so I got there 7.15. As I was in line, one nurse came out at 8.10 and put a line suspended poster 100 metres behind me,” she told Guardian Australia. Gabriela said there was a woman in line standing up and breastfeeding as they waited for their tests. “There were two women in the line who told her they would keep her place if she wanted to sit down and breastfeed. “There were a couple of people with kids, they were well behaved, they all deserve gold stars, but it feels so unnecessary at this point. “Is this working for anyone?” Gabriela said the people around her in the line did not have symptoms, and most were having tests so they could travel. “We’ve got rapid antigen tests, we need to start using them. I have one at home, I could have easily done one.” In NSW, Dr Effie Karageorgos said she had encountered testing lines several kilometres long. “In Sydney right now – testing lines are kms long and there isn’t a rapid antigen test to be found in chemists and other stores (have been driving around and calling trying to find some this morning for my parents in case they need),” she tweeted. In Victoria, at least one resident, who did not want to be named, chose to ignore the mandatory isolation over Christmas after waiting four days to get her test result back. “On Wednesday night I found out a colleague had Covid, so everyone who worked with her had to get a test,” she said. The couple waited four days to receive their negative results. After talking to their family, they decided to go to her parent’s house for Christmas. “The rapid test should be free and we should be able to do that if we have no symptoms,” she said. Prof Adrian Esterman from the University of South Australia said the long lines created problems. “We’re getting a lot of people infectious in the community because they’re not willing to wait,” Esterman said. “The second issue is that all of our modelling assumes testing and contact tracing are working well, and they’re not. “So our modelling isn’t accurate and we are getting far more cases than we expected.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Sunday the South Australian government moved to rapid antigen testing for interstate travellers, but the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, was standing firm, saying the PCR testing requirement would not be reconsidered until 1 January. Esterman said all interstate travel should require a rapid antigen test instead of a PCR, to release some pressure from the system. The chaos had resulted in calls to disregard testing altogether, especially after Hazzard said on Sunday that everyone in the state “at some point will get Omicron”. But Esterman said that was “a gross exaggeration” and to save lives the testing system, especially for healthcare workers and those people who were symptomatic, still needed to be in place. “The reason why we still need it is to say if people are infected. The rapid antigen test is good, just not as accurate – you have to have the right tool for the right job,” Esterman said. “If you’ve got an aged care worker and they’ve got symptoms you want to know for sure if they’re infected or not. The PCR is test is by far the best way in certain situations.” A NSW Health spokesperson said it was constantly monitoring demand for testing alongside private testing labs. “Testing capacity in NSW is currently under enormous pressure … NSW has requested that the requirements for PCR testing by other states be terminated and, where necessary, substituted by a rapid antigen test.” Hazzard said rapid antigen tests were “absolutely” the way forward in the pandemic. “We need to look seriously, very seriously, at all these pressures on PCR testing,” he said. “NSW by far does the most PCR testing in the country … two years ago we thought we were doing well when we were doing 40,000 tests a day.” The state has been averaging 132,240 Covid tests a day in the past week, peaking at 164,144 on Christmas Eve. At the same time, the test positivity rate has risen beyond 6%. Prior to Omicron, NSW was also averaging about 130,000 tests a day in September, during the Delta wave of the virus when the positivity rate hovered at about 1%. Testing peaked at 173,913 tests at the beginning of the month. At the end of August, the state was recording an average in excess of 140,000 Covid tests on some days. Private testing clinics were seeing similar pressures with wait times in excess of 100 hours in some instances. An automated voice message on 4Cyte’s Covid hotline was asking patients to hang up and call back later if they had waited less than 72 hours for a test result, while Histopath’s contact line automatically terminated calls due to “unprecedented volumes”. Laverty’s contact number connected patients with a recorded message – “Due to unprecedented demand NSW Health says not to call for test results until after 72 hours” – and then hung up automatically. All three clinics were approached for comment. • Additional reporting by Australian Associated Press.At this darkest, coldest time of the year, it seems a kind of midwinter madness to take a canoe on to a Highland loch in the deep of night. But we came here for the summer solstice, so it feels right to return. We are the Swallow, set for adventure. The moon is full, but muted by a thick mist. As we cut across the loch, the black water fades without seam into grey cloud, all the familiar landmarks on the shore dissolving. The silence is broken only by the slap of paddles and the creak of boat until unseen geese are startled. Their rising hullabaloo erupts into a storm of wingbeats and splashing till they circle above and settle again, squawks fading. We make for the dark island, feeling like the Dawn Treader on the brink of nightmares, then judder across a skirt of ice that cracks and splinters beneath us. Now we are the Endurance at the ends of the earth. Our vessel stowed on the frosted shore, we head for a clearing at the foot of giant beeches, sweep away leaves and dig out a circle of turf for a fire. Flasks appear, bowls of warm custard on cake, mugs of hot chocolate. We make our beds in bivvy bags and I spend the hours trussing myself in ever more layers of fleece, down and discomfort, my body stiffening into cold. On this longest winter night, the moon has suffused the fog with a strange half-light, and I am as wakeful as when midsummer will not surrender the sky. At last it is morning and time to move. Clearing camp, we discover hair ice pluming from a fallen branch like candy floss, shiny white and soft to touch. An owl makes a wild, demonic shriek from deep in the trees, and we depart the forbidden isle. At first the canoe scrapes across the newly frozen ice ring before breaking through into water the colour of mercury. Beside us, the reed beds are furred with hoar frost, crackling as we brush past. Cloud holds sway all around, hiding horizons, smudging forest and land, blurring edges. Quietly, we slip back to civilisation, fugitives from another world. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryExhausted New South Wales health workers are being pressured to return from Christmas leave as hospitals and testing facilities are crippled by surging Covid numbers and staff furloughs. About 2,000 health workers have been furloughed across the state after being listed as close contacts, prompting NSW Health to slash the isolation time for health workers from two weeks to seven days provided they return a negative PCR test. Health Services Union secretary Gerard Hayes welcomed the change but said immense stress was being placed on a hospital system at breaking point and workers were now under pressure to return from leave. “We’re seeing all these additional pressures … the ambulance service fast tracking students out of university, hospital workers returning from leave, and 200 people on permanent casual shifts for 12 months just trying to get through this period,” he said. Hayes said the next four weeks would be the ultimate test on the health system. “When you have 2,000 people off on a daily basis that is ultimately not sustainable,” he said. “We have some breathing space as vaccines appear to be working, and presentations are nowhere near as big as they were. “But we’re seeing 6,000 cases a day and probably more. If that presentation rate increases it would be incredibly problematic.” Covid hospitalisations have more than tripled in the past fortnight, rising to 557 on 28 December including 60 people in ICU. “Take on the frustration of 18 months work, of chronic fatigue and then the frustration of missing Christmas, and New Year, all these additional pressures are stacking up,” Hayes said. “We are really pushing hard to allow people to have leave because a lot hasn’t been taken … people are fatigued. If they keep pushing on that could have long-term effects. People might start leaving the industry because it’s all becoming too much.” NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association general secretary Brett Holmes said the system was under “enormous pressure” with “massive and ongoing shortages” on rosters. “Even without furloughed staff, everywhere is extremely tight,” he said. “We know many nurses have been asked to voluntarily cancel leave, and we have an exhausted workforce given the intensity of the past 18 months.” “There are no easy solutions here, we have a long term problem for the proper staffing of hospitals, and other issues will continue to arise,” he said. Meanwhile, the NSW health minister Brad Hazzard on Tuesday said staff across the state were “exhausted”, with some laboratories working through the night to process Covid-19 test results. Hazzard said he was “very concerned” about two St Vincent’s Hospital bungles that led to about 1,400 people falsely receive negative Covid test results when they were positive or meant to be isolating. Of those, 886 people who were told they were negative have turned out to be positive. In a statement, SydPath, the laboratory responsible for processing the tests, said that to deal with the “major increase” in test volumes it had moved from an automated to a manual system to expedite the release of negative test results. Hazzard said he had made sure the hospital had reviewed its protocol and procedures but “when people are under pressure, human errors become more frequent”. “There just isn’t the capacity anymore … particularly when some of those queues [for testing] are three and four kilometres long,” he said.Former England cricketers and fans have begun what promises to be a long and painful postmortem into how the team slumped to the quickest ever Ashes series defeat in Australia after only 12 days of cricket. England legend Ian Botham said he was “embarrassed” after they capitulated to defeat by an innings and 14 runs on the third day of the third Test in Melbourne on Tuesday morning with only their captain Joe Root – as usual on this tour – showing any application with the bat. Geoffrey Boycott, another former England captain, called for Root to step down from the role. Writing in the Telegraph, Boycott said: “Now Australia are 3-0 up and the Ashes have gone, will Root please stop saying Australia are not much better than us? I don’t mind him living in cuckoo land but stop trying to kid us. “If he really believes what he says then maybe it is time he gave up the captaincy of the England cricket team. The facts are staring us all in the face, except Joe doesn’t want to see it … It’s every cricketer’s dream to captain England and Joe has had 59 test matches to mould and stamp his authority on this set of players. He has had 13 tests against Australia with only two wins and nine losses.” Already 2-0 down in the five-match series, England needed a big score in the second innings to have any hope of fighting back but slumped to 68 all out – their lowest total in Australia for 117 years. Australia wrapped up the Ashes in 852.3 overs from the first Test to the end of the third, the quickest of any side for a five-Test series Ashes Down Under. England are well on their way to another 5-0 series whitewash to match those suffered in 2006-07 and 2013-14, with the remaining two Tests to come in Sydney and Hobart. However, the consensus among ex-players, commentators and fans was that the class of 2021-22 is one of the worst, if not the worst, ever sent to contest the Ashes in Australia. “I’m a little embarrassed,” Botham told the Seven Network in Australia. “To lose the Ashes in 12 days, I don’t know if that’s the fastest, but it’s got to be very close to it. “I just think that England have lost their way.” Steve Harmison, whose fast bowling feats helped England to win the Ashes in 2005, also said he was embarrassed and that it would be a difficult inquest process. “That’s embarrassing, I’m sorry,” he said in the wake of the defeat. “There’s going to be a big inquest, there’s going to be people’s careers on the line”. Another former England captain, Michael Vaughan, said the pandemic meant that England had not had a good preparation for the series but the real reason was more glaring. “For some time now, this Test match team has not been good enough,” he said on Australian TV. “They’ve not focused enough on the Test match team, the focus has been more on white-ball cricket – and it delivered a World Cup [win in 2019]. “I honestly don’t think our system allows young players to develop and give themselves a chance of playing at this level.” The television presenter and cricket fan Piers Morgan said the defeat occurred in the “most humiliating manner imaginable”, adding: “I feel sick”. Morgan admitted that he, like many England fans, had never heard of the Australian bowler Scott Boland before he ripped through England’s batting in Melbourne, finishing up with six wickets for seven runs. His efforts contributed to England recording another set of ducks and now have a world record 54 for the calendar year. Another astonishing fact proving popular on social media was that in this calendar year, England’s third highest top scorer has been extras. England fans had their say in emails to the Guardian’s over-by-over blog. Lawrence Di Bartolo, of Brisbane, who described himself as an ex England cricket team supporter, said his worst fears about the outcome of the tour had come true, and summed up the mood of many. “This tour has been a train wreck waiting to happen,” he wrote. “Unfortunately such is the pathetic state of English cricket that it will be glossed over and normal transmission will resume with the same losers in charge of the wreckage that is English cricket. Until someone stands up and states that this is not good enough English cricket will continue to be the laughing stock of the cricket world and kids will not want to play a sport full of gutless losers.” Another England fan, Tom Paternoster-Howe, was searching for silver linings. “The only good thing about how pathetic and embarrassing this shower that passes for an international test team are, is that at least their incompetence will annoy 140,000 Australians who had tickets for the last 2 days.”A bright blue anthropomorphic dog may not have been the hero that dads had asked for – but he was the one they clearly needed. After years of being depicted as affable morons in children’s media – from Peppa Pig’s daddy to the accident-prone father in the interminable Biff, Chip and Kipper books – a new community of dads has formed around the children’s animated show Bluey, and more particularly Bluey’s father, Bandit. Thousands of dads have joined an online community group launched in the UK by Matt Bellis, a Bluey superfan who wanted to connect with other fathers who loved Bandit – a dry-humoured doggy dad who demonstrates a playing prowess most parents can only aspire to. The BBC hit, which depicts the everyday life of the six-year-old blue heeler (otherwise known as an Australian cattle dog) puppy, her four-year-old sister, Bingo, and her parents, Chilli and Bandit, has been praised for making parents and children laugh in equal measure – while The Strictly Come Dancing star Tom Fletcher has called Bandit his “dad-idol”. Bandit is particularly loved by fathers because while he is not perfect – one episode shows him trying to turn watching the cricket into a game – he captures the fun many dads have playing with their kids, said Bellis. “Bandit makes you realise you need to step up your game and it helps you bond with your kids because it gives you ideas and games you hadn’t thought of before,” said Bellis, who makes steam train boilers for a living. He started the group – which is strictly for dads only – with a few friends on Facebook, but it now has more than 6,000 members from all over the world, with admins in Australia and the US. The Emmy-award-winning show, written by Joe Brumm with the production house Ludo Studio, has been showered with plaudits since it first launched in Australia in October 2018. Viewing figures are the stuff of television executive dreams, with Bluey becoming the most downloaded show in ABC iView history and the most watched preschool show for Disney in the US, as a well as a hit for CBeebies. In emails from his home in Australia, Brumm explained that Bandit was good at meeting his kids at their level. “He’s not faultless but he loves his family and would do anything for them,” he wrote. “This describes most dads I know. Given these qualities, I take great comfort in the fact that he is looked on as an icon.” Presenting the parents in Bluey as equal partners came about organically, he added: “The scripts were based on my life and I was working from home at the time. I was very involved with parenting and this just came through in the show.” But for those promoting gender equality and equal parenting that depiction is gamechanging, said Adrienne Burgess, the joint chief executive of the Fatherhood Institute, a UK thinktank. “What Bluey does differently, and what makes it revolutionary, is it shows the lived experience of dads,” she said. “Fathers are so much more engaged than they were in the day-to-day business of raising children.” While mothers did more caring during Covid lockdowns, the gender care gap narrowed. In May, the Office for National Statistics found that the first Covid lockdown led to a 58% increase in childcare undertaken by men. Bellis, who struggled with postnatal depression after the birth of his son, said the group was also a safe space for dads, where they can open up about their own mental health struggles. “I love my son to pieces, but to begin with it was difficult. I felt lost,” he said. “It can be quite lonely as a dad sometimes, so it was really important for me to have a space where we can support each other.” While fathers share photos of the memories they have created with their children, they also, he admitted, just spend a fair amount of time talking about Bluey, and of course Bandit. “I think as a show it is helping dads realise that they are just as important as mums,” he said. “It’s about co-parenting, isn’t it. You know, 50/50. You’re a team.”First there was recycling, then cutting down on flights, now feeding your pets insects is the latest lifestyle choice to help tackle climate breakdown. Environmentally minded pet owners are choosing to feed their animals meals made out of crickets, mealworms and black soldier flies in an attempt to curb the huge carbon emissions produced by raising livestock for traditional, meat-based diets. Experts say pets can be fed insects as they are rich in protein, and that farmed species can also contain high fats, oils, mineral and vitamin levels. Preliminary research also suggests that when insects are farmed commercially, emissions, water, and land usage is lower than farming livestock. Nicole Paley, deputy chief executive of the Pet Food Manufacturers Association, said: “When made into a nutritionally complete pet food, insect proteins can contribute to nutritious and palatable products that can also be environmentally sustainable. Insect-based products offer an alternative for owners who prefer to feed their pets a diet that is sourced from ingredients other than traditional livestock animals.” Forecasts by Rabobank, a Dutch multinational, estimate that the insect-based pet food market could increase 50-fold by 2030, when half a million metric tons are projected to be produced. Andrew Knight, a professor of veterinary science at the University of Winchester, said this would reflect growing consumer interest in alternative pet foods, which included vegan diets, for sustainability reasons. This is partly a result of owners’ anxieties about the high carbon footprint associated with the pet food industry, which according to a UCLA study represents about 25% of the environmental damage associated with the meat industry, and is equivalent to 64m tons of carbon dioxide a year – the same climate impact as 13.6m cars driving for a year. However, Knight added that many consumers’ “revulsion to insect-based diets” may act as a barrier to wider take up. Insect-based pet food is also typically more expensive than traditional ranges. For example, a bag of insect-based Lovefood dry kibble costs £12 a kg, compared with £9.75 for a 2kg bag of Iams dry cat food with chicken. Solitaire Townsend, co-founder of Futerra, which is working with Mars Petcare to produce Lovebug, its first insect-based pet food range for cats, said their market research suggested that nearly half (47%) of pet owners would consider feeding their pets insects, with 87% of those surveyed noting that sustainability was an important consideration in choosing pet food. Townsend said that as a vegetarian for climate reasons, she wanted an option “for my cat and my conscience”. She added: “Cats aren’t squeamish about eating bugs, but some people can be. Of course, millions of people across the world eat insects as normal within their diet. Perhaps in the UK it can feel a bit unusual, but I’m old enough to remember when sushi, and even pasta, was the same way.” She said owners should be aware that pets could be sensitive to sudden changes in their diet, and recommended a week-long transition, starting with a ratio of 75% old food to 25% new food and slowly altering the balance. Justine Shotton, president of the British Veterinary Association, said owners must be careful to ensure that insect-based pet food met their pets’ nutritional needs, and further research was needed. “At the moment, there is not enough evidence to support insect-based protein completely replacing current complete pet food diets, but it is another option which could be considered in the future. Owners should always ensure any changes to a pet’s diet are supervised by a vet with in-depth nutritional knowledge,” she said. According to the Pet Food Manufacturers Association, there are seven insects authorised by the EU for use as pet food ingredients. The farmed insects are fed on spent grains, palm kernel, fruits and vegetable crop by-products, and while most farms were originally located in the tropics there are now more than 100 in Europe.Producers searching for a replacement for Meghan McCain as a co-host of ABC’s The View ran into criticism on Monday, over their reported preference for a conservative who does not support Donald Trump’s lie about electoral fraud or attempts to overturn the last election – but is not a “Never Trumper” either. One critic said the news was “scary for a lot of reasons beyond leaving The View short-staffed”. Polling shows that more than half of Republicans believe Trump’s lie that his defeat by Joe Biden was the result of electoral fraud. That lie stoked the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January and has since driven attempts to restrict voting by Democrats and to make it easier to overturn elections. Founded by the influential journalist Barbara Walters in 1997, The View is a talkshow with all female hosts that screens on ABC on weekday mornings. McCain, the daughter of the late Arizona senator and Republican presidential candidate John McCain, filled the slot for a conservative voice for four years, alongside Joy Behar, Whoopi Goldberg and Sunny Hostin. Last summer, McCain left. She later claimed to have endured a “toxic work environment”. On Monday, Politico reported that Behar, Goldberg and Hostin were “upping the pressure to pick a successor, and voicing their displeasure at having to introduce new guest hosts … in a seemingly endless process that they find disruptive”. The website also said that while executives would not “consider a Republican who is a denier of the 2020 election results, embraced the 6 January riots, or is seen as flirting too heavily with fringe conspiracy theories or the Maga [pro-Trump] wing of the GOP”, they also wanted a host with “credibility with mainstream Republicans, many of whom still support Donald Trump”. Politico said Ana Navarro, a Republican operative and frequent guest host, was not favoured because she was too close to the other hosts – and worked for Biden in 2020. “They are really looking for a unicorn,” one “former show staffer” was quoted as saying. “They want someone who is going to fight – but not too hard, because they don’t want it to be ugly and bickering.” An anonymous guest host was quoted as saying: “The problem is that they bring people on under the mantle that ‘this woman is a conservative’ when they’re ‘Never Trump’, so they don’t represent the country.” The report prompted anger online. “I’m sorry,” wrote Tom Nichols, a “Never Trump” conservative, academic and author. “Why is being a ‘Never Trumper’ somehow disqualifying?” Max Burns, a Democratic operative, wrote: “It’s increasingly impossible to find a prominent Republican voice willing to say the 6 January insurrection was wrong. That’s scary for a lot of reasons beyond leaving The View short-staffed.” Another writer, Daniel Kibblesmith, went further: “Maybe that’s a sign that if … the average Republican viewer is a fascist, there’s no obligation to make sure those views continue to be broadcast to millions like we’re all just friends who disagree with each other meeting in the middle.” A spokesperson for The View said: “Our plans are on track as we continue to look for the right person to join our panel of smart, dynamic women. We look forward to welcoming guest co-hosts for return appearances and introducing new names into the mix in the new year.”Just north of the tropic of capricorn, Zimbabwe lies mostly at an altitude of between 1,000 and 2,500 metres (3,270 to 4,920ft) above sea level, which, like its northern neighbour Zambia, gives most of the country a warm and equable climate. Being farther south than Zambia, and well away from the influence of the equatorial regions, Zimbabwe has not two, but three, distinct seasons: one wet and two mostly dry. For three months from the middle of August temperatures rise as the land becomes arid and parched. The rains come in the middle of November, causing temperatures to fall, though the increased humidity makes it feel less comfortable than before. The rains last through the summer months, but become more sporadic from mid-March onwards, through to May, when the cool season begins, bringing much-needed relief until the temperature starts to rise again in August. As in most tropical countries, the rain usually falls as thunderstorms or heavy showers in the afternoon, at the time the heat reaches its peak. The driest areas are in the south, around Kipling’s “great grey-green greasy” Limpopo River along the border with South Africa, with just 400mm (below 16in) annual rainfall. At Zimbabwe’s greatest tourist attraction, the mighty Victoria Falls, daytime temperatures remain comfortably warm all year round, though it can get surprisingly cool at night.Yes, we have chosen the best television of the year. Yes, we’ve celebrated how great TV can be at its finest. But where were the prank calls? The flouncing presenters? It’s time to turn our attention to the shocking, infuriating and stupid incidents that plotted the way through our television year. Here are the most controversial TV moments of 2021. Meghan’s race-related bombshell Anyone hoping Prince Harry and Meghan would maintain a diplomatic peace with the British royal family were immediately dashed when the couple sat down to talk to their neighbour and mentor Oprah Winfrey. The biggest takeaway from the event: Meghan claimed that a senior member of the family had openly wondered what skin colour their child would have. A book published this autumn pinned it on Charles, Charles has denied it and other insiders have whispered about a different culprit. Not that it matters – the impact was the thing. Piers Morgan’s implosion Another nugget from the interview: during some of the worst issues with the royals, Meghan’s mental health suffered to the extent that she contemplated killing herself. This sort of thing deserves to be treated with consideration. Piers Morgan, meanwhile, spent the whole of the next day’s Good Morning Britain angrily accusing her of lying. The day after, as the fallout continued to rumble, his weatherman colleague challenged him. He reacted by turning bright purple and storming off set. Bit snowflakey, really. The Eurovision ‘snorting’ incident In the final stages of this year’s Eurovision song contest, the lead singer of the victorious Italian entry Måneskin appeared to duck down and run his nose across the surface of a table. Social media went wild. Was he snorting cocaine? Amid Måneskin’s repeated denials, the Eurovision Broadcasting Union launched an investigation that saw them drug-test the band. And given that the tests came back negative, it would appear the Italian rockers were telling the truth. Nevertheless, good luck trying to change Twitter’s mind about anything. GB News launch Perhaps the most hilariously tinpot TV launch of all time happened when GB News, ostensibly a UK Fox News equivalent, revealed that it was held together by nothing but spit and sticky tape. The graphics didn’t work. Prank callers with fake names like Mike Oxlong and Jenny Taylier (say them out loud) repeatedly made it to air. Andrew Neil looked as if he was being forcibly kept in a sex dungeon. It was awful. Has it improved? That would require watching GB News, so nobody knows. Prince Philip’s death coverage If you ever wondered how the British public would vote if they had to choose between the royal family and the BBC, here’s a pretty good indication. When Prince Philip died in April, the BBC respectfully cleared its schedules to discuss his life and the impact of his death. And people were furious. In total, the BBC received at least 110,994 complaints about their favourite shows being yanked off air. That’s more complaints than it has ever received about anything. Sure, Prince Philip was important, but you screw with The One Show at your peril. Growing concrete Technically this is a radio moment rather than a TV moment, but I’m jiggered if I’m going to leave it out. In October, an Insulate Britain spokesperson appeared on TalkRadio and broke the mind of host Mike Graham. You’ve seen the clip a million times by now, but it ended with Graham claiming that concrete grows like trees, pausing for silent, befuddled seconds, shutting down the interview then grumpily stating that he never wants to talk to another carpenter in his life. The funniest, messiest brainfart that has ever happened in public. The Line of Duty finale I have to admit to being slightly terrified by this, since last time this paper mentioned Line of Duty in a vaguely negative way, Jed Mercurio went full-blown bananas. However, it’s fair to say that Mercurio’s mature climax to Line of Duty – a weary, beaten sigh at the realisation that the good guys will never truly win – was met by thousands of tweets all reading “EH? IS THAT IT?” By depriving the audience of a more instantly gratifying wham-bang ending in favour of something more nuanced, the Line of Duty finale qualifies as controversial. Please don’t tweet me about this, Jed. Ant Middleton leaves SAS: Who Dares Wins This one, on the other hand, probably isn’t very controversial. In March, Ant Middleton was not invited back to appear on SAS: Who Dares Wins. Why? Well, who can say? Was it because he urged people to “carry on as normal” during the first wave of Covid? Was it because he called Black Lives Matter protesters “absolute scum”? Was it because multiple women filed complaints with their union, accusing him of making “lewd and suggestive” comments towards them during filming (which he claims was “military banter”)? It was one of them, given Channel 4’s response. It couldn’t have happened to a nicer guy. The fall (and fall) of Mr Big When Sex and the City sequel And Just Like That … was announced, one problem above all others elbowed its way to the front. Carrie Bradshaw was married to Chris Noth’s Mr Big. How are you going to make a fun TV show about dating when your lead character is married? The show devised an ingenious workaround: in the first episode, Big had a heart attack on a Peloton and died. Peloton’s stock crashed as a result, and it was forced to bring Noth back for a damage-limiting ad campaign. And then, two days later, Noth was accused of multiple sexual assaults (which he denies). It’s probably fair to say we won’t see him around again. Christian Eriksen’s collapse Perhaps the most upsetting moment in all of television this year was the Euro 2020 match between Denmark and Finland. Halfway through the game, Denmark’s Christian Eriksen dropped to the ground and, while his teammates sobbed with anguish, was revived by CPR. The incident was long and traumatic, and at no point did the cameras move from the sight of a man who – as far as anyone knew – had died. The BBC eventually apologised for not cutting back to studio sooner. Richard Madeley in general I mean, where to start? Gushing over the size of Kate Middleton’s waist? Describing Angela Rayner as Keir Starmer’s “best girl”? Asking the victim of a spiked drink what precautions she had taken to stop it happening? Calling a parenting expert “darling”? Ranting at a climate change activist until they left the studio? There may be more, but I got these from Googling “Richard Madeley under fire” for three seconds and it feels like enough. BBC One’s Christmas Day True, it has a lot working against it, like shrinking budgets and booming competition, but BBC One’s Christmas Day lineup was particularly lousy this year. In fact, it was so similar to 2020’s lineup that it featured the same repeat of the same Vicar of Dibley episode. The schedule demonstrates an appalling lack of imagination and worse, forced us to actually talk to our relatives. Yuck.6 January will be the first anniversary one of the most shameful days in American history. On that date in 2021, the United States Capitol was attacked by thousands of armed loyalists to Donald Trump, some intent on killing members of Congress. About 140 officers were injured. Five people died. Even now, almost a year later, Americans remain confused and divided about the significance of what occurred. Let me offer four basic truths: 1. Trump incited the attack on the Capitol For weeks before the attack, Trump urged supporters to come to Washington for a “Save America March” on 6 January, when Congress was to ceremonially count the electoral votes of Joe Biden’s win. “Big protest in DC on 6 January. Be there, will be wild!” he tweeted on 19 December. Then on 26 December: “See you in Washington DC on 6 January. Don’t miss it. Information to follow.” On 30 December: “JANUARY SIXTH, SEE YOU IN DC!” On 1 January: “The BIG Protest Rally in Washington DC will take place at 11am on 6 January. Locational details to follow. StopTheSteal!” At a rally just before the violence, Trump repeated his falsehoods about how the election was stolen. “We will never give up,” he said. “We will never concede. It will never happen. You don’t concede when there’s theft involved. Our country has had enough. We will not take it anymore.” He told the crowd Republicans were constantly fighting like a boxer with his hands tied behind his back, respectful of everyone – “including bad people”. But, he said, “we’re going to have to fight much harder … We’re going to walk down to the Capitol, and we’re going to cheer on our brave senators and congressmen and women, and we’re probably not going to be cheering so much for some of them, because you’ll never take back our country with weakness. You have to show strength, and you have to be strong … We fight like hell. And if you don’t fight like hell, you’re not going to have a country anymore.” He then told the crowd that “different rules” applied to them. “When you catch somebody in a fraud, you are allowed to go by very different rules. So I hope Mike [Pence] has the courage to do what he has to do, and I hope he doesn’t listen to the Rinos [Republicans in Name Only] and the stupid people that he’s listening to.” Then he dispatched the crowd to the Capitol as the electoral count was about to start. The attack came immediately after. 2. The events of 6 January capped two months during which Trump sought to reverse the outcome of the election Shortly after the election, Trump summoned to the White House Republican lawmakers from Pennsylvania and Michigan, to inquire about how they might alter election results. He even called two local canvassing board officials in Wayne county, Michigan’s most populous county and one that overwhelmingly favored Biden. He asked Georgia’s Republican secretary of state to “find 11,780 votes”, according to a recording of that conversation, adding: “The people of Georgia are angry, the people of the country are angry. And there’s nothing wrong with saying that, you know, um, that you’ve recalculated.” He suggested that the secretary of state would be criminally prosecuted if he did not do as Trump told him: “You know what they did and you’re not reporting it. You know, that’s a criminal – that’s a criminal offense. And you know, you can’t let that happen. That’s a big risk to you and to Ryan, your lawyer. That’s a big risk.” He pressed the acting US attorney general and deputy attorney general to declare the election fraudulent. When the deputy said the department had found no evidence of widespread fraud and warned that it had no power to change the outcome of the election, Trump replied: “Just say that the election was corrupt + leave the rest to me” and his congressional allies. Trump and those allies continued to harangue the attorney general and top justice department officials nearly every day until 6 January. Trump plotted with an assistant attorney general to oust the acting attorney general and pressure lawmakers in Georgia to overturn election results. But Trump ultimately decided against it, after department leaders pledged to resign en masse. Presumably, more details of Trump’s attempted coup will emerge after the House select committee on 6 January gathers more evidence and deposes more witnesses. 3. Trump’s attempted coup continues Trump still refuses to concede the election and continues to say it was stolen. He presides over a network of loyalists and allies who have sought to overturn the election (and erode public confidence in it) by mounting partisan state “audits” and escalating attacks on state election officials. When asked recently about the fraudulent claims and increasingly incendiary rhetoric, a Trump spokesperson said the former president “supports any patriotic American who dedicates their time and effort to exposing the rigged 2020 presidential election”. Last week, Trump announced he will be hosting a news conference at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida on 6 January. “Remember,” he said, “the insurrection took place on 3 November. It was the completely unarmed protest of the rigged election that took place on 6 January.” (Reminder: they were armed.) He then referred to the House investigation: “Why isn’t the Unselect Committee of highly partisan political hacks investigating the CAUSE of the 6 January protest, which was the rigged presidential election of 2020?” He went on to castigate “Rinos”, presumably referring to his opponents within the party, such as representatives Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, who sit on the 6 January committee. “In many ways a Rino is worse than a Radical Left Democrat,” Trump said, “because you don’t know where they are coming from and you have no idea how bad they really are for our country.” He added: “The good news is there are fewer and fewer Rinos left as we elect strong patriots who love America.” Trump has endorsed a primary challenger to Cheney, while Kinzinger will leave Congress at the next election. Trump and other Republicans have also moved to punish 13 House Republicans who bucked party leadership and voted for a bipartisan infrastructure bill in November. 4. All of this exposes a deeper problem with which America must deal Trump and his co-conspirators must be held accountable, of course. Hopefully, the select committee’s report will be used by the justice department in criminal prosecutions of Trump and his accomplices. But this in itself will not solve the underlying problem: a belligerent and narcissistic authoritarian has gained a powerful hold over a large portion of America. As many as 60% of Republican voters continue to believe his lies. Many remain intensely loyal. The Republican party is close to becoming a cult whose central animating idea is that the 2020 election was stolen from Trump. Trump has had help, of course. Fox News hosts and Facebook groups have promoted and amplified his ravings for their own purposes. Republicans in Congress and in the states have played along. But Trump’s attempted coup could not get as far as it has without a deepening anger and despair in a substantial portion of the population that has made such Americans susceptible to his swagger and lies. It is too simplistic to attribute this anger solely to racism or xenophobia. America has harbored white supremacist and anti-immigrant sentiments since its founding. The anger Trump has channeled is more closely connected to a profound loss of identity, dignity and purpose, especially among Americans who have been left behind – without college degrees, without good jobs, in places that have been hollowed out, economically abandoned, and disdained by much of the rest of the country. Trump filled a void in a part of America that continues to yearn for a strongman who will deliver it from despair. A similar void haunts other nations where democracy is imperiled. The challenge ahead for the US as elsewhere is to fill that void with hope rather than neofascism. This is the real meaning of 6 January. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comArt Van Gogh Self-Portraits From a portrait of the artist as a young man in Paris in 1886 and the artist in his mirror with a bandaged ear (from the Courtauld’s own collection), to Van Gogh’s self-portrait with a palette, painted not long before he killed himself. Featuring more than 15 works, can this really be the first ever show dedicated to his self-portraits, from every stage of his career? AS • Courtauld Gallery, London, 3 February-8 May The World of Stonehenge One of the most mysterious wonders of archaeology gets the blockbuster treatment. From the medieval myth that Merlin imported it from Ireland by magic to great artistic images by Blake and Constable, to the arrest of Hardy’s Tess of the d’Urbervilles at the stones, this ancient place haunts British culture. JJ • British Museum, London, 17 February-17 July A Century of the Artist’s Studio: 1920-2020 The studio as workshop, factory, sanctuary and theatre, and both subject and artwork in its own right. Taking us from Francis Bacon’s photogenic chaos to a Louise Bourgeois cell, from collective, collaborative spaces to places where creativity has run out, this exhibition reveals a century of art-making and aeons of frittered time. AS • Whitechapel Gallery, London, 17 February-29 May Carlo Crivelli: Shadows on the Sky It has long been Ikon director Jonathan Watkins’s dream to stage a show of Italian Renaissance painter Carlo Crivelli (1435-95), who was both a conservative figure and, Watkins says, “as radical as Magritte”. Susan Sontag saw Crivelli as “camp”. Curiosity piqued at Crivelli’s undoubted weirdness, I can’t wait. AS • Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, 23 February-29 May Surrealism Beyond Borders The surrealist belief that beauty comes from the unconscious was born in Paris but kindled dreams around the globe. In Prague, it unleashed the visions of novelist Bohumil Hraba and animator Jan Švankmajer. In Mexico it inspired Frida Kahlo. Follow its flame to these and many more surreal breeding grounds. JJ • Tate Modern, London, 24 February-29 August Robert Indiana: Sculpture 1958-2018 All you need is love, and in the case of this pop artist who died in 2018 that’s all a lot of us know about him. Indiana’s defining work Love is a public sculpture that swept the world, but how did he develop? Here’s a chance to see him whole. JJ • Yorkshire Sculpture Park, 12 March-8 January 2023 Kyōsai: The Israel Goldman Collection The 19th-century painter Kawanabe Kyōsai brought Japanese art into modern times. He lived in an age of widening encounters for Japan and was a contemporary of the French impressionists, dying in 1889. His ghosts, courtesans and animals are rollicking masterpieces. This show from a great collection reveals a genius. JJ • Royal Academy, London, 19 March-19 June Hew Locke Unpicking British colonial history is key to the work of the Guyanese-British artist, whose Armada, a flotilla of 45 votive boats, will be suspended from the ceiling of Tate Liverpool in February. Locke’s forthcoming commission for Tate Britain’s Duveen Galleries combines the themes and material that have informed his earlier work: expect trophies from the junkyard of empire, remnants and flotsam and flowers. AS • Tate Britain, London, 22 March-23 October Sheila Hicks: Off Grid The Hepworth’s delayed show by the Paris-based American artist, who has used weaving as the basis of her work for more than 50 years, finally arrives. Drawing on wildly different weaving traditions, and working on both small woven drawings and large-scale installations that respond to the architecture of the gallery, the exhibition promises to be ravishing. A perfect venue for her art. AS • Hepworth Wakefield, 7 April-25 September The Vasseur Baltic Artists’ award 2022 A great premise – get three leading artists to each nominate a younger colleague, who gets £25,000 and a show at Baltic. Culture and nature, cosmological thinking and the political and material formation of taste inform the work of Ima-Abasi Okon, Laleh Khorramian and Fernando García-Dory, selected by Otobong Nkanga, Mika Rottenberg and Hito Steyerl. AS • Baltic Gateshead, 9 April-2 October Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster Gonzalez-Foerster is an enigmatic creator of rooms, situations and beguiling surprises. Speculative, literary, haunting and strange, the French artist’s work is often as autobiographical as it is a kind of sci-fi of the self and our place in the universe. The Serpentine tells us to expect “an immersive, supernatural and sensory environment”: I haven’t a clue what to expect. AS • Serpentine Gallery, London, 13 April-4 September (Dates TBC) Cornelia Parker Surrealism still lives in the transformations Parker performs on everyday stuff. Her often comical, accidental-on-purpose catastrophes, from blowing up a shed to crushing musical instruments to flattening the silverware, have helped make contemporary art popular. So this retrospective with all her greatest hits should go down a treat. JJ • Tate Britain, London, 18 May-16 October Picasso Ingres: Face to Face Picasso gobbled up artistic influences from around the world but was also able to take on European classicism. After all, he was trained in it at a 19th-century academy. This should be thrilling as we see how he squared up to the authority of Ingres with great, strange results. JJ • National Gallery, London, 3 June-9 October Vivian Maier Working for more than 40 years as a domestic nanny in suburban Chicago, Vivian Maier had a double life as a street photographer. Her anonymity was her disguise but it was taken to such an extreme that her art remained almost unknown until after her death. Maier saw herself as a sort of spy, recording life in Chicago, New York and wherever her obligations took her. She was brilliant, weird and wonderful. AS • MK Gallery, Milton Keynes, 11 June-25 September Carolee Schneemann: Body Politics The first survey of American artist Carolee Schneemann’s (1939-2019) work in the UK, the show celebrates a radical artist and feminist agent-provocateur. Tracing her development from early paintings and assemblage, to her confrontational performances using her body as primary medium and subject, and her later films and multimedia installations. AS • Barbican Art Gallery, London, 8 September-8 January 2023 Very Private? The recently discovered erotic drawings of Bloomsbury artist Duncan Grant should bring the crowds to this house and gallery that preserves the spirit of the early 20th-century avant garde. Grant’s openly gay sex scenes were made at a time when homosexuality was a crime. They are his masterpieces. JJ • Charleston, Sussex, 17 September -12 March 2023 Lindisfarne Gospels Artists Monster Chetwynd and Ryan Gander are among the stars of a cultural festival across the north-east to celebrate the return of a regional wonder. The illuminated Saxon treasure the Lindisfarne Gospels, created by Northumbrian monks, is one of the most hauntingly beautiful manuscripts on Earth. And it’s coming home. JJ • Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle, 17 September-3 December (plus region-wide events) Lucian Freud: New Perspectives In a year that also includes its much-delayed Raphael blockbuster, the National Gallery dives into the world of a modern great. Freud belongs here. He judged himself against the likes of Titian, Rubens and Corot – and now his paintings can be assessed in their company. A genius takes his place in history. JJ • National Gallery, London, 1 October-22 January 2023 Cézanne Cézanne remains a pivotal figure in the development of modern art. Reclusive, idealistic and curmudgeonly, this new retrospective will contain many works not seen in the UK before, and follow his development from the 1850s to his death in 1906. It’s not all about apples, mountains or the bucolic Provençal good life. Tate last mounted a Cézanne retrospective in 1996. It feels a world away. AS • Tate Modern, London, 6 October-12 March 2023 Architecture House of Hungarian Music A hole-filled slice of Swiss cheese has landed in Budapest’s wooded City Park, forming an undulating canopy above the trees. This is the new House of Hungarian Music, by experimental Japanese architect Sou Fujimoto, designed to host concerts in a glade-like setting, along with a library and exhibitions on musical history. • Budapest, January F51 Concrete bowls bulge from the cafe ceiling of F51 in Folkestone, signalling the presence of the world’s first vertical skatepark. Billed as an “adrenaline building”, this new youth hub will house facilities for skateboarding, BMX, climbing, bouldering, boxing and more – in a building that was originally planned to be a multistorey car park. • Folkestone, early 2022 John Hejduk: Building Worlds The postmodern American architect John Hejduk created stories and characters more than buildings, concocting casts of strange anthropomorphic structures that took on lives of their own. This free installation will see a large-scale model constructed from one of his “masques”, built in collaboration with students from the Royal College of Art. • Royal Academy, London, 22 March Burrell Collection After almost six years, Glasgow’s cherished venue is set to reopen, following a £68m refurbishment by John McAslan. First opened in the city’s Pollok Country Park in 1983 to house the sprawling art collection of shipping magnate Sir William Burrell, the building has been radically upgraded to improve display conditions and allow more to be shown. • Glasgow, March National Museum of Art, Architecture and Design A vast oblong of glowing white marble floats above a greenish-grey stone base near the Oslo waterfront, signalling the arrival of the new £544m National Museum. Designed by German architects Kleihues + Schuwerk, it will display more than 5,000 artworks across 90 galleries, the upper Light Hall containing a colossal 2,400 sq metres space for changing exhibitions. • Oslo, 11 June Objects of Desire: Surrealism and Design 1924-Today From a gigantic red lip-shaped sofa to a coffee table with golden bird’s feet, this exhibition will explore how surrealism has influenced design of the past 100 years, spanning kooky furniture and interiors to graphic design, fashion and photography. Anyone for an iron studded with nails?  • Design Museum, London, 14 October Plastic: Remaking Our World From the 2m plastic bags being used every minute to the microplastics choking sea life in the deepest oceans, the material is everywhere. This exhibition will chart plastic’s 150-year history, explaining how we got here and asking what’s next for tackling one of the world’s most pressing environmental challenges.  • V&amp;A Dundee, 29 October Horror in the Modernist Block What better city to host an exhibition on horror and architecture than Birmingham? Both loved and loathed for its brutalist concrete cityscape, Birmingham is the starting point for an exhibition that explores how modernist architecture – in fiction, film and art – has been used to tap into our deepest fears. • Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, 25 November-19 February 2023 The Factory, Manchester Providing a year-round home for the Manchester International festival, the £186m performance venue is finally due to open at the end of next year, following delays, cost escalations and redesigns. Created as a hangar-like shed, its Dutch architects OMA say it aims to “preserve the city’s rough edge, as a sort of resistance to the pervasive beautification of inner cities”. • December Sydney Modern Project, Art Gallery of New South Wales Designed by Japanese architects Sanaa as a series of white pavilions and canopy-covered sculpture terraces cascading down the hillside site, this £184m extension promises to be a light-flooded addition to Sydney’s main art gallery. It will almost double the current exhibition space, and will include an atmospheric underground gallery in a converted second world war oil tank. • Sydney, DecemberMost days I would walk along the coast road, past the bungalows facing the Channel, where the sea was implacably grey, and the gardens so neatly plotted that the space between each tulip, each daffodil, seemed to have been measured with graticule precision. Each day I would ask myself: “What am I doing here?” I had left London in the summer of 2014. Having flirted with the idea of moving to Los Angeles, instead I chose the Kent coast, then in the early flush of regeneration. I was looking for something that felt more like a community, close enough for creativity to mingle. Somewhere, perhaps, to finally feel settled. But last spring, I returned to London – sneaking back into the city just as everyone else seemed to be heading the other way. The media then was giddy with stories of those who had escaped to the country, giving up cramped east London flats for manor houses in Somerset with enough room for chickens and rainbow chard, or moving to Thanet and taking up early morning sea-swimming. The figures seemed to back it up. At the start of this year, the accountancy firm PwC published a report predicting that about 300,000 people could leave London in 2021. The previous August, a London assembly survey was even more striking: 416,000 people planned to move out of the city in the following 12 months. There were many causes: lower international migration thanks to Brexit and the pandemic, fewer graduates moving to the capital, and the increased possibility of home working meaning the once office-bound could be pretty much anywhere. I received countless messages in those months from colleagues gleefully announcing they were emailing from their new farmhouse kitchen or in their cottage by the sea. “I don’t even miss the city!” they would say. “The kids are so happy, and we have a garden, and I can work in my tracksuit. I don’t think I’ll ever go back to the old life.” I understood. I had been a version of this too, once. I didn’t suddenly fall out of love with coastal life this year; it had been fading for some while. But this was the year I realised I absolutely had to get out. Before I vandalised my neighbours’ tulips, or walked out into the sea. It’s easy, I think, for new arrivals to cluster together, bonding over a shared choices of schools, restaurants, social events. But this in turn kindles an insularity. As more and more people moved down from London, talking, endlessly, about the fact that they had left London, some days I could barely breathe with the sheer suburbanness of it all. Everywhere hung the air of self-congratulation. It was cliquish, and gossipy, and parochial – I don’t think I’ve felt so excluded, or so sneered-at, since I was at secondary school. Meanwhile, the newcomers navigated endless squabbles, affairs, sourdough rivalries. “It has become The Archers,” a friend who still lives there told me recently. I thought about the city and all the things I missed – galleries and gigs and theatres, city parks, city trees, architecture, friends, restaurants, 24-hour grocery shops stocked with everything from za’atar to rambutan, the pace of it, the constant evolution, the sheer multicultural wonder of it all. More than anything I missed people who talked about things other than themselves. The possibility it offered. The quiet, beautiful anonymity. London might not be my city for ever, but this year it has been a joy to return – to be part of its glorious tangle again. The morning after I moved, I walked around my new neighbourhood, under the plane trees, past my new neighbours’ gardens: cherry blossom, wisteria, hollyhocks, palms; giant ferns, hydrangea, parrot tulips springing at odd angles, and finally I exhaled. At last, I thought, I have escaped back to the city. Laura Barton is a writer and broadcaster specialising in musicIt was not a long love affair; we barely made it to spring. But all through autumn and into winter, we spent every other night together. I am not good at this season. I loathe the cold, the blanched land, the flatness of a winter sky. I have to look hard for its joys and hold on to them: rook caw, sharp light on rosehip, the morning frost crowning the blackthorn. My new love felt like one of them: I liked that he had hair the colour of a conker, and the way he wore a bright red scarf, so that, sometimes, from the corner of my eye, he looked like a haw, like sustenance. He hated winter, too. The first time I visited his house – this all happened many years ago – I found his living room filled with tropical palms and exotic corals. On rainy afternoons, we sat huddled together in pub corners, drinking Guinness and talking about the warm places we loved, about Cuba, Venezuela, Mexico; about the summer to come. We stood before Gauguin’s Bathers at Tahiti in the Courtauld, and the ancient cycads at Kew; we sat glistening in saunas; we checked in to a fancy hotel and took a long, hot bath. One weekday in midwinter, when the season had grown ridiculous in its bleakness, we made a plan: we would both take the day off and create a tropical oasis in my flat. It seemed, by that point, the only feasible way to make it through; London was miserable, the days were short, the faces looked pale and sad. It was so cold that my street stood largely empty, the shops shuttered early, and the sound of footfall ricocheted along the buildings. By the time he arrived at my front door that morning, I had already cranked up the heating and filled the house with flowers. He brought ice, tropical fruits, a small elephant’s foot palm. We spent the day in bed, drinking piña coladas and listening to João Gilberto records. It is hard for a relationship to carry between seasons. The fevered romance of summer can falter in the new lucidity of autumn; what seemed bright in March can tire come August. Ours was no different. During the months we spent together, everything felt heightened. There was the complicated relationship with the mother of his child, his growing possessiveness, the fact I did not wholly believe some of the stories he told me. Everything cast long shadows, the way it does in winter light. As spring drew closer, something seemed to shift. Perhaps, now the world had begun to feel full again, with bud and blossom and light and scent, I needed more space. One evening, after a dinner he had spent once again talking about his ex, I told him I did not feel there was enough room for me in the relationship. He shouted at me in the restaurant. He shouted at me in the street. I cried, and walked home alone. It was hard to find our way back to any warmth after that. Once, he told me that the morning after he had first stayed at mine, he sent his friend a postcard from my street, telling him he was having a lovely holiday in Bloomsbury. At first it made me laugh, and later it made me feel sad, but with time I have come to think that perhaps this was all we were ever meant to be: the warm taste of rum on a February day, the flicker of palm-shadow on unsunned skin, a brief summer fling in the depths of midwinter.Insecure 9pm, Sky Comedy After five unwaveringly excellent seasons, Issa Rae gives us the last ever episode of her Emmy-winning creation. Details are being kept under wraps, but the finale is bound to be an emotional one for the cast (Yvonne Orji, Jay Ellis, Natasha Rothwell) and fans. But nobody expects a neat, happy ending – this show celebrates life’s messy and grey areas, after all. Hollie Richardson Worzel Gummidge: Twitchers 7.15pm, BBC One Mackenzie Crook steps back into his straw-filled shoes for this continuing reboot – one that is warmly welcomed. This time, Worzel and his friends Susan and John have a pesky group of bird-watchers to deal with. HR Royal Institution Christmas Lectures With Jonathan Van-Tam 8pm, BBC Four One of the more reassuring presences of the Covid era, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam delivers the first of three addresses on the subject of viruses. A heist-themed look at immunity and a super-sized lateral flow test are among the educational stunts. Jack Seale JFK: Destiny Betrayed 8pm, Sky Documentaries Oliver Stone dives into the world’s most famous “whodunnit?”, which remains shrouded in conspiracy theories. In episode one of the four-parter, Stone examines the early formation of Kennedy’s foreign policy and builds a portrait of the leader he was. HR Landscapers 9pm, Sky Atlantic This mini-series, which features widely hailed performances by Olivia Colman and David Thewlis as two unlikely killers on the run, reaches its finale. Susan and Christopher take to the stand for a final chance to tell their versions of events from that fateful night in their home. HR Mock the Week End of Year Special 10pm, BBC Two Yet another comedy panel show runs the rule over the defining incidents of 2021. And what a year it has been: we sat at home and watched TV; we got vaccinated; we got pinged; we wondered whether to risk going on holiday. Dara Ó Briain, Hugh Dennis and pals will be attempting to find the funnies. Phil Harrison Live sport Premier League football: Arsenal v Wolves 12.30pm, Amazon Prime Video. Followed by a full day of fixtures. • This article was amended on 28 December 2021 to replace the main image from Insecure; the previous image misnamed the show’s characters.Small businesses have been forced to close during the crucial summer holiday period because of the failure of state and federal governments to bring in free Covid rapid antigen tests, the sector’s peak body says. Alexi Boyd, the chief executive of the Council of Small Businesses of Australia (Cosboa), said she welcomed an announcement by the New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, that the state had ordered 20m rapid antigen tests, which he expected to be available by the end of January. But Boyd said many hospitality and tourism businesses had already been forced to slam shut their doors due to a lack of staff amid a dramatic increase in case numbers, led by NSW, caused by the highly contagious Omicron variant. In October, Cosboa, unions and transport industry bodies called on governments to make rapid antigen tests, which deliver results within minutes, free for small businesses. “We could see with the reopening of the economy that we needed to see workers not re-entering the workforce unnecessarily and endangering people,” she said. She said the long waiting times seen at stations delivering polymerase chain reaction tests, which are more reliable than rapid antigen tests but take longer to return a result, were foreseeable at the time. “These lines at PCR testing facilities, of course they were going to happen,” she said. Speaking in Wagga Wagga on Tuesday, Perrottet said the NSW government had “put an order in for 20m rapid antigen tests”. “My expectation is they will be available by the end of January,” he said. “As we move into 2022, as we are living alongside the virus, taking personal responsibility, rapid antigen tests will be key. “They are not to be used in circumstances where you are going out to the shops. These tests will be used for people going to high-risk settings. Going to hospitals, visiting elderly relatives, going clubbing.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Boyd said Cosboa was “really pleased to see that the NSW government was taking action and showing some leadership in this regard and recognising that RATs are an important factor”. “If all governments around Australia, including the federal government, had taken some action we might have found ourselves in a different space.” The ACTU has also criticised Scott Morrison for failing to provide rapid antigen testing. Last week, the acting secretary, Liam O’Brien, said Morrison’s inaction led to “testing sites jammed and a looming crisis on our hands”. “Scott Morrison’s callous indifference to Australians who cannot afford the sky-high costs of rapid antigen tests proves yet again that working people cannot trust this prime minister to be there when they need him,” he said. Boyd said small businesses had “really risen to the challenge of keeping their workers and customers – even the not so nice ones – safe” and were now suffering from worker shortages at what for many was their high season. “For some of them, this summer period, these weeks, can be the income that they live on for months,” she said. “There’s a lot of businesses that chose to close over the Christmas period because of the low foot traffic, but more because of the risk of transmission.” She said some business owners who remained open were burning out due to long hours caused by a shortage of workers. The Morrison government’s decision to slam Australia’s borders shut during the pandemic cut off the supply of overseas labour relied upon by some Australian businesses. “Worker shortages – that’s across the board from accounting and IT to hairdressing and retail,” Boyd said. “You’ve got worker shortages caused by border closures, you’ve got the ongoing confusion over vaccine mandates, you’ve got the problems around rapid antigen tests.” She said long waits for PCR results, which can take days to arrive, were also making life difficult for contractors who work in the concert and event industries. “They’ve been told they need to have results a certain time period before an event occurs,” she said. “That’s causing additional stress.”The construction of a €1bn (£850m) dam on the Vistula River is one step closer to getting the green light in Poland, despite warnings that it could devastate rare wildlife habitats. The Vistula runs more than 620 miles from the Carpathian mountains, passing through major cities before flowing into the Baltic sea. The state-owned company Polish Waters intends to build a dam over the river’s main channel at Siarzewo, north west of Warsaw, with the primary aim of creating hydroelectric power as well as flood protection, water management and navigation. Discussions about building a dam at Siarzewo have been going on for several years. In August, the plans for the dam were rejected by the Polish environment ministry after a coalition of NGOs warned it would damage one of Europe’s largest rivers, with irreversible impacts for wildlife and people. However, in October that decision was reversed after a successful court appeal by Polish Waters. The provincial administrative court has given consent for “immediate implementation” of the dam. The Siarzewo dam is considered a key component of the E40, a 1,240-mile international waterway that will link the Baltic and Black seas, running through the Chernobyl exclusion zone where dredging started last year. The waterway would dissect Polesia, a large wild area of eastern Europe known as Europe’s Amazon. The dam would directly affect several EU designated wildlife sites downstream of the dam, including Włocławska Vistula valley, Nieszawska Vistula valley and lower Vistula valley, campaigners and scientists have warned. These reserves – which cover an area of 420 square kilometres – are Natura 2000 sites, meaning they protect the continent’s rarest and most threatened species, including the European fire-bellied toad, the large copper butterfly and European river lamprey. The little tern, for example, is listed as vulnerable in Poland and 83% of its population nests in the Vistula valley. Human interventions on river systems are a significant driver of its decline. The proposed site of the dam is also a key spawning ground for critically endangered Baltic sturgeon. “That translates into significant loss to populations of priority habitats and species under the Habitats Directive, including riverine forests,” said Dr Przemysław Chylarecki from the Polish Academy of Sciences. “In such a case the consent can be granted only if it is justified by reasons of overriding public interest. This is not the case for Siarzewo. None of the declared reasons for building the dam can be classified as having overriding public interest.” Legal analysis from WWF Poland has shown that building the dam would violate the EU’s Habitats Directive and the Water Framework Directive. In August, the European Commission said the project did not currently comply with EU law. “All independent environmental NGOs in Poland protested against the Siarzewo dam construction,” said Andrzej Mikulski, a hydrobiologist from Warsaw University. “Environmental consent for Siarzewo dam is highly flawed for the simple reason that the high negative impact of the planned dam on the environment is quite obvious and that this impact is not outweighed by the possible benefits. For several decades, the Polish scientific community has emphasised this many times.” The middle and lower parts of the Vistula are in a natural state – apart from one dam in Włocławek – with high levels of biodiversity thanks to a natural riverbed, floodplain and dynamic arrangement of banks and channels. The dam would turn “several dozen kilometres of the Vistula into a highly eutrophic lake”, degrading the river and valley below the dam, and also making the reintroduction of migratory fish “very difficult or impossible”, according to Mikulski. A 2019 report found that a new generation of hydroelectric dams are threatening Europe’s rivers, fuelling the steep decline of freshwater fish such as salmon, trout and eels, according to the first inventory of Europe’s hydropower plants by RiverWatch. The European Environment Agency has found dams and reservoirs are linked to increased coastal erosion and flooding elsewhere. A spokesperson for Poland’s Ministry of Climate and the Environment said it had not yet received the final judgment on the dam’s construction and that the files regarding the provincial administrative court decision have not yet been returned. “Until the proceedings are resolved, it would be all too soon to comment on the case,” the spokesperson said. A spokesperson for Polish Waters said the Siarzewo dam is necessary to protect human health, the health of the economy and is an important part of flood protection and infrastructure. They added that the project is in keeping and in accordance with Polish law and EU law, the Habitats Directive and Water Framework Directive, and nearly 100 specialists in various fields had worked on the development, including engineers and natural scientists. Polish Waters disputes that the construction will be bad for wildlife or the natural environment. “The results were collected and developed using the most modern methods and techniques available … We wish to add that it is untrue that all environmental organisations are against the implementation of the Siarzewo dam,” the spokesperson said. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresAgainst the backdrop of Dunkirk’s busy port with its cranes and smoke, a collapsed, grey rubber dinghy lies on the shore, abandoned and washed in by the tide. It is one of the many haunting signs of the thousands of desperate people who have attempted to cross the Channel from northern France. Nearby lies a red lifejacket and a shoe, half-filled with sand. The vessel bears the name MaRe Boote, a German firm based in the small western Rhineland town of Werne, about 400 miles from Calais. According to German police, at least 24 MaRe boats have been used by migrants to make the perilous journey. In a compound in Dover, where boats seized after being used to carry people from France are stored, there are dozens of dinghies of the same or similar model. According to British and French authorities, smugglers buy them in Germany, ship them to France, then transport them to the beach a few hours before departure. The Guardian has traced the journey of a number of different types of dinghies used by the people smugglers, most of which are produced thousands of miles from Dover in China, where they are generally ordered by smugglers over the internet to be delivered to the main migration routes to Europe. “Most of the dinghies, about 11 metres long, are designed to carry safely a maximum of 15 people. The smugglers push them into the vastness of the ocean even with 50 people on board,” said Salvatore Vella, chief prosecutor of Agrigento, Sicily, who has led the majority of investigations against smugglers operating in Libya. “The risk for passengers aboard these rafts is very high,” Vella added. “They are among the main causes of death at sea for asylum seekers, because it is difficult for these boats to reach their destination if they are not rescued. To cut costs, smugglers buy low-quality, inflatable boats, with prices ranging between $500 [£377] and $2,000.” A MaRe Boote dinghy, of the type found at Dunkirk, can be bought for about £2,000. There is no suggestion that the Mare Boats are substandard for normal use, or that they market their boats to people smugglers. In the past, crossings were attempted in old fishing boats, barges and wooden and glass fibre boats, which smugglers had bought from Libyan, Turkish, Tunisian and Egyptian fishers. However, since the peak of the migrant crisis in 2015, the European military missions to combat illegal immigration have begun to destroy these boats, with the aim of preventing them from being reused for people-smuggling. As a result, across the main sea routes, from the central Mediterranean to Turkey and from the Canaries to the coast of Dover, the inflatable dinghy has become the most-used type of vessel to reach Europe. Some dinghies, built with poor materials, are prone to deflate after just a few hours of navigation. Gradually, all their air chambers can collapse, even when the boat is stationary in a calm sea. Even the more expensive and better made German-sold models are unsuited to a Channel crossing when overloaded with dozens of people. Although the Channel route may seem more accessible than the Mediterranean, in reality it is one of the most lethal passages. At its narrowest point – about 21 miles across – the Channel is one of the busiest seaways in the world, with a constant traffic of cargo and fishing vessels, passenger ferries, yachts and coastguard boats. Carrying no lights and no technology to broadcast their own location or monitor the positions of other vessels, the rafts grope in the dark, virtually invisible to other ships. Onboard for emergencies, passengers only have a bike pump in case of deflation, and plastic bottles for bailing out water. Last month 27 people, most of them Iraqi Kurds, died when their boat sank in darkness in the Channel. The two survivors said the dinghy began to deflate about three-and-a-half hours after they set off from a beach near Dunkirk. Those onboard tried to keep the dinghy afloat but their pump broke, the survivors said, and the dinghy eventually flipped over. The survivors claim they had reached British waters by this point and rang the UK calling for help – unsuccessfully. Eleven hours later, French fishers spotted bodies in the water. “Costs for traffickers have dropped significantly with the use of rubber boats,” Vella said. “They can also be navigated by inexperienced men, chosen from among the migrants themselves. Plus, they’re easy to find. They can even be ordered on the web, in Asian markets.” For many years the Chinese online shopping platform Alibaba.com offered inflatable boats for sale under the tag “refugee boat” or “migrant boat”. A sales advert offered buyers a “high-quality refugee boat” for $800 to $1,100, for vessels made of plywood, aluminium and PVC that could carry up to 30 passengers and with lifejackets as “optional equipment”. “The boat has a good anti-sinking capacity. When it is loaded to capacity (even if the boat is fully filled with water), it can still float,” read one of the ads seen by the Guardian. After complaints from the EU, Alibaba.com said it would no longer “tolerate” sellers using its platform for this purpose. Since then, it says, most references to “refugee boats” and “migrant boats” have been removed from its platform. But a few weeks ago the Guardian found that links that contain “refugee boat”, “high quality refugee boat” and “inflatable migrant boat” were still valid on the e-commerce giant’s English-language website, even though most of the products listed under those pages no longer call themselves as such. There was at least one advertisement that reads: “GTS800 15 People, Inflatable Migrant Boat, 6.5 metres long, with a 60cm diameter tube”. The supplier is a Qingdao-based company called Goethe. A sales representative contacted by the Guardian said that 70% to 80% of the company’s sales had been to Europe this year – mostly to Germany and Greece. She said she was aware a Turkish customer had bought a boat for refugees a few years ago, but insisted this was “no longer happening” because of a Turkish government crackdown. “We manufacture thousands of boats every year, with some 100 different models,” she said. “Inside China, [these] boats are made mainly in the Shandong and Guangdong provinces.” But when asked about the “migrant boat” advertised on Alibaba.com, she said: “This is only a gimmick. It doesn’t mean very much.” She refused to disclose any details of Goethe’s clients, citing “corporate secret”. Alibaba has since removed the pages found by the Guardian. The Hangzhou-based company insists that it “will not tolerate those who seek to profit from this crisis”. “We are constantly engaged in efforts to ensure sellers on our platforms list products in an appropriate manner and in compliance with our policies,” it says in a statement to the Guardian. A leaked EU-restricted document, written in 2016 by the officers of Operation Sophia, the EU’s mission to crack down on illegal people-smuggling routes across the Mediterranean, confirmed that Libya-based smugglers were buying dinghies made in China and shipping them to north Africa via Malta. The document cited an interception of about 20 packaged rubber boats “imported from China and transported to Malta and Turkey, in a container destined for Misrata, Libya”. As there were no legal grounds for holding such shipments, the boats were released. Vella said vessels used to take people to Greece are delivered to Turkey. Those that set off from Libya are sent to Malta or Turkish ports, from where they are shipped as cargo to Libya. The inflatables that cross the Channel are delivered to the heart of Europe, he said. A report last month from the PAF border police (Police aux Frontières) found that “boats that come from China and are able to carry up to 60 migrants are stocked abroad, mainly in Germany”. Marvin Reuter, the owner of MaRe Boote, the German firm whose logo has repeatedly appeared on some rubber dinghies attempting to cross the Channel, agreed to speak to the Guardian. The firm’s website says: “We build exceptional inflatables. High quality, individual, sporty, fast and uncompromisingly good.” Reuter said he felt “frustrated” after German police informed him that his inflatable boats, which cost about £2,000 each, were used by migrants to attempt the crossing from France to the UK. “I feel horrible about what these bad guys do with my boats,” he said. Reuter said the customers who bought the inflatables, which are manufactured in China, did so “legally”, and took them away in a car, like everyone else. Like other dinghy firms in Europe, Reuter said he was not able to determine if customers intended to use the vessels to transport people. “The problem is that customers who bought these vessels may have sold them to the bad guys.” Some smuggling gangs appear to be continuing to buy direct from China. Olivier Cahn, professor of criminal law at CY Cergy Paris University, said these included a well-organised criminal gang made up of Iraqi Kurds and operating from Calais. The gang was partially dismantled in November, with several arrests, after 27 people drowned. The smugglers used dinghies ordered in China and shipped to Turkey, Cahn said. The vessels were then transported via the Balkans to Germany, where they were “unbundled” and handed over to teams of smugglers operating in Nord-Pas-de-Calais and Normandy. Refugees the Guardian spoke to last month in a freezing camp on the outskirts of Dunkirk said smugglers charged €3,000 (£2,500) per person for the Channel crossing. In 2019, crossings intercepted by law enforcement agencies included an average of 12 individuals per boat; in 2021, this number rose to 27. As the fees charged by criminal organisations are high, small “self-employed” groups are trying their luck, Cahn said. They expose themselves to the dangers of the sea on board makeshift dinghies, reinforced with sections of PVC attached with marine duct tape, or sheets of plywood fixed with screws. Several large distribution companies in northern France, such as the sport equipment retailer Decathlon, no longer sell dinghies or canoes, to prevent migrants from attempting to use them to cross to England. The rubber boats – after a journey of 6,000 miles, passing from the containers of cargo ships to the hubs of international airports, to the warehouses of European shops, from the hands of smugglers who fill them with people – end up on the beaches of northern France and southern England, along with shoes and clothing. The footwear and garments belong to men, women and children, whose fates, much of the time, remain unknown.About 12,000 Afghan refugees will begin 2022 in UK hotels as the government struggles to persuade enough councils to find permanent homes for the new arrivals, the Guardian has learned. Of the 16,500 people airlifted from Afghanistan to the UK since August, “over 4,000 individuals have either moved into a settled home or are in the process of being moved or matched to a suitable home”, according to the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP). The rest wait eagerly for news of where they will begin to rebuild their lives, though many say their hearts remain in Afghanistan, where they hope to return one day. They will not be evenly distributed across the UK after the government decided not to force local authorities to rehouse the refugees. More than 300 local authorities in the UK have stepped up to offer permanent accommodation, according to a Home Office spokesperson. According to the most recent figures, by the end of September, councils in Yorkshire and the Humber had welcomed 213 of the 770 Afghans resettled across the UK this year. Ninety-two of those were in Bradford, compared with just 24 across all the London councils. After Bradford, Edinburgh was the city to have resettled the most Afghans this year: 67. As of 7 December, about 7,500 people had been relocated to the UK under the Afghan relocations and assistance policy (Arap), which offered sanctuary to any current or former UK government employees who faced intimidation or a threat to their life. Operation Pitting, the Afghan airlift in August, brought 15,000 people to the UK. Since the evacuation, a further 1,500 people have followed. More than 12,000 Afghan evacuees remained in bridging accommodation as of 22 December, according to sources at both the DWP and Home Office. At least 4,000 of those are in London, according to London Councils, the local government association for Greater London. London council officials described the situation in hotels as “chaos” and expressed particular concern about the unsuitability of hotels in the long term to accommodate the large number of children currently living in them. Many now have community ties with London, children have started school and as time goes by it will be harder to uproot them and move them to a different part of the country where there is a greater supply of affordable accommodation. While the government made housing grants available for the new arrivals, none of the Afghans who arrived in the UK after 31 August are eligible for these grants. The vast majority of Afghan refugees stuck in hotels are not able to work yet because they do not have permanent addresses and cannot guarantee to an employer that they will not be shipped across the country with minimal notice. Benafsha Yaqoobi, a visually impaired commissioner at the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, who has been living in a four-star central London hotel since August, said the local council had advised some Afghans that they could not work while they were stuck in the hotels. Some guests were “very excited” to have found jobs, only to be told they could not take them, she said, because it was not known where they would be relocated, they could end up in Scotland. Living in a hotel for so long was hard, said Yaqoobi, who is sharing a room with her husband, Mehdi Salami, who is also visually impaired. “For me, for all Afghan people who are here, it’s very difficult, especially with Covid increasing these days. In a hotel and living like this, it’s not easy.” When the Guardian spoke to Yaqoobi in September, she pleaded for world leaders to help more disabled people flee Afghanistan. She continues to be very worried about the disabled children she used to help with her charity, the Rahyab Organisation, who she had to leave behind, and hopes to begin studying for a PhD. Three months on, she has struck up a friendship with Mozghan Shaban, a DWP employee originally from Afghanistan, who spent several weeks going from hotel to hotel in London helping the new arrivals apply for universal credit. The DWP had processed more than 3,000 claims for universal credit, as of 3 December, covering more than 4,700 people. The government legislated to exempt those arriving under the Afghan relocation and resettlement schemes from the usual residency tests which restrict access to certain benefits upon arrival in the UK. Shaban, whose family fled Afghanistan in the late 1990s, can speak Farsi, one of the main Afghan languages, and was well placed to help the new arrivals navigate British bureaucracy. She is well known around the hotels for her jokes, reassuring the guests that they do not need to fear their new country – “the worst you’ll get is rain”. She describes herself as a “therapist, mum, sister” who helps them understand British customs and culture and particularly gender roles. “Some of the families who have come here are very, very traditional,” she said. “It’s quite customary for a girl or woman to stand up and offer her seat to, say, her brother or her father. That’s just a thing that we do out of respect, because in Afghanistan men are treated as gods and women, not so much.” She preempts cultural misunderstandings too: “I had to explain to people that if they go out on the street, don’t stare too much at a woman. And to explain that the LGBTQ community is quite large here.” She has been amazed by the Afghans’ positivity: “The energy that they have for life is just so inspiring. They’ve been knocked out several times over decades and decades of war and they still get up and they’re still willing to rebuild the life in a completely different country, not knowing the language, not knowing the environment, not knowing anything.”From the moment Amanda Gorman started to speak at President Biden’s inauguration, on 20 January, the effect was spellbinding. A graceful young woman in a brilliant yellow suit, speaking to millions – she seemed like sunshine itself, bathing the audience in her light. That performance of her poem, The Hill We Climb, had star quality – and her words, pressing for national unity and reconciliation, soared. The sentiments might not have been out of the ordinary but their delivery was. “The new dawn blooms as we free it./For there is always light,/ If only we’re brave enough to see it./If only we’re brave enough to be it.” Gorman is brave enough to be it. And to be able to perform at a political gathering and at once lift up and move an audience in this way is rare – the legacy of Martin Luther King needs no labouring. She is now celebrated as a US national youth poet laureate and could even be described as the country’s dazzling new secular preacher. For, as her poem Cordage, or Atonement, puts it: “Poetry is its own prayer,/The closest words come to will.” I found it difficult, reading Call Us What We Carry, to separate the poetry from the remembered image of that inauguration recital. Fending for themselves on the page, some of the poems appear incomplete – like unaccompanied minors, waiting for their guardian’s return. They ask to be read aloud. The collection is ardent, committed but uneven. Gorman’s hallmark is also, at times, her weakness: she cannot resist words that echo one another. “Shall this leave us bitter? Or better?” (The Shallows); or “As we become more akin/To kin,” (Back to the Past) or “This book is awake. This book is a wake.” (Ship’s Manifest). When she pulls it off, it is musical: there is a sense of exalted wordplay – sounds as soulmates. But as often, the echo is empty and does not deliver enough meaning. Having said this, she nails a political point in describing the US’s early Covid days, in At First, as “Unprecedented &amp; unpresidented.” Gorman makes a virtue of telling rather than showing. The poems are emotionally primed and have an aphoristic momentum. And while some images do not quite come off (“Hope is the soft bird/We send across the sea”), the emotion always does (“We have lost too much to lose”) and one is grateful for her uncompromising take on the tragedy of the pandemic and the wrongness of living apart. Elsewhere, poems such as Fury &amp; Faith are powerful reiterations of black lives mattering, peaceful rallying cries. She makes sure you know where she is coming from (sometimes in the most profound sense – as a descendant of slaves). History is her spur: she enterprisingly takes the testimony of Roy Underwood Plummer (1896-1966) and uses his soldier’s journal to perform historical ventriloquy. In her vigilant, truthful poems about Covid, it is as if she were taking the temperature of the times (feverish, often courageous, sometimes sadly lacking a pulse) while also not neglecting to plunder the past to reflect upon other viruses that might inform our experience (she alludes to the famous Aids quilt and has extensively researched Spanish flu). And it is striking how often the image of a ship appears (we were, after all, in our separate ships metaphorically during lockdown). On the Good Ship Gorman there is never any doubting the shining intentions of the skipper. She is, throughout, playfully experimental. One poem is shaped as a supine whale, another an American flag and there is a poem in the shape of a face mask that ends with the line: “Who were we beneath our mask./Who are we now that it is trashed.” In Fugue, she exults “Even now handshakes &amp; hugs are like gifts”. But she is right in The Unordinary World to express uncertainty: “The worst is over/Depending on who you ask”. For the curious thing, beyond Gorman’s control, is that many poems already seem past their sell-by – or (to play her game) their celebrate-by – date. The masks have not, after all, been trashed and there will be much more for this extraordinary woman to write. • Call Us What We Carry by Amanda Gorman is published by Chatto (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyEvery winter, thousands of grey seals give birth on the beaches near Winterton-on-Sea. By late November this year, the Friends of Horsey Seals had already counted 1,172 pups, with many more on the way. The Friends have looked after the growing colony since 2012, to make sure visitors can watch safely without disturbing the wildlife. I’m alarmed that one fluffy white pup seems to be bleeding, until a warden points out the red streak is the umbilical cord. The scene in front of me, teeming with life, is one of Britain’s great natural spectacles. Winterton-on-Sea is a 45-minute ride on Coastal Clipper bus 1 from Great Yarmouth, which has smart, hourly trains through the marshy Broads from Norwich. I’ve spent much of the past decade exploring East Anglia and thought I knew what to expect from a minibreak on the coast near Yarmouth. Turns out there’s plenty I don’t know: about lichen, about the circus, and seals. I talk to several seal wardens, all devoted, knowledgable, and keen to emphasise that people should keep off the beach. A raised flipper, which looks like a cheerful wave, actually means stay away. I’m sleeping in an old red-brick barn at Mill Farm, which is 15 minutes’ walk from the beach. There are four big bedrooms round an even bigger living room with sofas, TV, log-burning stove and piles of boardgames. There’s a separate games barn with pool and ping pong tables. And several green features, from a biomass boiler to a guest allotment. The welcome hamper includes juice from the farm’s apples. Environmentalists Emma and Neil Punchard, who converted this Eco Barn, have created an orchard, wildlife pond and butterfly-magnet paddocks around it, and planted 1,800 native hedgerow shrubs to line the permissive path that keeps walkers safely off the road from the village and nearby bus stop. In April, they’re opening a new Grain Barn that sleeps four. The pink-footed geese first fly over while I’m having breakfast the next day. Their calls alert me, and I run to the door to see a classic spear-shaped line of geese. Attracted to Norfolk partly by sugar beet tops left in the fields after harvesting, overwintering pink-foots have become a local phenomenon. The nearby Berney Marshes sees as many as 15,000 of them gathering between October and March each year, migrating from their summer breeding grounds in Iceland and Greenland. One of the area’s most interesting car-free trips is to these remote, roadless marshes, which I explored with friends very soon after Berney Arms railway station reopened in February 2020. Accessible only by train, boat or on foot along the river (and bank) from Yarmouth, the black tower of the Berney Arms wind pump is the tallest in the Broads. Around it, miles of water and grass stretch out to a distant horizon, home to wild geese, galloping hares and muntjac deer. On Sundays, with buses from Winterton into Yarmouth and trains onward from there, you can follow an isolated loop through the windmill-studded landscape. You’ll need to keep an eye on train times and bring weatherproof kit and refreshments. I spend this morning exploring Winterton and the neighbouring dunes, marvelling at the patchwork of ferns, fungi and mosses. There are dozens of different types of lichen, including one that has pale branches like antlers and another that looks like lots of tiny green elfin goblets. I look them up later and find they are reindeer lichen and pixie cup lichen. There’s a tall white lighthouse above the dunes and colourful thatched roundhouses that are part of Hermanus holiday park. Three silver, 70s Airstream caravans nearby belong to Norfolk’s Edge, a new beach cafe that opened last July. Alex Clare, former head chef at the Ingham Swan, serves up seasonal brioches or tubs of shellfish bisque here by day, and provides fine dining in private houses in the evening. I stop for a bagel, then follow the coast path northwards. The seal colony stretches seven miles from Winterton to Waxham. Patches of bright red on distant sand are placentas, soon food for scavenging seagulls. There are seals surfing the waves, lolloping over the beach, or moaning to each other. It’s almost a relief to leave the unsettlingly human wailing and turn inland to loop back to Mill Farm. I combine routes 2 and 3 from the booklet of local walks supplied in the barn and relax to the sound of birdsong and rustling reeds. Marsh harriers fly silently over fields of squawking pheasants. The highlight is ruined St Mary’s church at East Somerton. Arched windows, curtained with ivy, surround a large oak growing out of the roofless nave. It’s raining steadily next morning, so I catch the bus into Yarmouth for some weatherproof sightseeing. I kick off with coffee and a lemony, sugar-crusted bolo de arroz (rice muffin) at Duarte’s cafe, where everyone else is drinking espresso and speaking Portuguese. The seafront is two minutes away, but it’s still drizzling, so I head for Time and Tide museum. Alongside a temporary exhibition of art from Ladybird books (until 23 January), this engaging museum celebrates the town’s history and herring industry in an old Victorian fish-curing factory (£6.70). Even through my face mask, I can smell the lingering woodsmoke in the well-worn wooden floors and old brick walls. The reconstruction of one of the town’s old rows (narrow streets) comes complete with a soundscape of babies crying, dogs barking and kipper-sellers shouting. Like any regional museum, it’s more interesting if you know the area a little. There are bronze buckles from the Roman fort at Caister-on-Sea, whose ruins I saw from the bus window on the way here, and an 1819 painting by George Vincent of the local seafront, complete with Dutch traders, bathing machines and Yarmouth’s towering monument to Norfolk-born Nelson. Round the corner on Yarmouth’s South Quay, a Georgian merchant’s house, which once housed a Nelson museum, reopened in May as the new Yare art gallery (free). The big, light-filled rooms are ideal for bold, colourful exhibitions, like the current celebration of the circus (until 13 January). There’s bunting above the stairs, distorting mirrors scattered through the galleries, and a giant inflatable pink elephant in the courtyard. Peter Jay, whose band toured with the Beatles, has owned Yarmouth’s Hippodrome Circus since 1979 and lent pictures and costumes from his collection. A film on the top floor narrated by Jay’s son Jack, the current ringmaster, shows how the 120-year-old building was restored; its round stage sinks to become a swimming pool for the water show. Intrigued, I walk 10 minutes to the art nouveau Hippodrome, where this year’s Christmas Spectacular runs until 9 January (from £13/£22 for kids/adults). The quirky 1903 cafe, full of mismatched furniture and circus memorabilia, opened earlier this year. The gold curtains are still drawn this morning, and I stroll along the sand for a bowl of clam chowder (£6.90) at the Beach Hut, my favourite Yarmouth cafe. The greyish-brown North Sea lies ahead, beyond young, grassy dunes. The Venetian Waterways, next door to the cafe, are a network of winding canals, bridges and little thatched shelters between neat borders of Russian sage and rosemary. The gardens were first laid out in the 1920s, part of a scheme to provide work for 300 unemployed men, and reopened in spring 2019 after a £1.7m restoration. The weather has cleared and scraps of rainbow float above the Britannia pier. After lunch, I hike past the airy Minster and five miles out of town to third-century Burgh (pronounced Burra) Castle, one of Britain’s best-preserved Roman ruins. Known to the Romans as Gariannonum, this was one of nine forts defending the estuaries of the Saxon Shore against seafaring raiders. Its flint walls stand up to 4½ metres high and Time and Tide has a Roman horseman’s helmet that was found there. I’m following the start of the Angles Way, a long-distance route that leads from Yarmouth, along the winding River Waveney and through the Broads, to wild Knettishall Heath in the Suffolk Breckland. Here, the route runs beside Breydon Water, a big, tidal stretch of water whose muddy banks attract thousands of waterbirds in winter. The tide is high now, leaving them little room to forage, but there are ducks and lapwings near the flood wall. This area was below sea level when the Romans arrived and built their coastal fort. The sun is already sinking as I reach a boardwalk between reedbeds and climb the steps to Burgh Castle. A chill wind ripples over the reeds and river. I walk past a round-towered church and along the lane to warm up in the Queens Head pub. Bus 5 goes back to Yarmouth every hour until teatime from the stop outside. As I wait, the pink-footed geese fly overhead again, calling to each other as they circle the ruins and head out across the twilit marsh. • Accommodation was provided by Mill Farm Eco Barn, which sleeps eight (three nights from £796 or from £325 for the two-person Hay Barn, millfarm-ecobarn.co.uk/). Train travel was supplied by Greater Anglia (advance tickets from London start from £12 each way, greateranglia.co.uk). More information at visitgreatyarmouth.co.ukMy first time at rock bottom came early. I was an infant when my mum fled with me and my brother to a refuge, to escape violence at home. This period of fear was brief, but it left an indelible mark. The chaos and trauma from these years manifested in my flailing limbs during desperate temper tantrums, in which my mum would hear every epithet I could think of while her whole bookcase crashed down our stairs. For as long as I can remember, I have been told that there is something wrong with me, that I am different, naughty, need help; and that chemicals would make me better, make me good. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder is the medicalised term for my condition, which proved incompatible with mainstream schools, where pirouetting in maths class like a drunk gymnast was not appreciated. Academia and I went together like shards of glass on toast. My maths teachers assumed I had dyscalculia, my English teachers dyslexia. One teacher – let’s call him Mr X – remarked that my grasp of grammar was “limp-wristed in the extreme”. (Mr X, if you are reading this, I started this sentence with a bracket, just for you – and now I am not going to close it. I thought getting expelled from every mainstream school was my rock bottom, but I continued to fall. I was thrown out of my foster home and went to a children’s home, where I got my first taste of a police cell. A few kids had decided we should disassemble our wardrobes and launch them down the stairs because the staff, trying to prise us away from the telly after curfew, had turned off the electricity. Kids’ homes in the 90s felt more like prepping units for prison. Bad behaviour meant being put “on basics”: no TV, stereo, sweets or pocket money. But those threats held no sway that evening. The staff, feeling they had lost control, dialled 999. We were twisted up and locked up. But our mischief nights only escalated. I visited the cells a few more times, earning a criminal record before I was 16. It is little surprise that children in care are far more likely to become criminalised than other children. But I still had further to fall. I spent most of my early adulthood unemployed. I was homeless before I turned 21. The library brought me a reprieve: I became an autodidact and eventually encountered real didacts when I made it to university at 23. Finally, I thought, I had escaped the turmoil of my past, but it caught up with me. I had lived on my own since I was 17, but I had never learned – or been taught – to look after myself properly. Over the three years at university, I racked up thousands of pounds of arrears, gained tens of pounds in weight and became a drink-sodden recluse. It ended with me graduating while living in an Emmaus community for homeless people. I have thought long and hard about how I bounced back from all this. If I am honest, I don’t know. In a way, it doesn’t matter. What matters more is that I am a walking, talking anomaly. How many people like me write for national newspapers, or write books? We all have a lowest point, but many people can latch on to loved ones and resurface. Others fall too far to return undamaged. Almost everyone I lived with through the care system has been in and out of prison, strung out, off the map; some are dead. We should judge a civilised society by how it treats its most vulnerable citizens – and the British state is an appalling parent. The children in its charge are more likely to be criminalised and exploited than other children; teenage pregnancies occur at a higher rate, as do substance dependency and mental illness. Then, when the state’s kids reach 18, they are expected to fend for themselves entirely. It should be no surprise that so many end up destitute, as I did. I could write about how picking up a pen and expressing myself gave me purpose – and it did. But, in reality, I was just lucky. And it shouldn’t be good fortune when a looked-after child makes it in our society. The kids I grew up with were damaged by difficult lives, but they were sharp, resilient and funny. Who knows what they could have become if the government had taken its parental role seriously? If we want the reason looked-after children can thrive to be down to more than chance, we must try harder – and care more. Only then will more people with stories like mine make it back from their rock bottom. • The headline of this article was amended on 28 December 2021 because an earlier version wrongly stated that the writer had spent time in jail.The Indian government has blocked Mother Teresa’s charity from receiving funds from abroad, just days after it faced a police investigation for “hurting religious sentiments of Hindus” amid rising intolerance towards Christians in India. The Missionaries of Charity, which was started by Mother Teresa in 1950 and runs a network of shelters across India led by nuns to help the poor, was denied the licence to continue to receive funds from abroad, cutting the charity off from vital resources. The home ministry, which made the decision on Christmas Day, said it had come across “adverse inputs” when considering the application. The rejection of the application comes less than two weeks after Hindu hardliners accused the charity of carrying out forced conversions of Hindus to Christianity in a home for girls it runs in Vadodara in the state of Gujarat. The accusations, which the charity fiercely denies, were that the charity was “luring” poor young Hindu women into becoming Christian by forcing them to read Christian texts and take part in Christian prayer. “The institution has been involved in activities to hurt the religious sentiments of Hindus intentionally and with bitterness,” a report filed to the police alleged. “The girls inside the Home for Girls are being lured to adopt Christianity by making them wear the cross around their neck and also placing the Bible on the table of the storeroom used by the girls, in order to compel them to read the Bible … It is an attempted crime to force religious conversion upon the girls.” A spokesperson for the Missionaries of Charity rejected all the allegations as unfounded. “We have not converted anyone or forced anyone to marry into Christian faith,” he said. The accusation come amid a wave of anti-Christian intolerance and violence that has been spreading across India, with rightwing Hindu nationalist groups accusing Christians of forcing Hindus to convert against their will, or through bribes. Christian pastors have been attacked and church services violently disrupted in recent months as anti-Christian hysteria has grown, and over Christmas there was an unprecedented spate of attacks against the Christian community, including the vandalising of a statue of Jesus Christ. The refusal by the government, which is ruled by the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP), to grant a new licence to Mother Teresa’s charity has been seen by many as indicative of a growing hostility towards Christian organisations operating in India. In recent years, the BJP government, led by the prime minister, Narendra Modi, has put a tight rein on NGOs receiving foreign funding, particularly those that have been critical of the government, and both Greenpeace and Amnesty International are among those who have had their accounts frozen by the government. In a statement on Monday, the Missionaries of Charity confirmed that its renewal application had been denied, and that it would not operate any foreign funding accounts “until the matter is resolved”.That’s all for today. Here’s what we learned: Daily cases in Australia exceeded 10,000 for the second consecutive day, with a total of 11,264 new Covid cases across the country – the highest figure since the beginning of the pandemic. NSW recorded 6,062 cases and one death, as massive demand for PCR testing led to wait times of up to eight hours. The premier Dominic Perrottet and the health minister Brad Hazzard both blamed “tourism testing” for delays. Victoria recorded 2,738 cases and four deaths, with 361 people in hospital. Queensland recorded 1,158 new cases, with health minister Yvette D’Ath announcing the state would scrap its day five testing requirement for interstate arrivals. SA recorded 995 Covid cases, the ACT recorded 252, Tasmania 43, and the NT 16 cases. WA reported no locally acquired cases, with three new cases in quarantine. In another testing error, the Sydney pathology lab SydPath initially told 486 people their Covid test had a negative result, when they had actually tested positive. Australia retained the Ashes after a dismal third test performance from England. Brad Hazzard also announced that January’s “sacred” Ashes test at the Sydney Cricket Ground would go ahead. Thanks for joining us! Exhausted New South Wales health workers are being pressured to return from Christmas leave as hospitals and testing facilities are crippled by surging Covid numbers and staff furloughs. About 2,000 health workers have been furloughed across the state after being listed as close contacts, prompting NSW Health to slash the isolation time for health workers from two weeks to seven days provided they return a negative PCR test. There’s some relief forecast for those on the south-west of coast of WA, where temperatures have soared in recent days. Over the weekend, Perth recorded its hottest ever Christmas day of 42.8C, breaking a record that has stood since 1968. Over Christmas and Boxing Day, 24 new temperature records were broken in WA. This isn’t great news (see: climate crisis), particularly in a La Niña summer – though it’s important to note that the climate pattern doesn’t tend to impact the south-west of WA much. The federal opposition says the Morrison government “should have better prepared for the inevitable spike in cases when they relaxed the rules and opened up again”. Labor frontbencher Matt Thistlethwaite told reporters at a press conference in Sydney today thousands of Australians were “waiting in unreasonably long queues for PCR tests” and it was hard to access rapid antigen tests. He accused the federal government of a lack of planning: Australians are now facing the prospect of very long delays and waits for test results, of businesses shutting down and of workers missing shifts and valuable income, because of this government’s incompetence. The Morrison government has lost control of Covid again. You would think that they would have learned their lesson after the bungling of the vaccine rollout, but it appears that they haven’t, and the Australian people deserve better. A PSA for Sydneysiders: Small businesses have been forced to close during the crucial summer holiday period because of the failure of state and federal governments to bring in free Covid rapid antigen tests, the sector’s peak body says. Alexi Boyd, the chief executive of the Council of Small Businesses of Australia, has welcomed an announcement by NSW premier Dominic Perrottet that the state had ordered 20m rapid antigen tests, expected to be available by the end of January. But Boyd said many hospitality and tourism businesses had already been forced to slam shut their doors due to a lack of staff, amid a dramatic increase in Covid case numbers. Read the full story here: On a different kind of test, here’s a laugh to bring us into Tuesday evening. (You can read more reactions to England’s Ashes loss here.) My colleagues Cait Kelly and Caitlin Cassidy have been reporting today on the issues around PCR testing delays. Queues of up to eight hours in NSW have led to calls to standardise interstate testing requirements and make rapid antigen tests the norm. The lines are frustrating for people queuing, but the delays are also affecting public health modelling. Here’s Prof Adrian Esterman from the University of SA: All of our modelling assumes testing and contact tracing are working well, and they’re not. So our modelling isn’t accurate and we are getting far more cases than we expected. Read the full story here: More details on SA’s Covid situation here: NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has said “tourism tests” are partly to blame for long wait times for PCR tests in the state. Speaking to Chris O’Keefe on 2GB, he said the proportion of tests being taken for interstate travel was “probably nudging 30%”. The premier continued: Our pathology teams both within NSW government and the private companies who work with the government are operating at full capacity. The anecdotal feedback that we’re getting is that there are many people lining up for tests who do not need them. You do not need to get a test if you are not feeling unwell or not advised to do so by NSW Health. But the high test positivity rate in NSW seems to suggest a different story. More people who get tested in the state are coming back positive than ever before. Yesterday, 6.5% of the Covid tests reported were positive – the highest rate since the pandemic began. A higher rate, according to public health experts, means that the official case numbers are likely capturing only a proportion of the true case figures. Here’s a summary of all of the Covid case figures across Australia today. It’s the second consecutive day that the country has recorded more than 10,000 cases in total. ACT: 252 cases NSW: 6,062 cases and one death NT: 16 cases Queensland: 1,158 cases SA: 995 cases Tasmania: 43 cases Victoria: 2,738 cases and four deaths WA: no locally acquired cases (three in quarantine) That brings the total to 11,264 cases. Testing sites around NSW remain under strain, with reports of people sleeping overnight in testing lines around Coffs Harbour to beat the rush. Some people were told there was no point hanging around the north coast station even before the testing site even opened, so large were the numbers. Locals are saying Sydneysiders driving north are checking in to get tests before they enter Queensland, and it might not be long before those from outside local government areas get refused. In Sydney, three local sites in the Inner West that had been offering afternoon tests were all closed during a recent reccy. Across town, my brother Jonathan and sister-in-law Torun spent almost four frustrating hours queuing to get tested in Rose Bay. They were told to expect results within 72 hours, leaving their New Year’s Eve plans in limbo, as is likely to be the case for thousands of people across Australia. One of their sons, Lukas, gave up waiting and skipped off to St Vincent’s after a tip-off on the @Bondi_Lines Instagram page about shorter wait times. Perhaps because of doubts about St Vincent’s pathology unit (SydPath) following the incorrect reporting of the Covid results of more than 1,000 patients, others have been wary of visiting the testing site. Lukas got his test within about an hour but has been told he may have to wait more than 72 hours for a result – maybe some extra checking being done there. Because of a glitch Lukas wasn’t formally told by NSW Health that he was a close contact with someone who tested positive. He says that means he is not eligible for compensation of $750 a week. “It’s just not good enough,” he said. If, like me, you felt like 2021 was in fact a million years long, this gallery is a great visual reminder of the year that was: Slight qualification to premier Mark McGowan’s tweet (below), WA Health has just put out a release that there are no new local cases, but there are three new cases, all in quarantine and not linked to the current outbreak. The department is still testing some close and casual contacts from the French backpacker who was in the community while infectious. The Northern Territory has recorded 16 new Covid cases. Five of them are household contacts from the Tennant Creek outbreak. Zero new cases for Western Australia: Aboriginal children in Western Australia have been kept in detention after being granted bail because child protection services did not know where to house them, the Aboriginal Legal Service has said. Read the whole story here: 252 new Covid cases have been recorded in the Australian Capital Territory. That’s 252 new cases, and 2,980 negative tests, which seems like quite a high positive rate – but there are a lot of variables in there. In case you missed it in the excitement of Australia’s Ashes win: England’s performance in the third test was their lowest total in Australia since 1904. Relive the glory (or the humiliation) here: Hello! Donna Lu here, keeping the blog warm while Tory grabs a bite to eat. We’ve been hearing a lot about long testing queues. Here’s a shot from Fran Kelly from earlier this morning: New South Wales premier Dominic Perrottet has echoed health minister Brad Hazzard by attacking “tourism tests”. Hazzard has been snarky with the Queensland government, and says their requirements for tourists to get tested before they visit is clogging up the NSW system. As people keep reporting those long testing queues and wait times for results, Perrottet’s keen for people to switch to rapid antigen tests and is putting pressure on other premiers to do the same. He’s promising free rapid tests for NSW by the end of January, and the government has put in an order for 20 million. He also said pregnant women should not be sitting in testing queues (see below – it came up earlier in the Hazzard conference). Some more figures from Queensland: Breaking! New South Wales Police have found the missing children, Hanna and Eli. (You can read the original story here). A quick look at the United States now. Those without symptoms will now only have to isolate for five days, down from 10. The Centers for Disease Control said after isolating, people should wear a mask when they are around other people. It also recommended a five-day quarantine for those exposed to the virus who are unvaccinated or are more than six months out from their second mRNA dose or more than two months after the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine and not yet boosted. You can read our US wrap here: Australia has retained the Ashes! You can read all the details at our live blog: Another 486 people who were initially told their Covid test had a negative result were actually positive. That is a total of 886 people to whom St Vincent’s hospital mistakenly gave the all clear. First, 400 people were told on Christmas Day that their result was negative, only to be told later they were positive. Yesterday the hospital’s pathology department (SydPath) said another 950 people who were tested in the days before Christmas were “prematurely” sent a text message saying they were negative when their actual results had not yet been confirmed. Of those 950 people, 486 were eventually found to be positive. SydPath said: Once again, we are sincerely sorry for this error and acknowledge the significant impact it has had on those involved. In order to contend with the major increase in volume of tests SydPath had recently moved from an automated system to a manual system to expedite the release of negative test results. Unfortunately during this manual process a simple data processing error was made which led to the wrong test results being released. We have reverted to our automated systems to ensure this type of error cannot happen again. Previously the advice was for those under 50: If you’re after some more details on those changes in Queensland: There are 43 new Covid cases in Tasmania, and the state government is (like others) considering switching to rapid antigen tests for interstate arrivals. Tasmania was Covid-free when it reopened its interstate borders on 15 December, and 43 is the second highest daily infection tally since then, AAP reports. Some good (and useful!) info here from Sydney airport (update: this is just for international travellers): Queensland has recorded 1,158 new Covid cases but has no patients in intensive care or on ventilators. Health minister Yvette D’Ath announced the government would scrap the day five test for people who have travelled from interstate. She said a positive rate from those tests of about 0.6% meant they were no longer necessary. (Although, of course, anyone with symptoms should still get tested.) She said anyone waiting now can leave, although there is a slightly confusing situation where border pass applications still require the test. D’Ath said people should “say yes” to that – but they don’t actually have to. January’s “sacred” Ashes Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground will go ahead, New South Wales health minister Brad Hazzard has announced. NSW Health will work with Victorian health authorities to manage any potential cases so it can proceed, Hazzard said: The SCG test is sacred, an important date at the start of the third year of our life with Covid-19. I want to assure the cricket-loving public, under our rules any players with exposure to a known case of Covid-19 would be asked to test and isolate only until a negative result was received. If there are any cases within the teams, their support staff, or families, we will work with the people involved to ensure they are safe, and there is as little disruption to others as possible. A teenager accused of continuing to party at an Adelaide nightclub after being told he was Covid-positive has been charged and denied bail. AAP reports: A teen who partied at an Adelaide nightclub despite knowing he had tested positive for Covid-19 has been arrested. Police nabbed the 19-year-old Kensington Park man on Tuesday and charged him with failing to comply with emergency directions. It’s alleged the man stayed at a nightclub in the city after being told by SA Health that he had returned a positive Covid-19 test result, and that he failed to quarantine. Police denied the man bail. He’s expected to appear in Adelaide magistrates court on Wednesday. He faces up to two years behind bars or a $20,000 fine if convicted. The state is on high alert after recording 842 new cases on Monday, the state’s highest single-day total. It topped the previous record of 774 on Sunday. The Covid outbreak continues to batter Sydney’s performing arts sector during what should be the busiest time of the year, with two big musicals forced to cancel shows due to infections within the production. On 22 December, performances of Hamilton at the Lyric Theatre were suspended “in response to positive Covid-19 results from within the Hamilton company”. The Lin-Manuel Miranda musical is due to reopen again on 5 January, according to the Sydney Morning Herald. Come From Away suspended its performances at the Capitol Theatre from 26 to 30 December, and at the moment is planning a return to the stage on 1 January. More from Brad Hazzard, the New South Wales health minister. He is pretty keen on getting rid of a whole range of PCR tests in favour of rapid antigen tests. He said he was talking to the federal government about removing the requirement for PCR tests for international arrivals, and pushing for hospitals to allow pregnant women to do rapid testing at home instead of queueing. He was also asked by a reporter about new mothers being asked to do PCR tests before seeing their newborns. He said he hadn’t heard about it but didn’t want to see anything come between mothers and their babies. Hazzard has also spoken to St Vincent’s hospital about errors that saw their pathology department mistakenly tell about 1,400 people their Covid tests were negative: Unfortunately when people are under pressure, human errors are more frequent. New South Wales health minister Brad Hazzard has doubled down on his attacks over “tourism testing”. He blames Queensland’s requirement that visitors be tested before they come for contributing to long testing queues and waits for results. He encouraged Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk in “the strongest possible terms” to change those requirements as the NSW system faces “huge pressures”: It’s time that the PCR tests for tourism testing were dropped, preferably today. Rapid antigen tests make more sense for people who are about to cross the border. Something a bit more chill, now – overseas customers are “lapping up” Australia’s ice-cream and dairy products, trade minister Dan Tehan says. Australia had record ice-cream exports last financial year. Tehan said (and I think we can all agree): A cold ice-cream on a hot summer’s day is one of life’s simple pleasures, and one we’re exporting to the rest of the world. More footage of those queues – this one in Sydney. Yikes. A big thank you to everyone involved for their patience ... Back on those testing queues, waiting times for results and calls for more rapid antigen testing. Social media is filling up (again) with reports of people waiting hours – and the day’s just started! I mentioned Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is set to make a decision about their use soon, and that NSW health minister Brad Hazzard blamed Queensland for requiring travellers to get tested before they go. AAP reports that she made her announcement “as hundreds of cars were still lined up at one north Brisbane testing site on Monday just ahead of it closing”: Of the people AAP spoke to, around half were from interstate and were required to take a PCR test. Car batteries were going flat in the line and people, including the elderly, were forced to wait for hours in hot vehicles. The numbers appear to correlate with people lining up in the ACT to get tested, with the territory’s health minister saying anecdotal evidence from testing teams pointed to half of all swabs being for people getting tested to travel. A potentially deadly batch of ecstasy is circulating in New South Wales. NSW Health said the “high-dose” pills had twice the average amount of MDMA in them. They’re blue, round and have a Superman logo. Prof Andrew Dawson, the NSW Poisons Information Centre’s acting medical director, said high doses could cause severe agitation and paranoia, raised body temperature, seizures or fits, irregular heart rhythms and death. Stay safe, people. And call triple zero if you (or someone you know) is unwell. Four people have died in Victoria and the state has recorded 2,738 new cases, with 361 people in hospital, 69 in ICU and 33 on ventilators: There has been one death in New South Wales and 6,062 new cases, with 557 people in hospital and 60 in ICU: There are various moves afoot to get more rapid antigen tests available, in more situations (see below – treasurer Josh Frydenberg was asked this morning if the federal government could play a bigger role). Queensland is expected to make a decision on replacing PCR tests with rapid tests in some situations, AAP reports. Australian Capital Territory health minister Rachel Stephen-Smith said they could be useful for screening travellers. NSW is set to make the tests free in the new year. South Australia overturned its ban on rapid tests last week. Labor’s health spokesman Mark Butler has called on the federal government to make them more affordable and accessible. I always appreciate a fast-forward video but this one made me feel a little anxious ... Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has told the ABC he is confident about Australia’s economic recovery despite the “new set of challenges” posed by the Omicron variant. New Treasury analysis of a bunch of economic indicators show Australia is doing better than many countries. Frydenberg said: [There] is reason to be confident but there is also reason to follow the health advice and to not be complacent. And so using common sense and compassion as opposed to fear and panic is the way to go forward. Asked if the federal government would act to ease Covid testing queues and waiting times for results, he said it was encouraging states to adopt rapid antigen tests instead of PCR tests before travel. And the federal government was doing the “bulk of the heavy lifting” in terms of paying for testing. The Covid positive test rate in New South Wales has risen to 6.5%, the highest since the pandemic began. The positivity rate is up from 1.73% a week ago and 0.71% a fortnight ago, a figure some epidemiologists say is likely to mean a proportion of cases are going undetected. Read more here: Good morning! Tory Shepherd here, suppressing some envy of all those who are lounging around at the beach, or reading, or still sleeping. It’s set to be another big day of Covid news as the Omicron variant continues to wreak havoc. Australia hit the grim milestone yesterday of 10,000 new cases in a day. We’ll let you know today’s results as they come in. Testing stations have been overwhelmed – AAP reports that in New South Wales alone, the number of tests processed each day has plummeted by more than 60,000 while the number of new infections stays high. Around the nation healthcare systems are coming under pressure – if not from infected patients, then from staff who have potentially been exposed. About 2,000 NSW healthcare workers have been furloughed, prompting NSW Health to reduce the staff period of isolation from 14 days to seven: Healthcare workers essential to service delivery, who are close contacts of a Covid-19 case in the household, will now be able to leave isolation and safely return to work after seven days. They’ll have to have a negative PCR test on day six and an assessment plan in place. Still in NSW, Sydney’s St Vincent’s hospital yesterday had to admit to a second error. First, its pathology department mistakenly told 400 people their Covid test was negative, when it was positive. Then a further 995 negative test results were sent out, when the actual result was not yet known. Human error, apparently. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard blames Queensland. He said their requirement that travellers get tested before they travel (“simply for tourism”) was putting pressure on the system: The focus should be only on clinical testing. The energy and capacity of pathology is being sucked out of NSW. I haven’t forgotten the other states and territories! I’ll keep you posted throughout the day.The biggest success of the fossil fuel industry’s decades-long campaign to push doubt about climate science is that it forced the conversation about the climate crisis to centre on science. It’s not that we didn’t need scientific research into climate change, or that we don’t need plenty more of it. Or even that we don’t need to do a better job of explaining basic science to people, across the board (hello, Covid). But at this moment, “believe science” is too high a bar for something that demands urgent action. Believing science requires understanding it in the first place. In the US, the world’s second biggest carbon polluter, fewer than 40% of the population are college educated and in many states, schools in the public system don’t have climate science on the curriculum. So where should this belief – strong enough to push for large-scale social and behavioural change – be rooted exactly? People don’t need to know anything at all about climate science to know that a profound injustice has occurred here that needs to be righted. It’s not a scientific story, it’s a story of fairness: people with more power and money than you used information about climate change to shore up their own prospects and told you not to worry about it. That story is backed up by not only the internal memos of various oil companies, and the discrepancies between those internal communications and what they were telling the public, but also by their patents. In 1973, Exxon secured a patent for an oil tanker that could easily navigate a melting Arctic. In 1974, Texaco was granted a patent for a mobile drilling platform in a melting Arctic. Chevron got a patent for its version of a melting-Arctic-ready drilling platform that same year. Shell was a bit behind; it got its melting-Arctic drilling platform design patented in 1983. When she was shown this evidence of oil companies’ preparations for a warming world, Lori French was shocked. French’s family fish for crab off the coast of California, and their business has been rocked by warming waters over the past several years. But she and her husband are not big “believers” in climate catastrophe. “We’re kind of both of the opinion that climate change has happened since the beginning of time,” she says. You might be surprised to learn that she told me this in 2019, shortly after her family and several other crabbers had signed on to support a lawsuit by their trade association against the 30 largest oil companies in the world for their role in delaying action on climate. Not because of science, but because of fairness. They were shown various documents detailing how the fossil fuel industry had been preparing to not just weather climate impacts but continue to profit as the glaciers melted. “When we saw that information, that was a definite gamechanger,” she told me. “It was like, oh there’s this higher thing controlling the choices you’re allowed to have. And I would like to believe, in my Pollyanna world, that most people are operating on an honest, level playing field. But they don’t.” For French, it didn’t really matter whether climate change is caused by burning fossil fuels or natural planetary force. She sidestepped the origin story of climate change and instead focused on the injustice inherent in preparing your own business for trouble while telling everyone else not to worry. Climate change is affecting fisheries all over the world, of course, and displacing entire communities. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), climate change is already affecting every region on Earth, in multiple ways, from rising seas to intensifying storms and wildfires. The World Bank predicts more than 200 million people are likely to migrate over the next three decades because of extreme weather events or the disappearance of their homelands. In 2020, 30.7 million people were internally displaced by disasters, over three times more than conflict and violence (9.8 million people). That displacement – like other climate impacts – is hitting communities in the global south first, and will disproportionately affect poor and working-class people all over the world. Meanwhile, in the same decade during which scientists’ warnings about climate change have grown more dire, social science researchers have discovered that there is almost no correlation between public understanding of climate science and risk perception, and thus little to no relationship between grasping the science of climate change, believing the scientists’ warnings, and doing anything at all about it. There is a relationship, though, between Americans’ awareness of inequality or injustice and their willingness to support social change. A Norwegian study surveying the impact of various climate stories found that those with heroes and villains had “a large persuasive impact” on readers. A study of students in six countries found that a justice framework spurred young people to act on the climate. For more evidence that a righteous sense of indignation, rather than a scientific understanding of problems, drives social change, you need only look at history. The US entering the second world war (the war effort people most like to compare with what’s needed to address climate change)? Check. The civil rights, consumer protection, women’s rights, anti-war and gay rights movements? Check again. All driven by moral outrage at the power being wielded by the few over the many. Climate crisis is not a scientific or technical problem, it is an issue of justice and political will. Acting on it calls into question not just our energy source, but our power structures, catalysing widespread social change. The only thing that’s ever really succeeded in doing that are justice movements – public outcries over blatant injustice and a demand for change. If progressives and climate activists want to have any hope of spurring the kind of movement necessary to shift political and economic interests away from fossil fuels, it’s time to put aside “believe science” and instead embrace a broad fight for justice. Amy Westervelt is a climate journalist and the founder and executive producer of the Critical Frequency podcast networkBritons are concerned that hypocrisy by politicians will affect the public’s willingness to change their own behaviour to tackle the climate crisis – and doubt that Cop26 commitments can be met unless they are legally binding. The opinions come from the latest in the Net Zero Diaries, a project run by the consultancy Britain Thinks to examine evolving attitudes to the pursuit of a net zero emissions target, the first collation of public views from the cohort since the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. The focus group project involved 40 people keeping diaries of news events and their everyday climate encounters, and hearing from a range of experts. Post-Cop26, many said it was the first climate summit they had engaged with, with several feeling “excited and hopeful” at the gathering of world leaders. The researchers examining the diaries found those who were originally less engaged on climate issues tended to believe Cop26 had been a resounding success because of the extensive coverage. But even those who described themselves as having a strong interest in the environment were unable to name detailed specifics on what had been agreed on issues such as coal and deforestation. There was considerable criticism of the role of richer countries as opposed to aid for the developing world. One described the outcome as “mean-spirited as the developed world made pledges of support to the developing world yet had failed to uphold previous promises”. Two key moments in particular stood out to diarists from throughout the conference: the US president, Joe Biden, appearing to fall asleep during one discussion, and Boris Johnson flying to London for a dinner after opening the summit. “It clearly didn’t get people involved if they were falling asleep during it,” one said. “I feel Boris Johnson was very hypocritical travelling by plane in between this – surely he could have utilised technology or at least travelled by an electric vehicle,” another pointed out. Some diarists felt these moments undermined the importance of Cop26, and fuelled diarists’ concerns that powerful global leaders are not taking the issue seriously. Participants were also deeply sceptical about some of the agreements, and whether they would stick. “None of the agreements are legally binding and are phrased as quite vague statements,” one diarist wrote. “On the main points, the countries mainly responsible did not sign those agreements.” Most participants, given an article to read about the conference, picked up on the fact that commitments are self-policing and expressed concern that they would not be upheld, with those who were more engaged pointing to the fallout from the commitments made at the Paris summit. Overwhelmingly, the most popular and best-understood pledge was the global commitment to end and reverse deforestation, with commitments from leaders including Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro. Land-clearing of forests contributes almost a quarter of greenhouse gas emissions, with clearances for the growing of agricultural products such as palm oil, soy and beef. Several diarists said the pledge was believable because it linked specifically to a practice that drives the climate crisis and because it was backed by a multi-billion dollar finance package. The research was commissioned by the energy company Ovo, Citizens Advice, WWF and Lancaster University, and diarists were recruited to reflect differing views on climate, from engaged activists to low-engagement regular consumers.‘I have endeavoured in this Ghostly little book, to raise the Ghost of an Idea,” begins Charles Dickens in the preface to the 1843 novella A Christmas Carol. It is a story so inescapable in British culture that nearly everyone knows about miserly Ebenezer Scrooge learning the value of compassion and kindness after being visited by three ghosts in the early hours of Christmas morning. As well as the popular film adaptations that unfailingly appear on TV over the festive season, stage productions this year include a Jack Thorne adaptation starring Stephen Mangan at the Old Vic, a Mark Gatiss version at the Nottingham Playhouse and an adaptation at the Sherman theatre in Cardiff set in Wales and with a gender-swapped Scrooge. While many people enjoy the story as a timeless tale of redemption, few think of it as a work of serious political activism, but that was Dickens’s intention. According to Michael Slater, a biographer of the Victorian author, A Christmas Carol is “Dickens’s reaction to the attitude of the government and many of the ruling classes in the 1840s … saying, if the poor couldn’t get work and couldn’t look after themselves, they’d have to go to the workhouses.” This belief was part of a prevailing attitude in Victorian society that the poor were a problem to be dealt with, instead of people to be helped – a belief Dickens vehemently disagreed with. Dickens’s politics were shaped by his own childhood experiences. When his family fell on hard times, he was briefly taken out of school and sent to work in a factory. “He felt a tremendous sense of betrayal and humiliation”, says Slater, “which gave him a hugely powerful identification with the children of the poor, because he’d been there himself.” In 1843, Dickens had initially planned to publish a political pamphlet called An Appeal on Behalf of the Poor Man’s Child, but instead decided to plant “the ghost of an idea” in a festive story. Early in A Christmas Carol, for example, when a charity collector tells Scrooge that many people would rather die than go to a workhouse, Scrooge replies: “If they would rather die, they had better do it, and decrease the surplus population.” Modern readers might read this as a nasty character saying an almost cartoonishly nasty thing but in 1843 the phrase “surplus population” was a loaded term used to refer to the poor. “It’s the idea that if a man is born into this world, and his parents can’t look after him, and he can’t look after himself, he is ‘surplus’ … and the sooner he dies, the better,” Slater says. “People were terrified of overpopulation, especially among the poor, and they believed that if people brought children into the world that they couldn’t afford to keep, they were almost committing a crime. This is what Dickens hated, this attitude.” It was an attitude that stemmed from the work of well-known political economists such as Adam Smith, who believed that if everyone acted in their own self-interest, the invisible hand of the market would distribute resources. And taking this idea further was Reverend Thomas Malthus, who in 1798 wrote the controversial book An Essay on the Principle of Population. In it, he argued that population growth would eventually outstrip the food available and it was the natural way of things that the poorest people would starve to death, restoring the balance. “Malthus doesn’t tend to use the term ‘surplus population’ but by the early 1840s, when Dickens uses it there, that term is firmly linked to Malthus’s name. I absolutely think people would tie that comment from Scrooge to Malthus fairly directly,” says Professor Robert Mayhew, the author of several books about Malthus. Later in the story, the phrase “surplus population” is used again, this time by the Ghost of Christmas Present. When Scrooge sees the Cratchit family gathering around Tiny Tim and asks if the boy will live, the spirit invites him to think about “what the surplus is and where it is”, suggesting Scrooge might be more surplus than the sick child. “A Christmas Carol isn’t just a cheery, uplifting tale that we can mimic in various modern ways,” says Mayhew. “It’s a very seriously intended work of moral fiction and, perhaps because we tend to pigeonhole it as a Christmas story, we don’t read just how serious it is.” The message that Dickens had for Victorian Britain is increasingly pertinent, even though we may use different words to describe similar problems, Mayhew believes. “It’s interesting because we’re living right now with unprecedented levels of homelessness and individuals needing the support of food banks. We have the binary between extreme wealth on one hand and those inured to poverty on the other.” You feel the resonance of A Christmas Carol seems to get stronger every year.”It has been 10 years since I last stalled a car. I was 18 and drifting across several lanes of an A-road roundabout while my driving test examiner gripped his seat. It was my second attempt at taking the test and my brain had turned into sweaty spaghetti. As I casually cut in front of an HGV, the examiner gasped and demanded I take the next exit. I mirrored, signalled and manoeuvred, found a safe space to pull up, and promptly stalled metres from the curb. I failed – of course I did – and didn’t get back in the driver’s seat in a hurry. I finished school and went to university, always deferring the prospect of booking another test. Years passed, priorities shifted, and even though I kept telling myself that driving is a scourge on the environment, a decade of scrounging lifts from my friends and family has taken its toll. After one too many nights standing in the rain waiting for the bus, I decided it was time to get back behind the wheel. On a blindingly sunny but bitterly cold autumn morning, I emerge blinking into the light to meet my new instructor, Vikram. I find myself feeling more nervous than I expected as he starts the car. Are people staring at me? Do they think it’s embarrassing that I’m learning so late? He begins by taking me through various safety features with the help of a laminated picture book. I want to tell him that I know all of this already, but I soon realise I actually never knew how to open a car door properly (using the arm that is furthest away from the latch, known as the Dutch reach). After what feels like an eternity of animated diagrams and looking into assorted mirrors, I get behind the wheel, fire up the engine, get into gear – and stall. But Vikram reassures me this is to be expected and, over the next five minutes, I cruise around the block. Despite my approximately 10mph speeds, I return home exhausted yet full of adrenaline. When I meet Vikram again a week later, I am fizzing with fear and excitement. This time, I’m in the driving seat immediately, but the level of concentration needed reduces my communication to a pre-verbal gurgle. I am merely a recipient of Vikram’s calm instruction now, nervously taking him on a slow journey to nowhere. Yet, surprisingly, I don’t falter; I’m in third gear and I feel I could take myself anywhere – as long as Vikram and his dual control pedals were there, too. I keep driving for at least 45 minutes and, despite a police car following us down several streets, it’s a success. I am frustrated that I left it so long before trying again but pleased to be back, giving it another go. Vikram assures me that “smart drivers take less time to pass”, so I should be able to take my test again after only a dozen or so lessons. I’m not sure how much I can buy into that flattery yet – mentally or monetarily – but I feel more sure now that there is a time for everything, and that perhaps 18-year-old me just wasn’t ready. In that spirit, I am re-booking my theory test for the new year, with dreams of driving myself to see friends far and wide by this time in 2022 – without stalling at the first roundabout.A review into crossbow ownership has been ordered by the home secretary just days after a 19-year-old man was arrested at Windsor Castle on Christmas Day allegedly carrying the weapon. The Metropolitan police are investigating a video, which has been linked to the suspect, which appears to show a masked figureholding a crossbow and saying they want to “assassinate the Queen”. A Home Office spokesperson said the department had been instructed by Priti Patel to look at possible ways to “strengthen controls” on the weapons. The spokesperson said: “Crossbows are subject to controls, and legislation is in place to deal with those who use them as a weapon. “At the home secretary’s request, we are considering options to strengthen controls on crossbows. Work on this has been ongoing throughout the year, and we keep all relevant laws under review to maintain public safety.” The man arrested on Christmas Day within the grounds of the castle in Berkshire where the Queen is in residence has been sectioned under the Mental Health Act, the Metropolitan police said. According to the Daily Telegraph, Whitehall sources said officials had been instructed to “incorporate any lessons” from the arrest into a review of crossbow laws which was ordered earlier this year. Under current legislation, it is an offence for anyone under 18 to buy or possess a crossbow and for anyone to sell a crossbow to someone aged under 18. Crossbows may also be considered offensive weapons and are prohibited from being carried in a public place without lawful authority or reasonable excuse. Demands for tighter regulation of crossbows initially came after the five-day inquest into the death of Shane Gilmer in April. The 30-year-old died after his neighbour, Anthony Lawrence, broke into his house in January 2018 and shot him and his partner, Laura Sugden, who survived the attack. The coroner, Prof Paul Marks, submitted a report to Patel in May in which he said he was concerned there was “no ongoing control, record or licensing requirement for (crossbows)”, unlike firearms. On Monday the father of the 19-year-old arrested on Christmas Day reportedly told MailOnline: “Something’s gone horribly wrong with our son and we are trying to figure out what.” “We’ve not had a chance to speak to him but are trying to get him the help he needs,” he said. “From our perspective, we are going through a difficult time. We are trying to resolve this issue and it’s not easy.”Joe Root insisted he will wait until the end of the Ashes tour to discuss his future as Test captain and called on English cricket to “reset” its approach to the red-ball format after Australia claimed a series victory in the space of 12 days. In the aftermath of England’s innings defeat in Melbourne, an unassailable 3-0 scoreline sealed by an embarrassing collapse to 68 all out on the third morning, Root was asked whether he wanted to continue in a role that has brought an English record 27 Test wins but seven defeats from eight in Australia. “The series isn’t over yet. We’ve got two very big games and, more than anything, it’d be wrong to look past that,” replied Root, who was among the victims as the debutant Scott Boland managed remarkable bowling figures of six for seven from four overs. “I’m in the middle of a very important series. My energy has to be all about trying to win the next game. I can’t be selfish and start thinking about myself. I think more than anything you’ve got to keep looking to do everything we can to get the players in the best possible place to go and win Test matches.” Root had earlier been removed for 28 during 80 minutes of carnage, meaning his own personal annus mirabilis with the bat fell 80 runs short of breaking Mohammad Yousuf’s Test record of 1,788 in a calendar year. Ultimately others have fallen short here, with Rory Burns, dropped in Melbourne, the next best with 530 runs in 2021. On the third morning they also registered their 54th duck of 2021, equalling a record set in 1998. This was also England’s ninth defeat since the start of January, equalling another record for a calendar year. In 2016, after eight Test losses, the year ended with a jaded Alastair Cook stepping down from the captaincy. It may be that the decision is taken out of Root’s hands, with both he and the head coach, Chris Silverwood, set to have their positions reviewed by Ashley Giles when the director of men’s cricket arrives in Australia next week before the fourth Test. The problems appear to go beyond captain and coach, however, with this latest Ashes trouncing furthering calls for English cricket to re-evaluate its approach to the first-class game. Root hopes a reboot occurs, similar to the one that followed England’s harrowing 2015 World Cup campaign and then led to Eoin Morgan lifting the trophy four years later. Root said: “It’s a big part of where the game is at in our country right now that the only place you can really learn [to play Test cricket] is in the hardest environment for what is quite a young batting group. “They’re having to learn out here in the harshest environments. You look back at 2015 and the reset that happened in white-ball cricket, and maybe that’s something that needs to be happening in our red-ball game as well.” In the short term the England team are dealing with a Covid-19 outbreak among the near 60-strong touring party that has seen three coaches and three family members test positive for the virus and be forced to isolate, and could yet threaten the completion of a tour that, after Sydney, concludes with a day-night Test in Hobart. Both sets of players were cleared by emergency PCR tests before the third day was allowed to commence at the MCG, with additional testing to take place over the coming days. For Australia the series win caps a rewarding couple of months that began with a surprise victory at the T20 World Cup in the United Arab Emirates. However their captain, Pat Cummins, declined to be drawn on the future of the head coach, Justin Langer, whose position has been the subject of much debate over the past 12 months. Cummins, who replaced Tim Paine before the start of the series, said: “I think we’ll savour this victory today and continue the Ashes. I don’t think today is the day to speculate on [Langer’s future]. We’ll all sit down together after this series. His contract is up for renewal in a few months and we’ll deal with that then.” On his side’s Ashes campaign to date, Cummins said: “It doesn’t just feel like a three-nil victory, it really feels like we’re setting ourselves up for the next few years as well. “We’ve got seven players in the top 10 of the world at the moment – four batters [Marnus Labuschagne, Steve Smith, David Warner and Travis Head] and three bowlers [Cummins, Josh Hazlewood and Mitchell Starc]. “We probably haven’t strung the performances over the last couple of years that we probably expected of ourselves. So I think this really consolidates that we are a really good, strong Test cricket side and it’s a good sign for the next few years.”It’s vaguely amusing to recall now that for much of the year, the very existence of this Ashes series was the subject of fraught, board-level speculation. Tense negotiations were conducted between Cricket Australia and their counterparts in England. State governments, federal government, public health experts and players all had to bestow their approval. Would the 2021-22 Ashes happen at all? Well, as it turned out, not really. Around 850 overs separated the dismissal of Rory Burns on the first morning in Brisbane and the dismissal of Jimmy Anderson on the third morning in Melbourne: the series decided in a little over nine days of cricket. And so as the victorious Australians celebrated wildly on the MCG outfield, it was possible to wonder whether they were overdoing things a touch. Was there any real satisfaction to be taken in despatching an opponent this easily? Did it not all feel a little hollow? A little comfortable? A little embarrassing? But then perhaps we are guilty here of reducing the contest as a whole to England’s desiccated level. After all, to play Test cricket for Australia in 2021 still essentially means something. Winning Test matches for Australia still means something. The Ashes still means something, and not just as a rivalry or as a commercial concern but as a basic test of sporting ultimacy, a seeker of truth, a gauge of character. Nobody exemplified this better than Scott Boland, the country’s newest cricketing hero after taking six for seven on debut. Boland is a fine bowler and a lovely story to boot, but he will be the first to admit that none of this really made sense. Never again will he enjoy the serendipity of being able to face this opposition, on this ground, at this point in their sporting trajectory. All he really had to do was turn up on time, put his socks on and not get no-balled for throwing. And yet in running in hard and doing his best, Boland accorded this contest a measure of respect that England had long since mislaid. What does it mean to play Test cricket for England in 2021? This is a more contested question. England have issued caps to 25 players this calendar year, from Jofra Archer to James Bracey, Dan Lawrence to Dom Bess, and it has long become impossible to discern who deserves what. Somewhere amid the bubbles and the brain-fades, the revamps and the rotations, the very point of the England Test team has become somehow blunted, dissolved, obscured. None of this makes it inevitable that you will get rolled over for 68 in bright sunshine. But it certainly doesn’t help. A thought exercise: if you had to reselect an England squad for this Ashes tour, knowing what we do now, would it have been possible to do anything differently? Maybe you send out a distress flare to Dom Sibley or Liam Livingstone or even Darren Stevens. Maybe you decide not to rush a half-paced Ben Stokes back from injury. But the raw materials of this team do not fundamentally change. This is what there is. Instinctively, we want to believe that there are 11 cricketers in England capable of collectively scoring more than 68 in a completed Test innings. But maybe there aren’t. This is, after all, a game England have been playing for a while. It’s tempting to regard this as a nadir, but England were all out for 67 five Ashes Tests ago. Before that there was the 85 against Ireland, the 58 against New Zealand, eight wickets for Roston Chase, 10 wickets in a session against Bangladesh. Every time lessons were learned, approaches were altered, decks were shuffled, and the same thing happened again. Nobody gets to act surprised at any of this. Naturally, there is a certain sense of climax here. Joe Root and Chris Silverwood will probably pay for this latest debacle with their jobs. Silverwood is clearly a capable coach, but something about this team and this moment appears to have detached him from reality, like a waiter in a restaurant talking you through the specials while the kitchen slowly catches fire behind him. Root is approaching five years as captain and either there’s nothing more he can do, or he’s actually making things worse. Either way, best to move on and concentrate on the one skill in which he genuinely has a claim to greatness. And yet, what is the wider aim here? Where is the institutional will to turn this team around? Will it really come from the England and Wales Cricket Board, which derives the vast majority of its revenue from selling home Tests and short-form cricket to punters and broadcasters? Producing Test teams that win big overseas series may be very nice, but it doesn’t keep the tills ringing. Staging a high-quality County Championship at the height of summer may produce better cricketers, but it won’t keep the bonuses flowing. Besides, if you think about it, England really has no divine right to be good at this. It is by no means inevitable that England will be good at Test cricket again. This isn’t Pakistan or India. The game does not live and breathe in our streets or our public spaces or our school system. History and tradition aside, cricket does not flow through the national bloodstream any more than judo or surfing or esports. Perhaps a close parallel is with the West Indies around the turn of the century: powered by one of its greatest batsmen (for Brian Lara, read Joe Root) and two of its greatest bowlers (for Ambrose and Walsh, read Anderson and Broad), and yet infected with a basic, complacent decadence. Over time they would recover their dignity. They would be competitive. They would occasionally even win. But their true calling –driven largely by commerce and circumstance – would be to produce brilliant short-form cricketers for the global marketplace. As for Test cricket, the sun had already set and risen somewhere else. In the short term, of course, England have no greater objective than to summon the basic species pride to make the last two Tests vaguely competitive. We’re not even talking a win here. A century, a partnership, even a fifth day would feel worthwhile at this point. In the longer term, meanwhile, there are broader existential questions to be answered. What is this team for? What does it want to be? Why should people care about it? English cricket has spent years labouring under its many delusions. The greatest of all would be to assume that this is as bad as it gets.Punctuation is so 1990s. The comma is disappearing, the full stop has come to a full stop, and the semicolon has been repurposed as a pair of winking eyes. While the exclamation mark remains in rude health, the fate of the apostrophe seems especially bleak. Even the Apostrophe Protection Society has given up the fight, calling an end to its activities in 2019 and declaring a victory for “ignorance and laziness”. Debates over the correct use of punctuation have raged since English printers began to adopt the fancy new marks to supplement the simple virgule of medieval scribes (the ancestor of today’s forward slash), used singularly to serve a range of functions. The recent release of a large electronic corpus of written English from the past 30 years by Lancaster University allows us to track this rapid shift to a plainer prose. Short messages typed in haste dispense with old-fashioned commas and stuffy semicolons in favour of more informal dashes. Text messages now often sent as individual sentences mean the full stop has become surplus to requirement; including one is seen to signal a deliberate desire to be blunt or convey hostility, similar to adding the word “period” in speech: “That’s enough – period.” Although being offended by a full stop is often framed as yet more evidence of the snowflakery of generation Z, they are not the only ones who can be intimidated by aggressive punctuation. In 2013, the US navy dropped its policy of requiring all communications to be written in capitals because its sailors objected to being constantly shouted at. It seems ironic that Donald Trump, known for his haphazard use of the upper-case – especially when identifying FAKE NEWS – has warned users of his new social media platform against excessive use of capital letters as part of its commitment to polite debate. In recent years the debate over proper pointing has become especially polarised, as new technologies and an assortment of smiley faces threaten it with extinction. These changes in the uses of traditional punctuation marks are frequently reported as evidence of falling standards of literacy and sloppy grammar. During this summer’s examination season, some universities, considering the rules of standard English to be elitist, announced a decision not to penalise poor punctuation in assessments in an attempt to promote inclusivity. This decision to wage a “woke war” on standard English (in the words of the Daily Telegraph) has been robustly challenged by a recent report from the Office for Students, the higher education regulator, insisting that students be assessed on their proficiency in written English and that to do otherwise is to undermine the rigour of the assessment process. The punctuation won this one. Another symbol that’s on its way out is the apostrophe, reflecting a much longer period of confusion over its correct use. The fact that it combines two functions – contraction and possession – makes it ripe for all kinds of misapplication, especially in its/it’s where those two uses come into conflict. Despite Lynne Truss’s desire to hack up those who muddle their itses and bury them in an unmarked grave, this is an entirely understandable mistake; in Shakespeare’s day “its” was correctly spelled “it’s”, reflecting its origin as a possessive form of the neuter pronoun “it”. Calls to drop the apostrophe go back to George Bernard Shaw, who refused to pepper his pages with these “uncouth bacilli”. Lewis Carroll took the opposite view, insisting that the proper spellings of “can’t” and “shan’t” should be “ca’n’t” and “sha’n’t”. The Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland author would have despaired of the recent trend to omit the apostrophe in possessive plurals; in the case of an Australian man who complained about his employer’s unwillingness to pay his “employees superannuation”, the oversight could end up costing him dearly since he is being sued for defamation. Since he was referring only to himself, he should have written “employee’s”; the spelling without the apostrophe implied that the entire workforce had been disadvantaged. It seems that apostrophes do matter after all. Truss can hang up her axe; Carroll can stand down the Queen of Hearts. For now, at least, it seems apostrophes are safe. The exception to this trend towards jettisoning these archaic dots and squiggles is the exclamation mark, which we are using more than ever. Originating in the middle ages as the “point of admiration”, this has become more a point of self-admiration, or a means of laughing at one’s own jokes, in the words of F Scott Fitzgerald. But excessive use of exclamation marks (or “bangorrhea”, to use the correct medical term) isn’t simply driven by a desire to overhype our messages; instead, research shows that these marks now carry a range of functions. The exclamation mark was formerly restricted to identifying what Dr Johnson called “pathetical statements” (ones arousing our sympathies), a function reflected in its alternative monikers “astonisher”, “gasper”, “screamer” and “shriek”. Today we wield these marks when offering greetings and expressions of thanks, challenging a hostile viewpoint, trying to defuse an argument, or to bolster an apology: “Sorry, I’m too busy!” The widespread use of exclamation marks to convey irony can be the source of some confusion. How should I respond to a tweet reading simply: “What a fascinating article!”? Perhaps this is the moment to resurrect one of many proposed devices to signal sarcasm: from the reversed exclamation mark of the 17th century to 2010’s SarcMark (similar to a reversed 6 with a dot in the middle). Ambrose Bierce, author of the Devil’s Dictionary (1911), coined the snigger point: a horizontal round bracket resembling a smile, thereby anticipating the emoticon. This has now been replaced by the upside-down face emoji, an ingenious invention that has solved all our problems 🙃. These markers all suffer from a lack of widespread recognition, combined with the fact that irony is usually intended to be subtle and ambiguous. After all, if we really want to ensure that someone doesn’t misunderstand our teasingly playful comment, they can always simply say: “What a boring article!” Simon Horobin is a professor in the Department of English Literature and Language at the University of OxfordWhen Britain fully left the European Union in January, it marked the start of a very difficult 12 months for the entrepreneur Rob Law, whose Trunki children’s suitcases used to sell well in mainland Europe. “We’ve had so many logistical challenges,” he said. “It’s been the perfect storm.” While trade has picked up since the start of the year, supply bottlenecks and the coronavirus Omicron variant have added to the challenges posed by the end of the transition period. In 2021, companies across Britain have suffered from the worst trade disruption in recent memory, as problems caused by Brexit collided with the pandemic. However, it is Brexit that Law fears will have a permanent impact. “There’s always going to be more cost, more delays; it’s never going to be as smooth as it used to be,” he said. In November, the government committed to boosting UK exports of goods and services from £600bn to £1tn by 2030, under the banner “Made in the UK, sold to the world”. A year-end look at what Brexit has delivered so far suggests reaching that target will take more than a 12-point plan and a new slogan. The most up-to-date figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), which cover the first 10 months of the year, show goods exports to the rest of the world are down by 14%, or more than £40bn, compared with 2019. For UK trade with the EU, exports have risen by 6%, or about £7bn, in the year to October compared with the same period in 2020, in a recovery from the worst economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. However, they remain 13%, or about £18bn, down on the same periods in 2019 and 2018. . The aggregate figures obscure how certain sectors have suffered dramatic shortfalls, in what could mark permanent structural changes. Outbound shipments of clothing and footwear to the EU are both down by about 60% compared with 2019. Meat exports have plunged by almost 25%, vegetables and fruit are down by an even steeper 40%. Fishing, held up by Brexiters as a sector that would benefit from being unshackled from EU rules, is now nursing a 15% fall in exports. The unravelling of British textile exports could be down to “rule of origin” requirements, which require a proportion of a product to be domestically produced to benefit from a trade deal. This is because a high proportion of clothing sold by UK retailers is made in Asia or the US, making them ineligible for the tariffs negotiated in the post-Brexit trade deal. Michael Gasiorek, director of the UK Trade Policy Observatory at the University of Sussex, said: “In textiles and clothing it is almost certainly associated with rules of origin and having to pay tariffs on exports to the EU; in food products it is probably to do with customs controls and the costs of checks on standards, and possibly from transport and logistic complications.” Fish and meat exporters say they have been hit by higher costs for sending lorry shipments through ports, with an army of extra workers required to deal with additional bureaucracy and paperwork. Figures from the ONS show more than a quarter of firms currently trading in the UK have seen a rise in their costs. Other data shows UK exporters have been losing market share. Work by the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis on trade by advanced economies shows goods exports for the month of September were just 1.3% below the monthly average in 2018, after adjusting for inflation. In the UK, however, real exports were almost 15% down in the same month. Few expect the free trade deals struck by the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and her successor as trade minister, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, will make up for the drop in business – the EU is the UK’s nearest and biggest market, and still accounts for almost half of trade. Official government figures estimate the free trade deals signed so far – including those with Australia, New Zealand, and Japan – will add less than 1% to UK GDP over 15 years. A trade deal with the US would produce the same as these small deals combined, experts say, still not enough to make up the EU shortfall. “It’s crazy what they’ve done,” said Angus MacNeil, the SNP chair of the Commons international trade committee. “I compare it to saying we need six or seven planets populated entirely by Americans to make up for Brexit.” For Trunki, sales in Britain are back to pre-pandemic levels as families bought more wheelie suitcases and bags in anticipation of going on holiday, but EU sales are still at 80% of 2019 levels. Law plans to open a German distribution hub to sidestep delays and red tape for shipments sent directly to customers from the firm’s Plymouth factory, after an earlier plan to set up a base in the Netherlands started to unravel. He is optimistic that despite the challenges he will keep trading, even with the extra barriers. “It can’t be as bad as this year, it can’t be as bad as January with not being able to get things out of the country. It can’t be,” he said. Exports to the EU also ground to a halt in January for North Shields-based recycling firm ECS Textiles, stymied by border checks and paperwork for the assorted items of clothing, toys and bric-a-brac it would send to Latvia by sea each week. The firm has since given up on selling to the EU, having found a buyer in Russia and Belarus instead. “The [Brexit] deal was obviously done very last-minute, and it was very slapdash,” said James Officer, sales manager at the firm. While some might say expanding horizons outside of the EU is part of the point of Brexit, Officer disagrees. Selling to Russia and Belarus isn’t as profitable, and the countries he now does business with carry significantly more risk. As Belarus descended into political turmoil, and the UK introduced financial sanctions to punish the Lukashenko regime, ECS almost went bust after its bank account was frozen for nine weeks because it was receiving payments from the country. The local Labour MP, Alan Campbell, stepped in and helped resolve the situation. “You’re out of the frying pan with Europe and into more hot water in Belarus. Brexit absolutely was not a good thing for our business. I haven’t seen any benefit,” Officer said. Britain’s chaotic year for trade is not all down to Brexit. Major economies the world over have faced Covid disruption – with lockdowns in China and the worst backlogs on record in southern California – caused by pandemic restrictions, shortages of lorry drivers and mismatches in supply and demand. In the UK, car exports are down 30% on 2019 levels, held back in large part by shortages of microchips around the world. Chemical exports, on the other hand, have performed more strongly than anticipated, up 5% on 2019 levels, despite warnings the sector stood to be among the biggest losers from Brexit. Chemicals have been in part protected because regulations covering the industry remain in line with EU rules – for the time being. While economists say it is difficult to disentangle the effects of Covid and Brexit, many business leaders argue leaving the EU has made a bad situation worse. There is concern over a further worsening of relations with France, and if negotiations over the Northern Ireland protocol end in stalemate. Samuel Tombs, the chief UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics, said: “A renewed trade spat likely would ensure that global manufacturers remain reluctant to locate production facilities in Britain, thereby undermining exports in the medium term.” He cautioned that the competitiveness of UK goods could start to decline “indefinitely” as tougher migration rules push up labour costs and a departure from EU safety standards restricts where products can be sold. The £1tn export target is likely to be about 67% higher than total trade volumes this year. It might not be reached at all. On current form, said Tombs, the target “looks like another Brexit fantasy”.Workers at the American Red Cross charity are speaking out about what they say is low pay, chronic understaffing, poor working conditions throughout the pandemic and proposed cuts to their healthcare. “The morale is at an all time low in my 23 years of history here,” said Darryl Ford, a collection technician at American Red Cross in Warner Robins, Georgia, and president of local union branch USW L254. He described Red Cross’ response to the pandemic as business as usual, as the non-profit ramped up blood drives anywhere they were able to hold them, since many typical blood drive sites closed when the pandemic hit. Ford also criticized the American Red Cross for doing little to nothing to clarify to the public that the blood donation drives were just testing for Covid-19 antibodies, not performing Covid-19 testing and providing inadequate PPE to workers. Due to the low pay, scheduling problems and working conditions, Ford noted that American Red Cross in his region experienced workers leaving throughout the pandemic. “People are quitting,” added Ford. “It’s a slap in the face to the employees for management to say ‘we’re going to cut your healthcare and not pay you anything, while we’re going to work from home and be safe.’” The Coalition of American Red Cross Unions, which represents about 4,900 workers from 11 international unions at American Red Cross across the US, is bargaining with the American Red Cross over the national addendum to the unions’ contracts, which expires on 31 March 2022. The unions are pushing for wage increases, to preserve existing healthcare plans and for solutions to address chronic staffing shortages around the US. The American Red Cross reported a revenue of more than $2.8bn in the 2020 fiscal year and the CEO of the non-profit received a salary of more than $700,000. The majority of its revenue, approximately $1.73bn, went toward biomedical services, the part of the organization that collects blood donations and sells them to hospitals and healthcare providers. The American Red Cross provides about 40% of the nation’s blood supply. Workers who collect and manage blood donations for the non-profit continued working throughout the Covid-19 pandemic as essential workers. Alexis Zebrowski, a member of CWA Local 1118, worked as an aide specialist at the branch in Albany, New York for one year before quitting in November 2021 over the low pay around minimum wage, understaffing and working conditions through the pandemic. As an aide specialist, she collected platelet, plasma and blood donations, conducted medical physicals of donors and took patient histories and helped run blood donation drives, which she noted were consistently understaffed and resulted in work shifts that went at least one hour or longer past her scheduled ten-hour shift without being able to take breaks. “I can go work at any fast food restaurant and make more money,” said Zebrowski. “I was sick of the pay and all the constant bargaining and everything. The contracts still keep getting pushed out because they don’t want to give us a raise or even acknowledge anything we do for the company. It’s a slap in the face to work for the amount of money we are working for.” She said the low pay and forced overtime led to worsening understaffing through the pandemic, with management rushing new hires through training and blaming existing staff when errors were made as a result. “When we’re working, we’re expected to work at 100%, but we never have 100% in return,” added Zebrowski. “We’re always forced to come into work no matter what, sick or not, we were expected to be there. Otherwise, we’d be fearing for our job because we’d be too worried about being written up for attendance.” Bobbie Terrell, a collections technician and member of AFSCME Council 31 at a branch in Peoria, Illinois, criticized American Red Cross for responding to chronic staffing shortages in her area by offering $1,500 sign on bonuses for new hires and paying them higher wages, while the only appreciation or benefit that longtime employees have received is pizza. “The people they’ve hired since November are significantly making more money than the staff who have been here for years,” said Terrell. “That’s a major slap in the face to the current staff that have worked through this whole pandemic and not been offered anything but pizza.” She also expressed frustration with American Red Cross’s proposal to cut the employees’ health insurance benefits, saying she is concerned that cutting healthcare will worsen staffing problems. She also criticized the organization for not paying workers to quarantine after being exposed to donors or coworkers who test positive for Covid-19. “Staff are being sent home for 10 to 14 days at a time, unpaid,” added Terrell. “We’re on the frontlines doing the job for them of collecting these life-saving products and basically they’re telling us that it’s at our own risk.” A spokesperson for American Red Cross claimed the non-profit plans to offer wage increases and retention bonuses to existing employees. But the spokesperson added that the group has not yet reached an agreement with unions on the terms and how the raises will be implemented, in addition to ongoing negotiations over healthcare. They noted employees were provided with pay to quarantine in Spring 2020 and from 21 November 2020 to 2 April 2021. “Across the country, many employers are facing staffing shortages as a result of pandemic employment trends and vaccination requirements, which have exacerbated the challenges to recruit and retain staff,” said the spokesperson. “Over the past few months, the Red Cross actively recruited to fill vacancies on our biomedical services teams and have made significant investments in additional resources and tools to seek out and attract candidates, including new hire bonuses.” The spokesperson added: “Our intention is to reach a fair and amicable agreement with the Coalition of Red Cross Unions and all of our local unions.”At the entrance of Kibagare, a slum in Nairobi’s outskirts, boots of dead gangsters dangle from electricity wires that hover over ramshackle homes of wood and iron sheets. With little state protection from crime, angry local people will often take the law into their own hands and beat an offender who is caught in the act, sometimes to death. Throughout a decade of crime and drug abuse, Peter Wainaina, 32, narrowly escaped death on several occasions, until he retired from the underworld in 2009. Since then, he has guided hundreds of criminals to do the same. “I suffered at the hands of the police,” claims Wainaina. “I was tortured and unlawfully detained. But I also met good police who gave me a second chance, which I am now extending to my peers.” Wainaina’s initiative comes amid growing public distrust of the police, with allegations of extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests, and corruption. Slums Network Reform (SNR) uses his experience and networks in the world of crime to bridge the gap between a disgruntled population and a police force often accused of brutality. Born and bred in Kibagare, Wainaina, who is called “the teacher” or kiongozi by those he has helped, was introduced to crime at 12, when his father abandoned the family and he became its sole provider. Like the rest of Nairobi’s slum dwellers, who account for about 60% of the city’s population of 4.4 million, his life was a daily struggle with poverty, despair and a lack of basic services, as well as rampant crime, which Kenya’s police have been accused of using as a pretext for brutal force. “Most criminals hail from slums. Inequalities in the society lead them to find a better life through crime,” says campaign manager at Amnesty International Kenya, Steve Musau. “Being in poverty also stirs up peer pressure where those [involved] in drugs or crime tend to inspire others negatively.” Unable to find a job, Wainaina quickly moved from petty crime to armed robbery and, fuelled by hard drugs, climbed the gang hierarchy. Dodging arrests and surviving mob justice, Wainaina earned the nickname “2Sharp” and became one of the city’s most wanted criminals. In 2009, two encounters with the authorities led him to start afresh. A botched armed robbery left his friends scattered: some dead, some escaped. He was arrested then released; the arresting officer gave him a home-drawn tattoo of a shooting gun, a reminder of the second chance he was being given. But the next day, Wainaina was detained by a different officer and alleges he was unlawfully held for months, tortured emotionally and physically, and made to witness the brutality meted out to other criminals. On his release, Wainaina gave up crime, devoted himself to church, and in 2016 founded SNR, seeking out criminals and encouraging them to reform. He is now married and has two children. Kelvin Mwanga’s life was changed by Wainaina. Once a criminal who mugged and threatened people, he now works as a bus conductor on the busy Waiyaki Way, west of the capital. Mwanga, 26, says Wainaina’s efforts to turn him away from crime began in 2016. “At first, I wouldn’t hear him out. It was not until 2019, when I was caught by a mob and then arrested that 2Sharp’s persuasion made me decide to change,” he says. Wainaina supported him at court and secured him a job. He is saving to buy his own bus with Criviv Sakwa, 26, who was also helped by Wainaina. Haroun Kibogo, 29, a former gang member, says poverty made him drop out of school as a teenager and become a fraudster. After his arrest, he says 2Sharp helped him “resonate with life’s reality”, and “see the bigger picture and the positive things life can offer”. Kibogo is now a family man and a shopkeeper and is part of Wainaina’s initiative. Through seminars and workshops, Wainaina reaches people in the slums known for dangerous gangs – Kibagare, Mathare, Dandora, and Kibera. Partnering with clergy, his connections among gangsters and the police, as well as his scars from the mob attack and lynching he survived, are key to connecting with an underworld inaccessible to the state, and to negotiating bail outs and pardons for criminals. “Peter’s initiative is quite transformative since he uses a different approach to avert crime,” says Musau. “His engagement with these criminals is also enhancing dialogue and good relationships with community members, in that parents seek his help and he gets their children out of crime.” A Nairobi-based senior police officer, speaking anonymously, says Wainaina and his colleagues’ efforts “make our work easier but we can’t say he’s doing our job”. “The community has a responsibility to ensure there are no criminals among them and Wainaina has been instrumental in this endeavour. Through him some young boys here are now making clean money in the transport sector, otherwise today they would be rotting in prison,” he says. But there are limitations. Wainaina’s resources restrict his reach. Aside from small donations he may get from families he has helped, he has no funding. Gangsters assume he is well off and demand hefty handouts, he says, but he is not always able to pay off criminals’ debts to help them leave crime. Kibogo, Wainaina’s childhood friend, recalls how one of the former gang members who had agreed to change returned to crime and met with an untimely death. “My heart was broken when a boy we were getting out of crime died after going back for a lack of $30, which he needed to start a business,” Kibogo says. “He was hit [on purpose] by a driver who saw him snatch a phone, and the mob descended on him to his death.” This article has been published in collaboration with Egab. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:This year has been excruciating for many Americans who have been battered by Covid, extreme weather disasters and political discord, but for one individual 2021 will be remembered for having propelled her into national prominence. Rachel Levine has shattered not one but two major glass ceilings this year. In March, she became the first openly transgender person to win confirmation in the US Senate after Joe Biden nominated her as assistant secretary of health. Then in October she was sworn in as the first openly transgender four-star officer as an admiral and head of the US Public Health Service Commissioned Corps. At that exalted rank she gets to wear the blue uniform of the corps, which though non-military is one of eight uniformed services. It’s been a heady 12 months, having been plucked from relative obscurity as health secretary for Pennsylvania on to the national stage. Levine’s meteoric rise is all the more impressive given how few openly trans federal officials there are in American public life. In an interview, Levine told the Guardian that she was touched not only by the honour and privilege of her new roles, but also by the “profound responsibility that I take very seriously”. She added that she would be looking to make an impact “both in terms of my advocacy through the LGBTQ+ community and also through the policy changes we can make across health and human services and the administration”. As the new head of the 6,000-strong commissioned corps, tasked with leading the federal government’s response to a multitude of health crises, Levine now finds herself in the thick of several raging disputes. Most poignantly for her, as the highest-profile trans official in the country, she is at the centre of the debate around appropriate treatments for individuals considering gender transition, especially adolescents. A graduate of Harvard and Tulane Medical School, she was trained as a pediatrician and specialised in adolescent medicine at Penn State. As such she has both personal and professional skin in the game. Levine said her starting point when thinking about trans youth was how at risk they are. “Transgender youth are very vulnerable,” she said. “They are vulnerable to being bullied, to discrimination and harassment.” Sensitive and supportive medical care has overwhelmingly positive outcomes, she said. “There is so much evidence that trans youth, when they are supported by their family and community and receive the standards of care treatment, they have excellent physical and mental health outcomes.” By contrast, “trans youth who are not accepted, do not have support from family or community, do not have access to the standard of care treatment, have big mental health issues. So we need to empower transgender youth, we need to nurture them, not discriminate against them.” In May, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) announced through its civil rights office that section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act, which bans discrimination on grounds of sex, would henceforth include sexual orientation and gender identity. The decision, which is being challenged by religious groups, requires health providers in receipt of federal funds to offer gender transition treatment. Levine said a priority for next year would be to roll out that rule change across the nation. “We are going to work to promulgate and distribute that for health insurance throughout the US,” she said. Much of the toxicity around the trans debate, Levine believes, is whipped up by partisan posturing. “A lot of this is political. There are those who are using these issues as wedge issues in the upcoming election.” She has personal experience of being targeted by such hostility. Rand Paul, the Republican senator from Kentucky, was rebuked during Levine’s confirmation hearing for his “harmful misrepresentation” of transgender surgery as a form of genital mutilation. Jim Banks, a Republican congress member from Indiana, was temporarily suspended from Twitter in October for willfully misgendering Levine. In a tweet, he said: “The title of first female four-star officer gets taken by a man”. In addition to such politically laden hatred, Levine thinks that fear plays a large role in driving much of the transphobic agenda. “People fear what they don’t understand and have experience of. I’m hoping that my appointment, and my being open and out and working for the nation’s public health, will lead to less fear and more acceptance. That’s my goal.” How does she cope with the virulent personal attacks? She said that as a pediatrician, treating sick children, she learned how to compartmentalize. “I sublimate that. I take those challenges and I throw them into my work, and it motivates me even more.” The transgender debate is just a small part of Levine’s daily workload. There is no shortage of health crises piling up on her desk, not least the gathering storm of Omicron and the resultant battle to get millions of Americans boosted. Within the fight against Covid, Levine said she was especially ardent about addressing the health inequities that have been exposed by the pandemic. “Covid-19 like nothing else has shown the depth and breadth of health disparities in the United States, particularly among individuals of colour,” she said. She is also passionate about directing the resources of the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps towards dealing with the health consequences of the climate crisis. As the crisis deepens, she said, the US is likely to be affected by the spread of vector-borne diseases such as those carried by mosquitoes. Already vulnerable communities are being assailed by extreme weather conditions. Life-threatening heatwaves have been found to disproportionately affect communities of colour. Levine highlighted the plight of many agricultural workers. “Farmworkers shouldn’t have to risk their health, even risk dying, due to extreme heat just to put food on their family’s table,” she said. “Minimum-wage workers shouldn’t have to decide between cooling their homes with electricity or paying for medication. Families across the country shouldn’t have to worry about safe drinking water.” Levine said that as the dangers of the climate crisis gather pace, the role of federal government was to help vulnerable communities build resilience. “The health equity lens is critical,” she said, “as we look at climate change and fight for environmental justice.”Next month marks the return of one of the UK’s most enduring and versatile singer-songwriters: Elvis Costello, whose new album with his band The Imposters, The Boy Named If, is out on 14 January. Alongside the release, he’ll answer Guardian readers’ questions, which you can post in the comments section below. Initially rooted in the righteous anger of the punk scene and the populism of pub rock, Costello has been a fount of strident, melodious songwriting since his breakthrough in 1977. Oliver’s Army, Pump It Up and I Don’t Want to Go to Chelsea are defining moments in the new-wave era, while ballads such as Alison remain equally celebrated. His impeccable and far-ranging taste meant that soul, jazz and country music were also folded into his sound as the 80s progressed, but his pen remained sharp: commerce, Margaret Thatcher and – on the peerlessly beautiful Shipbuilding – the cruelty of war were among his lyrical targets. He was also a producer on classic albums for bands such as Squeeze and the Specials, and other collaborators down the years have included Paul McCartney and Burt Bacharach. Opera, New Orleans R&amp;B, a ballet score, orchestral works, piano jazz … Costello has stayed inquisitive and adventurous in the decades since, his creativity only briefly curtailed in 2018 by an “aggressive” prostate cancer which he managed to beat. Now back into a groove of regular albums and tours, Costello, 67, is ready to answer your questions on his remarkably varied career. Post them in the comments section below by 3 January. We will publish his answers in the 7 January edition of the Film &amp; Music print section, and also online.By turns fetid and febrile, pyretic and putrid, and all things hot and sticky, this unique avant garde work is the result of a collaboration between writer-director Stefan Lernous and his colleagues at Abattoir Fermé, a theatre company based in the Belgian Flemish-speaking city of Mechelen. It has a plot, of sorts: there’s a guy named Dave (Tom Vermeir, caked like everyone else in the film with white make-up that makes him look like a zombie) who looks after his family’s supposedly empty hotel, an elaborate set full of rooms encrusted with mould, grot and dead stuff, all of it in the process of mulching down into one sludgy, semi-organic mass. Perhaps the title is a clue that this is all taking place in some para-aquatic terrain, which would explain the abundance of tridents and fishtanks and other watery kit. Anyway, Dave is not entirely alone; this soggy hell has other people in it. There is an unseen neighbour who is watching some extremely noisy porn with whom Dave communicates via shouts. A young woman named Nora (Anneke Sluiters) who insists on renting a room; another husky-voiced woman (Ruth Becquart) in fleshy pantyhose who complains that she’s bored with “fingerbanging” herself all day. Dave’s angry shouty mother (Tania Van der Sanden) is on hand, and Dave’s dead Aunt Lucy (Dirk Lavryssen) who seems to have died on a sofa some time ago, her altered state only noticed when Nora takes a closer look. Later, there are wild parties, autopsies in the kitchen, and a whole lifetime for Dave lived inside a glass case with a pretty strawberry blonde and a football team’s worth of ginger kids. Perhaps Hotel Poseidon is meant to be someone’s nightmare or a diorama of Dave’s subconscious. But it really yields up very little in the way of actual meaning, and it was not entirely enjoyable to watch. But this film has a strange, incontrovertible integrity that demands and deserves admiration, especially for art director Sven Van Kuijk’s intricate design, and the crazy aural bricolage of screeching violins, echoes, dialogue and the sound of someone moving furniture that acts as a regular backbeat throughout. • Hotel Poseidon is released on 3 January on Arrow.Omicron is “not the same disease we were seeing a year ago” and high Covid death rates in the UK are “now history”, a leading immunologist has said. Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University and the government’s life sciences adviser, said that although hospital admissions had increased in recent weeks as Omicron spreads through the population, the disease “appears to be less severe and many people spend a relatively short time in hospital”. Fewer patients were needing high-flow oxygen and the average length of stay was down to three days, he said. A number of scientists have criticised the government’s decision not to introduce further Covid restrictions in England before New Year’s Eve, with some describing it as “the greatest divergence between scientific advice and legislation” since the start of the pandemic. They have expressed concern that while the Omicron variant appears to be milder, it is highly transmissible, meaning hospital numbers and deaths could rise rapidly without intervention. The NHS Providers chief executive, Chris Hopson, said it was still unclear what would happen when infection rates in older people started to rise. “We’ve had a lot of intergenerational mixing over Christmas, so we all are still waiting to see, are we going to see a significant number of increases in terms of the number of patients coming into hospital with serious Omicron-related disease,” he told BBC Breakfast. NHS staff absences caused by having to isolate over Omicron are also causing strain on the health service, with experts predicting up to 40% of staff in London could be off in a “worst case scenario”. “We’re now seeing a significant increase in the level of staff absences, and quite a few of our chief executives are saying that they think that that’s probably going to be a bigger problem and a bigger challenge for them than necessarily the number of people coming in who need treatment because of Covid,” said Hopson. George Eustice, the environment secretary, said the government was keeping the level of Covid hospital admissions under “very close review”. He acknowledged that infection rates from the new Omicron variant were rising but said there was evidence it was not resulting in the same level of hospital admissions as previous waves. “There is early encouragement from what we know in South Africa that you have fewer hospitalisations and that the number of days that they stay in hospital if they do go into hospital is also lower than in previous variants,” he told the BBC. “At the moment we don’t think that the evidence supports any more interventions beyond what we have done. But obviously we have got to keep it under very close review, because if it is the case that we started to see a big increase in hospitalisations then we would need to act further.” John Bell told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “The horrific scenes that we saw a year ago of intensive care units being full, lots of people dying prematurely, that is now history, in my view, and I think we should be reassured that that’s likely to continue.” He said that over the course of multiple waves of Covid, including Delta and Omicron, “the incidence of severe disease and death from this disease has basically not changed since we all got vaccinated”. He added that quiet streets over the past couple of weeks showed people had been “pretty responsible” with regard to protecting themselves from the virus. Speaking after the government’s announcement on Monday that they would not be introducing any more Covid restrictions this year, Simon Clarke, an associate professor in cellular microbiology at the University of Reading, warned that the latest data was incomplete. He cautioned that the latest case figures did not include data for samples taken between Christmas Eve and Boxing Day, and that it would become clear how the virus had moved through the population over the Christmas period in the coming week or so. “While nobody wants to live under tighter controls, the public need to realise that if we end up with a significant problem of hospitalisations and mass sickness, it will be worse than if authorities had acted earlier,” he said. Speaking on Tuesday, Paul Hunter, a professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia, said people with Covid should eventually be allowed to “go about their normal lives” as they would with a common cold. “This is a disease that’s not going away. Ultimately, we’re going to have to let people who are positive with Covid go about their normal lives as they would do with any other cold,” he told BBC Breakfast. “If the self-isolation rules are what’s making the pain associated with Covid, then we need to do that perhaps sooner rather than later. Maybe not quite just yet. “Covid is only one virus of a family of coronaviruses, and the other coronaviruses throw off new variants typically every year or so, and that’s almost certainly what’s going to happen with Covid. It will become effectively just another cause of the common cold. “Once we’re past Easter, perhaps, then maybe we should start to look at scaling back, depending on, of course, what the disease is at that time.”Players of the year 1) Antoine Dupont (France) The new Gareth Edwards? And still only 25. 2) Finn Russell (Scotland) So much fun to watch, a punk poet in a world of prescriptive prose. 3) Jaz Joyce (Wales) A trailblazer for women’s rugby, in every sense. Head coach of the year Simon Middleton The England women’s team are now scarily good but their squad culture also reflects well on those in charge. Result of the year 6 March 2021: Cornish Pirates 25 Saracens 17 Such a shame no fans were permitted at the Mennaye Field to watch this deserved underdog triumph. Most reliable gamechanger Marcus Smith (Harlequins) The fly-half’s contributions as Quins came from 28-0 down to beat Bristol in the semi-final and then topple Exeter in the final to be crowned Premiership champions were remarkable. Rugby ambassadors of the year Kevin Sinfield (Leicester) Running 101 miles inside 24 hours from Leeds to Leicester to raise funds and awareness for motor neurone disease research and awareness, in tribute to his former Leeds rugby league teammate Rob Burrow, is just his latest epic feat. Ashton Hewitt (Dragons) An inspiring voice in the fight against racism in rugby and sport, summed up by his opinion on the importance of taking a knee. “People can say: ‘What’s it actually doing for racism?’ I’d say to them: ‘What are you actually doing to combat it?’” Matt Hampson, the former Leicester prop, on the emotional strain of Covid for disabled people: “When you have underlying health conditions it is very scary. It’s been very, very stressful for a lot of people.” Most significant international developments France beating New Zealand 40-25 a week after the All Blacks had lost against Ireland in Dublin has beautifully teed up the next 18 months heading into the 2023 Rugby World Cup. The regulation change that will allow dual‑eligible players, from next month, to qualify for another country after a stand-down period of three years. Will improve the depth of some – if not all – countries significantly. Biggest letdown British &amp; Irish Lions tour to South Africa Don’t rush to rewind the so-called highlights. And please let it be the last fan-less Lions tour in history. Comeback of the year Impossible to top Alun Wyn Jones’s Lazarus impression to captain the Lions against the Springboks. Most influential Premiership players André Esterhuizen (Harlequins), Alex Dombrandt (Harlequins), Tyrone Green (Harlequins). Most upwardly mobile team Fair play to Leicester Tigers, a club whose outlook has been totally transformed. Golden boot award Nic White (Australia) The first man to execute a successful 50:22 in a major Test. Most enjoyable grounds visited 1 Mennaye Field, Penzance (see above). 2 Recreation Ground, Redruth. 3 Veritas Park, Taunton. Best law initiative When Luke Pearce marched back Billy Vunipola 20 metres for repeated acts of backchat in Saracens’ game against Exeter in early December, it reintroduced a concept that every official should consider embracing. Best pundit David Flatman Ditching the Channel 5 highlights show he fronted with his trusty stunt double Mark Durden-Smith was a serious PR own-goal for the English game. Best/worst video producer Rassie Erasmus Look, each to their own but at least the Springbok head honcho’s love of video expression has spawned the amusing @RassieDancing where he can now be found grooving unsteadily to everyone from Abba to the Proclaimers. Best letter written The one sent to the Irish government by 62 current and former players voicing collective concern about the Irish Rugby Football Union’s commitment to women’s rugby. Sadly departed iconic Lions John Pullin (England), Sandy Carmichael (Scotland), John Dawes (Wales), Ray McLoughlin (Ireland). Most telling quotes “I spent several years thinking I was going crazy. At one stage that’s genuinely what I thought. It was the constant headaches and all these things going on that I couldn’t understand” – the former All Black prop Carl Hayman, aged 42, reveals he has early onset dementia. “It is very special and if rugby were to lose it, it would be a travesty” – Alun Wyn Jones on the future of Lions touring. “I believe the game has already moved to an era when 10s have to be attackers” – Gregor Townsend reflects on the game’s changing emphasis. “Let’s not beat around the bush, I think a lot of people looked at me in a strange way. I totally understand why they would have that image because there aren’t that many women in sport at senior level” – Leicester’s admirable chief executive, Andrea Pinchen. “He doesn’t know and I don’t know how good he can be … but we intend to find out” – Eddie Jones on his back-row forward Tom Curry. “People have got to respect what the Championship’s about. We’ve got to keep it going and there’s got to be investment in it” – Cornish Pirates’ head coach, Alan Paver, pleads for better treatment for England’s second-tier clubs. “Sometimes I’m not too sure what I’m going to be doing. My body just completely takes over” – South Africa’s star winger Cheslin Kolbe. Top rugby books read This Is Your Everest: The Lions, The Springboks and the Epic Tour of 1997 by Tom English and Peter Burns (Polaris) Crossing The Line by Willie Anderson with Brendan Fanning (Reach Sport) Centre Stage, My Life in Rugby by Jamie Roberts with Ross Harries (Hodder &amp; Stoughton) The Flying Prince Alexander Obelensky by Hugh Godwin (Hodder &amp; Stoughton) A Week One Summer by Floyd Steadman (ASM) The Silenced by Claudio Fava (Polaris) Up-and-coming players to follow in 2022 James Hume (Ulster), Dan Sheehan (Leinster), James Dobie (Glasgow), Christ Tshiunza (Exeter), Jack van Poortvliet (Leicester). Three hopes for 2022 Covid-free rugby played in front of capacity crowds. Is it really too much to ask? A successful World Cup in New Zealand that transforms perceptions of women’s rugby. More support for former players with early onset dementia. • This is an extract from our rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe and receive the full email, just visit this page and follow the instructions.When I ask parents, siblings and children what they want Guardian readers to know about their family member lost to gun violence, each one emphatically tells me their relative didn’t deserve what happened to them. They tell me their loved ones adored animals, loved kids – that they were just special. The people I speak with, especially parents, want the world to know their sons and daughters weren’t stereotypes. This desire for posthumous exoneration isn’t anything new, but the pleas sounded especially urgent in 2021. 2021 was a brutal year for gun violence in the US, where communities across the country experienced a heartbreaking increase in homicides and shootings. The rise started in 2020, when homicides rose by 30% from the year before, the highest single year increase since the FBI began tracking crime data in 1960. The increase amounted to an estimated 5,000 additional deaths. The majority of victims were killed with guns. The full data for 2021 is not yet available, but the rise appears to have continued in 2021, with homicides in cities such as Oakland, Portland and Detroit continuing to climb. These dramatic increases have led to intense and divisive conversations about why people shoot others and the role police and prosecutors play in preventing injuries and death. It was discouraging to watch conversations about people losing their lives morph into political fodder and an excuse to push debunked “tough on crime narratives”. Reporting on gun violence this year reinforced that most Americans don’t understand that the deadly and traumatic toll of this violence isn’t spread equally across the country. Shootings, as well as the grief and trauma that come with it, are concentrated in lower-income, mostly Black and Latino communities in California, New Jersey, Louisiana and other states. No group feels the impact more disparately than young Black men. The stories that have struck and saddened me the most were those of children and teenagers who don’t get to make it out of adolescence alive or free of the scars that gun violence leaves on your heart, mind, and spirit. I continue to grieve the losses of Shamara Young, a 15 year-old who was gunned down after getting a fresh set of braids, Jasper Wu, a toddler who died while riding in a car seat and Demetrius-Fleming Davis, who, at 18, was shot while riding in a truck with friends. Communities are still reeling from these tragedies while new slayings force their way into our collective conscience. Just this month a 12year-old was killed and a nine year-old was wounded during a shooting in Wilmington, the next day a teenager was killed in Boyle Heights. Speaking with families and community members highlighted how gun violence incidents have ripple effects that extend far beyond what most people consider or what most news media covers. People may have read a local news story about a shooting, seen a vigil the day after a shooting or passed by a commemoration on the anniversary of a death. But few have heard about the day-to-day struggles that make the burden of gun violence so heavy to carry – making funeral arrangements or traversing the same streets your child was killed on to go to work – a burden that is exponentially more devastating when somebody is killed young, violently and in their own community. So many mothers I’ve spoken with on this beat told me about the physical consequences of having a child shot and killed. They are on anti-depressants, can’t go back to work, are fearful for their remaining children’s lives, are trying to muster the strength to go on and make their family work now that a huge chunk has been ripped from them. “I already know where my health is going and I’m not scared,” Sonya Mitchell, whose 23-year-old son Daimon “Dada” Ferguson was shot and killed, told me this summer. “I wanna stay here for my daughters and grandkids, but my heart’s too broken. I used to have a hella life, but I just don’t anymore.” “The death of my son doesn’t affect just me, it affects so many other Black women who I’ve seen suffer, mothers who are my friends and we all buried our sons,” she added. “We have to be there for each other because no one knows this pain but us.” The pain of losing a loved one to gun violence affects the entire family unit and community at large. Younger siblings, family and friends of people who have been killed, they all live with the repercussions of gun violence in all of these different ways. But as consistently as there’s been community gun violence, there are dedicated residents who swoop in to help entire neighborhoods heal. I spoke with Tashante McCoy in Stockton and Jasmine Hardison in Oakland, who embrace and support people in their homes and organize events to bring joy, awareness and healing in their communities. DeWanda Joseph in Richmond holds weekly meetings for people who still don’t know how or why their child was killed and are losing faith in the justice system’s ability to get answers. Reporting on gun violence before and during the pandemic made me realize how many systems– governmental and community-based alike – need to be in place and ready to respond to these traumatic situations. The many interactions someone has after a loved one is murdered can either compound trauma or start that healing process. And most people don’t get to see that unless they have been impacted by gun violence or work with those who are.Police in Devon are ramping up a search for a 12-year-old girl who vanished from her home eight days ago, missing Christmas celebrations with her family. Devon and Cornwall police said they were growing increasingly concerned for the welfare of Leona Peach, who was reported missing from the Newton Abbot area on 20 December. Leona, who is 4ft 9in, was wearing flip-flops and carrying a pink bag when she was last seen in the Hele Park area of the south Devon town. Police believe Leona may have travelled to Bideford to be with her father, Billy Peach. They are appealing for them to get in touch with police or her family in Newton Abbot so that they know she is safe and well. Officers are also asking for the public to assist with any information that may lead to the whereabouts of the pair. The force said: “Leona was last seen in the Hele Park area of Newton Abbot around 9.15am on Monday 20 December. Originally from the north Devon area officers believe she may have travelled to Bideford.” The police have appealed for Leona to make contact with her family in Newton Abbot. DI Dave Pebworth said: “Inquiries are continuing in our efforts to locate Leona and we are asking members of the public to help us. “We are supporting her friends and family and are appealing to Leona to contact home so that they know that she is safe and well. “This time of year is especially important for families and we are keen to make sure that she is OK and would ask that anyone who is with her encourages Leona to contact her family in Newton Abbot. “Leona, if you are reading this, we want you to know you are not in any trouble. Please contact us, or someone you trust, to let us know you are safe.” She is described as white and of slim to medium build. She has hazel eyes and long brown hair that reaches the middle of her back. She has a bald patch above her right ear. Leona is believed to have been wearing grey/blue leggings or skinny trousers with a dark fur coat. Police have urged anyone who has seen Leona or knows of her whereabouts to call 999 immediately, quoting log number 0222 of 20/12/21.The Labour party has demanded stricter limits on air pollution after analysis showed the close correlation between children living in poverty and dirty air in the UK. Five London boroughs rank worst for child poverty and worst for dirty air, according to government data collated by Labour, mapping areas of high poverty against statistics on air pollution. The analysis showed that the higher the rate of child poverty in a given area, the dirtier the air there was on average, with most of the 50 most polluted areas in the UK also showing the highest rates of child poverty. Boroughs in Birmingham, Southampton, Portsmouth, Sandwell and Walsall also showed high correlations between child poverty and air pollution. In the 11 local authorities that exceed the WHO’s recommended guideline limit of an annual mean concentration of 10 micrograms per cubic metre of air (µg/m3), an average of 39.5% of children are living in poverty – much higher than the national average of 31%. Altogether, about 6.7 million children are living in areas of the UK where air pollution has breached legal limits, of whom about 2 million are also living in poverty, according to the research. The announcement by the Labour party follows a meeting in December with Keir Starmer, Ed Miliband, and campaign group Choked Up, a group of young black and brown teenagers living in areas affected by air pollution, who are calling for a right to clean air. Jim McMahon, the shadow secretary of state for environment, food and rural affairs, said: “Everyone should have the right to breathe clean, safe air, no matter where you live. If the pandemic has shown us anything, it’s that public health has to be at the very top of the political agenda, and that has to start with the air we breathe.” He pointed to Labour proposals for a Clean Air Act, which would establish a legal right to breathe clean air, and legal requirements for air quality based on the advice of the World Health Organization. The government rejected amendments to the environment bill that would have set pollution limits in line with WHO advice. He added: “The Conservative government refused to protect the health of British children, voting against tougher limits on pollution. Our children should be able to take clean, safe air for granted. Only a Clean Air Act is going to guarantee that.” Under the new environment legislation, the government will set new pollution targets from late next year. The government was repeatedly found to be in breach of EU air pollution rules, when they applied to the UK, before Brexit. A government spokesperson said: “Air pollution has reduced significantly since 2010 – at a national level, emissions of fine particulate matter have fallen by 11%, while emissions of nitrogen oxides are at their lowest levels since records began. But we know there is still more to do. To continue to drive forward tangible and long-lasting improvements to air quality, we are committed to setting stretching and ambitious targets on air quality through our Environment Act.” Some of the most polluted cities, including London, Birmingham and Portsmouth, have introduced clean air zones in an effort to reduce air pollution, which mainly comes from diesel and petrol vehicles, agriculture and wood-burning stoves.Teleri Fielden is suddenly very despairing. After skirting around the topic for the best part of an hour at her farm in Snowdonia, we’re discussing rewilding and the idea of restoring land to a more natural state and creating more nature-friendly farming practices. Wales has become one of the focal points of the debate playing out all over the world about how farms and rewilding can work together. Supporters of rewilding say the two can co-exist, but that farming has to change given it is the biggest contributor to nature loss in the country. Around 1 in 6 species in the country are currently at risk of extinction and birds like turtle doves and corn buntings have already gone from Wales’ skies. With close to 90% of land in Wales used for agriculture, there is currently little space for wildlife to exist free from the influence of farming. Rewilding, which can involve encouraging and supporting wildlife on-farm through replanting hedgerows as well as giving over unproductive land to nature, could help reverse the biodiversity decline. A recent report from the Rewilding Britain charity found rewilding at 22 sites in England had led to an increase in jobs from a total of 151 to 222, in roles including animal husbandry, ecology and nature tourism. But two years ago plans to rewild a large area of mid-Wales sparked a backlash from farmers, who felt sidelined. Rewilding Britain was forced to step down from the project. Adding to the disquiet are reports of Welsh farmland being bought for carbon-offset projects. Fielden, 31, who has just taken over the tenancy of Hafod y Llyn Isaf, a farm a few miles from Wales’ highest mountain, Yr Wyddfa (Snowdon), is involved in the nature friendly farming network, but nonetheless remains sceptical of rewilding. “I just find it bizarre. It is as if they just go, ‘we’ll pluck all you people out of there, we don’t want you, your livelihoods, your traditions or your land management skills’,” she says. “We’ll just remove you and to hell with the rural economy, people and food. It’s a weird kind of Highland clearance,” adds Fielden, referring to the forced removal of people from farms in the Scottish Highlands by landlords from the mid-18th century. Together with her husband, Ned, 29, Fielden is building a herd of sheep and cattle, which they rear outdoors all year round. She has made a beautifully hand-drawn map of their plans for creating flower-rich meadows and integrating the woodland on their farm, once an estuary. “Nature can do amazing things, but if we separate ourselves from the land, we will lose that link, as well as the skills and experience of managing it for ever. We could just import food – or instead, we could create livelihoods, local communities and homegrown protein.” For Fielden, taking on the farm was only possible with a loan from her parents to cover the cost of livestock and investments around the farm. Income streams include selling meat boxes, being paid to graze their livestock on other land, and jobs four days a week off the farm. It sounds precarious, but Fielden, who grew up in Wrexham, already feels committed to the area and community. “We’re probably going to be here for the rest of our lives,” she says. “I’ve always wanted to farm and to do something positive environmentally. And for me, beef and lamb is the most ethical way of raising meat. Our animals are very much free range, they’re just here on the land. It’s a closed-loop system [manure is recycled into the soil that grows the grass animals eat]. We’re not buying in soya feed like with chickens and there are no external inputs apart from worm treatment.” Jane Powell, a coordinator of the Wales Real Food and Farming Conference, and who has been involved in rewilding projects, says farmers are seen by some as “incidental” to the countryside: “That they [farmers] had trashed the wildlife and now someone else was going to restore it.” Powell says land-use debates must take account of food, wildlife, tourism and jobs. “Wildlife and food are not two things to be traded off against each other; they need to be integrated. “We shouldn’t be selling off bits of land for rewilding and keeping intensive poultry production on others,” she says. Rewilding Britain admits mistakes were made in the mid-Wales project, but insists it is a myth to think rewilding is about abandoning land, food production or communities. “Growing numbers of farms are showing how they can make a difference to nature – from smaller-scale wildlife projects that are sowing wildflowers or replanting hedgerows or reducing chemical use, to farms that are rewilding marginal and unproductive land on a large-scale,” says a spokesperson for the organisation. “Farmers are essential for helping society tackle the nature and climate crises – not least because some 70% of Britain is farmland, and because so often farmers know the land intimately, with deep cultural, historical and personal connections to it.” While Fielden juggles work, the farm and diversification to stay viable, 50 miles to the south in mid-Wales, Rhidian Glyn has a large enough cattle and sheep business to farm full-time. Glyn, 36, is also a tenant, with a landlord who he is keen to stress wants the land to remain in agricultural use. His type of farming – livestock on hilly land – is often seen as the least viable, yet subsidies make up just 10% of his turnover, thanks to booming lamb sales – “prices have gone through the roof since Brexit”, he says – and a profitable business rearing milking cows for local dairy farmers. Annual measurements of the farm’s soils show he is capturing and storing, or sequestering, carbon through his cattle and sheep. “Because we rotationally graze [moving animals between pastures], the organic matter of the soil is improving at a rate of 0.2% a year, which means more carbon locked up in the soils. For every tonne of meat we’re selling from the farm, nine tonnes of carbon are being sequestered,” he says. Yet for Glyn, this is no financial boom, rather a source of potential conflict if farmers are sold credits for that carbon but later asked to provide meat that can be marketed as sequestering carbon. As with the debate about rewilding, Glyn fears that carbon offsetting will accelerate a move away from food production and traditional livelihoods in Wales. He doesn’t want to sell carbon credits from planting trees or sequestered carbon in his soils if it replaces rearing sheep and cattle. “It would be interesting if the world did come to that, but whether it’s right is another thing. Agriculture is just the recycling of carbon, isn’t it? Whereas the companies that are buying carbon credits are just burning fossil fuels, aren’t they, which is just a one-way system.” Sign up for the Animals farmed monthly update to get a roundup of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at animalsfarmed@theguardian.comAfter five seasons of the groundbreaking TV drama Lost, the formula had started to get stale – to say nothing of the endlessly convoluted mystery at its heart. And so, for the sixth and final series, the producers added a new twist: as well as the flashbacks and flash-forwards that had come to define the show, it introduced the flash-sideways, showing the viewers an alternate reality where no one was ever marooned on a deserted island. Anyway, as we come to the season finale of the Long 2020, with the reintroduction of a global villain viewers thought was defeated and an increasingly convoluted B-plot involving chaos in the top tiers of the British state, I thought I would borrow that concept. Yes, rather than doing a look back over the year that was (because no one needs to dwell on that for a second longer than is necessary) or a prediction of what next year might hold for us (if I do not hold out hope for good things then I cannot be disappointed), I thought we could do something different, and look at what might have been if previous predictions had been a bit more accurate … 2017 Christmas 2016. The world was reeling from the election of Donald Trump, Mark Zuckerberg had just said it was “crazy” to think that Facebook might have played a part, and I was predicting that the big story of 2017 would be … virtual reality. I thought that the recent release of Sony’s PlayStation VR, Oculus’s Gear VR and Google’s Daydream all pointed to an imminent mainstreaming of the technology – or, at least, a definitive answer as to whether or not VR had what it took to break out of the early adopter bubble. That means there’s two versions we could flash-sideways to: the one in which VR succeeded, or the one in which it flamed out in an industry-destroying mess. It’s fairly easy to see how the latter filters through to today. If 2017 had been the death knell for the VR industry – rather than another year of sales being just high enough to continue investment, but just low enough to claim success – then we wouldn’t be talking about the “metaverse” in anywhere near the same tenor. Facebook’s investment in Oculus would have been written off, Sony would have shuttered its VR project, and Google … well, Google did sunset Daydream, but that’s just because someone in Mountain View clearly gets off on killing products. But the former is harder to imagine. With the benefit of hindsight, it’s clear that the technology simply wasn’t sufficient for mainstream acceptance: even Facebook’s Oculus Quest 2, several generations improved from what it was selling five years ago, is still clunky enough that the company’s head of communications, Nick Clegg, blasts it as a “wretched headset” while wearing it for a PR stunt with the Financial Times. So a victory for VR in 2017 would have been still confined to a niche – but if that niche was “video games”, the industry today would be transformed. A breakout success for Sony’s PSVR, for instance, would at the very least have radically changed the company’s plans for the PlayStation 5, foregrounding plans for a successor to the VR system. But the biggest ramification, I think, would have been if Facebook’s Gear VR – a collaboration with Samsung that let users slot their Galaxy phone into the headset for low-cost accessibility – had been a hit. Mark Zuckerberg has wanted to build a VR-based social network since he acquired Oculus back in 2014, but the user numbers have never been big enough to fully commit to. Even the Meta rebrand was predicated on hope for the future, rather than success in the present. If Oculus had exploded in popularity five years ago, though, you can be sure that Facebook would be all-in on VR by now. The motivation remains the same in either world: a desire to own the platform on which Facebook is built, rather than have to play by the rules of, first, the open web and later the app stores of the major players. We’d be five years ahead on the transformation to “Meta” – but, of course, only if the events of 2018 had also been somewhat different from reality … 2018 As 2017 drew to a close, the “techlash” was beginning to brew: the events of the year had served to raise more questions than ever about whether the largest tech companies in the world were fit to hold the power they had amassed. Against that background, questions were being raised about one Silicon Valley company, which had an uncomfortably close relationship with the American right, was credibly linked to the rise of Donald Trump, and was being remarkably cavalier about the safety of children and young people on its platform. But it wasn’t Facebook. As we looked ahead to 2018, the smart money was on an annus horribilis for YouTube. The video sharing site’s widespread use by far-right shock jocks had been noted in the wake of the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, and the phrase “algorithmic radicalisation” was on everyone’s lips: how far down the rabbit hole could YouTube’s recommendations take someone? “The world’s largest broadcaster has started to wake up to the fact that time and again, it is cited as part of the ‘radicalisation pathway’ that turns young men from bedroom shut-ins to mass murderers,” I wrote at the time, predicting that it would be forced to take action. On top of that, the same algorithmic pressure was leading to utterly bizarre content being screened for children on the site, with one internet theorist calling the site’s practices “infrastructural violence” against children. And then, in March that year, the Cambridge Analytica scandal broke in the pages of the Observer, and YouTube was forgotten. The ramifications of that diversion have been long-lasting. Even as the techlash broadened from Facebook to the wider industry, with leaders like Tim Cook and Jack Dorsey invited to sit alongside Mark Zuckerberg and be shouted at by US legislators, YouTube has been forgotten. Susan Wojcicki, the company’s long-running chief executive, has never been grilled by Congress. Her boss, Sundar Pichai, has been; but YouTube rarely comes up in those conversations. Contrast that to, say, Instagram, which frequently gets treated like its own company in such discussions, even though the top down control of the latter is much stronger than the former. With or without the Cambridge Analytica scandal, Facebook was always going to face a reckoning given its involvement in the 2016 election. But YouTube has managed to remain largely unchanged over a period that’s seen all of Google’s peers forced to radically alter their ways of doing business. Perhaps it would have been better if this were one prediction that had come true? 2019 OK look, I actually did pretty well in my predictions for 2019. That may be because I had a fairly dull selection (wow, past-me, you really thought you’d set the world alight with that prediction that USB-C would be in more things, huh?), and generally I’d rather be wrong but interesting that right and boring. But, being right still feels quite good. Still, there’s one major flub: I thought that Epic Games’ decision to launch a competing App Store on Android was a seriously consequential step, and one that could up-end the power of the app stores in general. I maintain my reasoning was sound. This was Fortnite at the peak of its popularity, suddenly being rendered unplayable on Android unless you installed Epic’s competing games store. It was a strategy that the company did indeed successfully pursue on computers, where it’s managed to bootstrap a competitor to Steam, the pre-eminent PC gaming platform, with just gumption, hard work, and billions of dollars in incentive payments to publishers for exclusivity. Epic’s problem, it turned out, was that while Google technically makes it possible to install a second App Store on Android platforms, it doesn’t make it easy. Add to that the fact that, anecdotally, Fortnite’s smartphone players are more likely to be on the younger end of its demographic, and so less likely to be able to pull off the complex steps required and less able to voice their displeasure at Google’s limitations, and Epic found it had argued itself into a corner. We all know what happened next, of course: reinstated to the Android App Store, Epic took the nuclear option, simultaneously breaking the rules of both Android and iOS in a bid to get itself thrown off the stores with standing for a lawsuit. But what would it look like if Epic’s stance on Android had worked? I think one possible answer is – not actually as good as Epic hopes. Alternative app stores for Android aren’t unheard of, after all, particularly in mainland China where Google’s own App Store is unavailable. Epic may have been able to avoid Google’s cut of in-app payments on Android, but it seems unlikely that it would be able to parley that into a wider competitive position. Instead, if the Chinese experience is instrumental, it would be more likely to open up a situation where every major app has its own unique App Store, and every minor app finds itself needing to be present on multiple app stores at once or run the risk of pirates stealing its customers. And then, of course, there’s the fact that Epic’s position on iOS wouldn’t have improved one bit from the painful showdown. In fact, it could conceivably be in a worse position that it is in our world – one where its case against Apple is weakened by the demonstrable fact that Apple’s claims that opening up the App Store would harm user privacy and security are true. 2020 and 2021 Over Christmas 2019, I drew up a list of 20 trends that would define 2020. Twenty! Surely I covered everything that would happen in the coming – ah, right. Yes. In 2021 I didn’t even bother to make any predictions, and yet I still got it wrong, because the fact that I sit here today, in effective lockdown due to a coronavirus outbreak, is … not something I would have predicted this time last year. That said, I did get some things right, from the fact that workplace activism would come to Apple (aided by the pandemic, which pushed the secretive company on to remote working platforms and so enabled organising for the first time) to the continued failure of the UK government to pass the online harms bill (now known as the online safety bill, and barely closer to actual passage than it was two years ago). In fact, the pandemic probably helped tech futurists more than it harmed them. Its immediate effect on the industry was to accelerate trends that were already well on their way to fruition: if you predicted more people using videoconferencing, more people shopping online, or more people playing video games, well, the pandemic helped you out. My major stinker was predicting the death of Facebook’s Portal, the company’s video-enabled Echo competitor. “Who would want to put an always-on microphone connected directly to Menlo Park in their homes,” I wrote. “Portal sales have reportedly been minuscule. A second iteration was squeezed out earlier this year; don’t expect a third.” Well, it turns out that a dedicated video-chat device is rather more compelling now than it was two years ago, and Facebook’s big pivot helps position the Portal as a halfway house between full VR and simple text chat. Talking about the world of tech in the absence of Covid feels like an impossible task – what wouldn’t be different – but there’s one are that I think would be radically changed, and it’s not what you might think. Zoom, Slack and even QR codes were all slowly growing in importance, and while they may not have had the explosive growth that they did, the companies would be largely recognisable even if Covid had never left Wuhan. Instead, the most 2020 story that wouldn’t exist without Covid was, I think, the rise of the “meme stocks” and the subsequent NFT boom. The tale of the second half of that year was one of a “K-shaped” recovery, with some people rapidly readjusting to life under lockdown even as others lost their livelihoods for months. Particularly in the US, where generous universal stimulus payments put money in the pockets of millions who simultaneously saw their monthly outgoings collapse, it lead to the creation of a fairly large group who suddenly had an awful lot of cash to burn, and an awful lot of time to burn it. It’s no wonder, then, that Robinhood, the free stock-trading app that has faced criticism for “gamifying” day trading, saw a boom in use, as day traders piled in on stocks such as Hertz, AMC and, notoriously, GameStop. This year, the focus shifted from stock trading to cryptocurrencies and NFTs, but the underlying cause was, I think, the same: people with more money and time than they used to have, seeking an outlet for their boredom. The question for the coming year, of course, is whether Covid is required to maintain that interest, or if it’s now reached self-sustaining levels of attention. I’d bet (and, if I’m honest, hope for) the latter, but we won’t find out for a while yet. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.Most years the very idea of a women’s Test team of the year would be redundant, but 2021 has bucked that trend: it’s the first calendar year since 2014 to feature two women’s Tests. India (having last played the format seven years ago) featured in both – against England at Bristol in June, and a pink-ball affair against Australia in Queensland in September/October. Both matches resulted in draws and, in a surprising turn of events, India matched their opponents: holding out in a nail-biter at Bristol, before racking up 377 for eight declared in their first innings against Australia. Australia’s coach, Matthew Mott, later admitted his opponents had “held all the aces” for the duration – a state of affairs reflected in the presence of only two Australians in the team that follows. India’s excellence could be good news, however. Should the BCCI get on board, 2021 could represent the early days of a revival of the Test format for women. Fingers crossed. 1) Smriti Mandhana, India Hit the only Test century of the year in October, and the first by an Indian woman on Australian soil. The beneficiary of a bizarre decision by Australia to bowl first, she made hay with all her usual elegance – after hitting 78 against England at Bristol. It’s a format she was made to play. 2) Shafali Verma, India Defied critics who said she wasn’t suited to the longer format by hitting three half-centuries in her first four Test innings (two v England, and one v Australia), and sharing a record 167-run opening stand with Mandhana at Bristol. Holed out on 96 in her maiden Test appearance, but not before drawing first blood in her battle with Katherine Brunt, smashing 25 runs from 24 balls against an experienced seamer who had no answers. 3) Heather Knight, England (captain) Hit a chanceless first-innings 95 and chose to enforce the follow-on at Bristol to take her side within a hairsbreadth of their first Test win on home soil since 2005. Selecting a team with only one specialist spinner proved to be a mistake but, after fighting her way back from a back injury, Knight’s part-time off-spin helped a bit, yielding first-innings figures of 11-8-7-2. 4) Ellyse Perry, Australia Could not quite replicate her 2017 double-century heroics, but once again proved undismissable with scores of 68 not out and 1 not out. Now averages 87 in Test cricket, and you wouldn’t bet against her improving that at Canberra in January. Can anyone get her out? 5) Sophia Dunkley, England After years on the outskirts of the squad, Dunkley’s cap presentation was a special moment – not least because it made her the first Black woman to play Test cricket for England. “If it does inspire any boys or girls that’s amazing,” she said, before seizing the chance to nail down her spot with an unbeaten 74. 6) Taniya Bhatia, India (wicketkeeper) Shared an unbroken stand of 104 with Sneh Rana at Bristol, to mastermind one of women’s cricket’s greatest escapes. India had been seven down and only 34 runs ahead, with a new ball due and a session and a half left to bat, but – subject to what they described as “constant sledging” – Rana (80*) and Bhatia (44*) simply put their heads down and got on with it, putting their side’s top order to shame. 7) Sneh Rana, India See above. An extraordinary performance from a player who was derided as a crazy selection, having not played an international since February 2016. Selected by India for her off-spin (picking up four wickets at Bristol), but has earned the role of all-rounder in this team. 8) Sophie Molineux, Australia Headed into the Carrara Test sporting a scar from the ODI leg of the series, after being smashed in the face fielding a rogue ball. Got some measure of revenge by taking three wickets at an economy rate of just over two – impressive in a match that was dominated by the India batters. 9) Sophie Ecclestone, England Threw everything at India in an attempt to bowl them out twice, including a mammoth, exhausting, 15-over spell on the final day. Finished with match figures of eight for 206, having bowled 64 overs in the Test (including 15 maidens). If everyone could have bowled like Ecclestone, England would have won. 10) Pooja Vastrakar, India Some questioned the decision to play Vastrakar at Carrara ahead of the more experienced Shikha Pandey, but the seamer proved the doubters wrong when she finished with the leading haul in the match – four for 62, on a batter-friendly pitch. Had earlier enjoyed smashing Ecclestone for 12 runs off one over in a 21-ball cameo at Bristol. 11) Jhulan Goswami, India Peppered the usually self-assured Alyssa Healy with short balls at Carrara, and successfully saw her off cheaply in both innings – a key factor in India’s dominance. She may be 39 and these will almost certainly be the last two Tests of her career – but she’s still got it.One feature of online dating that makes it a recurring pub-discussion topic among my friends is the propensity for the people involved to do strange things. A whole new spectrum of dating behaviour has evolved on “the apps”. Habits that, while now common, are still odd things to do. Someone might seem very interested but then “ghost” or “orbit” (which means they stop replying to messages but still engage with your social media content, liking your posts and photos); or tell obvious but seemingly unnecessary lies; another person might read “the riot act” on a first date, sternly laying down their terms for how the relationship should progress; and there are endless stories about dates reacting bizarrely, even menacingly, if rejected. One I heard recently was about a man my friend met on an app. When she told him she didn’t want to see him again he went through a phase of sending her pictures from her own social media accounts, platforms they had never interacted on, as if to say: “I’ve got my eye on you.” But most of it is not really threatening, just plain strange. I haven’t dated in a little while but (and there is no way to say this without sounding like I’m 90) I had my Tinder phase, and I remember the strangeness well. One man I matched with spent months sending me puns and jokes based on the TV show How Clean is Your House?. I did my own share of things which probably ended up being discussed in pubs. Once I was on a second date I didn’t really want to be on, with a man I didn’t like, and when he said something mildly obnoxious I latched on to it, picked a fight and then ran out of the restaurant and off down the street. When he messaged me later for an explanation I told him I’d done it because I was a feminist – as if that alone sufficed. But I knew, deep down, the real reason: I did it because I could get away with it. We didn’t know anyone in common. Who would he tell? I’ve come to see a lot of the bizarre behaviour through this prism. The apps have created a dating landscape that is largely divorced from our normal social ecosystem of friends and acquaintances – people whose opinions we care about, who might judge us for ghosting someone or consistently treating dates badly. There are rarely wider social consequences for anything we do when we date strangers we meet online, and so we are free to get up to all sorts. A new book, The New Laws of Love: Online Dating and the Privatization of Intimacy, by Marie Bergström, a sociologist and researcher who works at the National Institute of Demographic Studies in France, explores this premise. She argues convincingly that the growing popularity of online dating has increasingly removed it from the public sphere, turning it into an entirely “domestic and individual practice”. She terms this the “privatisation of intimacy”. The book has a refreshing lack of hysteria about the impact the internet has had on our sex lives, and no grandiose declarations about the state of love today. Bergström’s interviews with young people, who conduct almost their entire dating life online, illuminate a culture where dating is often so detached from their wider social network that the idea of mixing the two evokes panic. One of her interviewees, a 22-year-old, admits she won’t even match with people on apps whom she shares contacts with. “Even at the relationship level, I don’t know if it’s healthy to have so many friends in common,” she says. Another 22-year-old balks at the idea of treating a regular, non-dating social media website as a place where you might find a partner: “These are people you already know!” he exclaims. Others discuss their fear of being gossiped about if they go out with other students at their university. One 26-year-old man says he wouldn’t date someone he met at a party because they would likely be a friend, or a friend of a friend: “There’s always trouble and it creates a lot of problems.” The New Laws of Love casts doubt on the idea that the ease with which we can meet large numbers of potential partners online is heralding a new era of sexual liberation. Bergström is particularly insightful on the subject of female sexuality and the lingering, damaging influence of tropes about the “right” sort of woman – who has a low number of sexual partners, is not sexually direct and does her best to minimise risk in her sex life. Many of the women she interviews say they prefer to use apps for casual sex and relationships to avoid judgment from their peer group. As Bergström rightly points out, this demonstrates a modern adherence to, rather than a rejection of, expectations of female modesty. As she puts it, “it is discretion rather than sexual assertion” that makes these apps popular. Meanwhile, the men she interviews frequently reveal themselves to hold startlingly conservative views about female sexuality. One says that when an attractive woman on Tinder propositioned him for a one-night stand he was so taken aback that he started “hallucinating”. Bergström’s “privatization of intimacy” doesn’t seem to have made dating any better. I realised too, while reading, that there is a strange, uncomfortable public side to all of this not covered in the book. It is now common for people to share screenshots of messages from strangers on dating apps on social media for public disapproval. There are whole accounts dedicated to this. Sometimes the messages are unpleasant, abusive or laughably stupid. But fairly often they are inane. The other week a woman shared an entire conversation because a man asked her if she was “pumped” for a date they had planned, hoping for widespread condemnation. Maybe this also makes me sound 90, but I’d surely rather be gossiped about for sleeping with someone from my uni course. Rachel Connolly is a London-based journalist from BelfastThe country has undergone massive cultural change around violence against women in the past year but the government is still failing completely to recognise the scale of the problem, according to Labour MP Jess Phillips. “I do feel like for the first time in my life violence against women and girls is definitely going to have to be a political priority and they cannot forget it,” she told the Guardian. “But even with all the cultural change, the conversations, the money apparently being thrown at it, I’m still left despairing with women who’ve got nothing out the system and it’s just failed them again and again. “And are women safer now than they were at the start of the year? No, they’re not.” Phillips, the shadow domestic violence minister, has long campaigned on issues surrounding violence against women, and each year in parliament reads out the names of all the women who have been killed by men in the preceding 12 months. This year had marked a huge “shift change” in awareness of the issue, she said. “I used to wait for Karen Ingala Smith [from Counting Dead Women] to send me the names. But I see them all myself now; they’re being reported everywhere,” she said. “And finally it’s not just like: ‘Aren’t these individual cases bad?’ We have started as a public to see them in the round.” The murder of Sarah Everard by the police officer Wayne Couzens in March sparked a nationwide conversation around women’s safety that has been galvanised by further killings, including Sabina Nessa, who was found dead in a London park in September, and Gracie Spinks, who was killed by a stalker in June. Andrea Simon, head of the End Violence Against Women coalition, said efforts to further protect women in 2021 had not gone far enough. “It has been an unprecedented year in terms of how much we’re talking about violence against women and girls, which means that for many it feels like a watershed moment,” she said. “However, I think many of the solutions and the responses from government, and in the criminal justice system, have missed the mark. We haven’t gone as far as we should have done. And we haven’t moved as quickly in terms of making things better for women and girls who report abuse.” Phillips said that while the government has claimed to be taking action on the issue, “it’s not OK to focus this entirely on the criminal justice system”. “They’re still stuck in a furrow of ‘tough on crime’. I will respond to their ‘tough on crime’ by saying you’re not being tough on crime, you’re literally letting most rapists through.” To effectively tackle the problem there needed to be institutional change across a wide range of services, she said, particularly in housing and welfare. “In England there isn’t anywhere a single woman on an average wage could afford a private rental property. And we ask ourselves why women end up stuck,” she said. “But the government think that declaring new sentences is the answer.” The government is also failing to dedicate enough resources to prevention, she said. “There needs to be far more about education, far more about what behaviours are and aren’t acceptable, there needs to be far more robust interruption of the perpetrator, whereas currently the system relies on the interruption of the victim.” Reflecting back on the year, Phillips said she felt “a little bit beaten” after speaking out about so many distressing cases. “I have found it a really difficult year. You get to the point where each and every case that I see, I can’t believe that it’s still so bad, and it feels tiring. It feels tiring,” she said. “And I have suffered more because of the raised profile, and the threat level against me has gone up as a result of me speaking out about it.” In April, Tony Eckersley, a white supremacist, was jailed for more than two years after sending hundreds of violent, misogynistic and racist messages to Phillips. She said the online harms bill currently making its way through parliament must be used as an opportunity to protect women online. “But currently it doesn’t say ‘women’ in it once. So there’s work to do,” she said. Phillips said she was hopeful for the future, with more opportunities to help tackle issues around violence against women than ever before, but she still despaired at how much “preventive work” women were expected to do themselves. “Women are the ones passing on the stories to their daughters about what you have to do. There’s a dreadful baton-passing about what to expect in life,” she said. “Women are the ones who have to act differently, have to behave differently, we’re supposed to flag down the buses. Women in relationships are meant to risk assess and then if you are a victim of violence, that is like a full-time job to come forward about it. “There is just so much where we are expected to fill the gaps left by a system that has failed.”Britney Spears has said the years she spent under conservatorship have left her scared of the entertainment industry. The singer revealed her reasons for not being ready to return to the music business after her conservatorship was terminated in November in an Instagram post. In a lengthy note shared as screenshots, she said: “I wanted to be nice but what they did to my heart was unforgivable. I asked for 13 years to perform new songs and remixes of my old songs … and every time I was told ‘no’”. The controversial legal arrangement controlled her life for nearly 14 years and took away her right to make basic decisions about her finances, career and personal life. “It was a setup to make me fail,” she wrote. “So much wasted time to only embarrass me and humiliate me and I guess it seems odd to most now why I don’t even do my music any more. People have no idea the awful things that were done to me personally … and what I’ve been through. I am scared of people and the business. They really hurt me. “Not doing my music any more is a way of saying ‘fuck you’ in a sense when it actually benefits my family by ignoring my real work.” Spears shared the statement along with a set of graphics about praying. The final three images are the screenshots of her notes, in which she also talks about losing her faith. “I had an experience three years ago where I stopped believing in God,” she writes. “From every angle I was being hurt for no reason and my family was hurting me. I went into a state of shock and the way I coped was being in fake denial. It was too much to really face. It then came full circle and my heart took over and I was [a] lion.” She also writes about her aims for 2022: “My goal for this year is to push myself a bit more and do things that scare me but not too much. I do know what makes me happy and brings me joy and I try to meditate on those places and thoughts that enable me to experience it.” Lawyers acting for her father have called for her to continue paying his legal fees, claiming he had “stepped up” to protect her from “opportunistic and wholly self-interested parties”.Chelsea could be forced to sign a left wing-back in January after deciding Ben Chilwell needs an operation on an anterior cruciate ligament injury. Chilwell has been out of action since sustaining a serious knee injury against Juventus last month, but Chelsea have been waiting to see if the problem heals naturally. Thomas Tuchel’s side have not been the same without the England defender and there were hopes that the 25-year-old would boost their title chances by making a swift recovery after he returned to light training this month. However Chilwell, whose rehabilitation was delayed after he tested positive for Covid-19 before Christmas, is unlikely to play again this season after it emerged that the injury requires surgery. The procedure is expected to take place this week and will leave Chelsea short of options. Chilwell’s absence is also a blow for England, who have Nations League games against Germany, Hungary and Italy in June. However the defender is expected to have recovered in time for next winter’s World Cup in Qatar. The more pressing concern is the impact his injury will have on his club side. Marcos Alonso is currently the only left-sided defender at Tuchel’s disposal, with Saúl Ñíguez, Callum Hudson-Odoi and Christian Pulisic unconvincing alternatives. Tuchel will be conscious of overplaying Alonso and could decide to enter the market for emergency cover. Chelsea could look at a loan move for Lucas Digne, who has fallen out of favour at Everton. They have also been credited with interest in Milan’s Theo Hernández, but he would be expensive and difficult to sign at this stage of the season. Another option would be to recall either Ian Maatsen or Emerson Palmieri from their loan spells. Maatsen, 19, has helped Coventry push for promotion from the Championship and Emerson, who is on loan at Lyon, started when Italy beat England in the Euro 2020 final. Chelsea, who are six points behind Manchester City at the top of the league, could be without N’Golo Kanté and Thiago Silva when they host Brighton on Wednesday evening. Kanté had a recurrence of a knee injury during Chelsea’s win over Aston Villa on Boxing Day and Silva has a hamstring problem. Meanwhile, Tuchel is waiting to see if Timo Werner, Kai Havertz and Ruben Loftus-Cheek are ready to return after spells in isolation.Jacob Lusk is getting a kick out of being the singer in Gabriels, the soulful, cinematic trio whose scant handful of London club shows this autumn were the buzziest gigs of the season. “This is the most authentic myself I’ve ever been,” he says down the phone from his home in California. “I can do whatever I wanna do, wear whatever I wanna wear, be who I actually am. I’m embracing me, more than I ever have before.” He is being embraced in return. At those shows, Gabriels were greeted with a fervour befitting Lusk’s own roots in spiritual music. It felt like watching a first kiss, but between a band and an audience. “That’s not a bad analogy. To be honest, it seemed more communal than anything. The audience gave us quite a bit of energy as well, so it felt more like a love fest than a show. ‘Hey, we’re all here together, let’s have this moment together,’ more than us presenting our wares.” The beginnings of Gabriels lie five years ago, when the choir Lusk was directing was hired to sing for a film project Ryan Hope and Ari Balouzian were working on. The three became friends, and started batting around musical ideas together. They didn’t hit on their sound – one that is woody and rich, steeped in Black American musical history, restrained but hugely emotional – until they wrote the track Loyalty, initially for a Prada ad in 2018. “That was the first time we were: ‘Oh, wow, this is our thing here.’ And then we kept writing and recording in that way and the songs came really quickly. It’s just an intersection of all the things we love and all the things we are.” There have been a series of releases since – an album is due late next year – but it was Love and Hate in a Different Time, released at the very end of 2020, that really flew. Elton John lavished his praise on it, a song that was both melancholy and ecstatic, and it was the arms-aloft highlight of those London shows. On stage, Lusk’s voice went from yearning to preaching, from whispering to shrieking, from an earthy bass to a soaring falsetto: his is one of the most spectacular voices you will hear this year. Yet for all the testifying, for many years he was resentful of being tagged a gospel singer. He had grown up in the Apostolic church, and was forbidden to listen to the radio – his points of reference were gospel crossover music, such as the Winans, and the jazz he was allowed to listen to at home. Then, in 2011, he was a contestant on American Idol, subject to a new set of restrictions. Here, his gospel roots were “a bad thing: you’re an R&amp;B singer, and you’re singing about sex and love, so you can’t embrace being a Christian, too. There were all these rules and things you couldn’t do.” Gabriels, though, is “the complete opposite”. This next year is going to see the trio fly. Those who attended the London shows left convinced they had seen one of 2022’s superstar acts, and surely the word-of-mouth hit at this summer’s festivals. That’s something Lusk takes entirely in his stride. “I want 30bn Grammys!” he says. “I want to go five times quadruple platinum. I want to play Glastonbury. I want to play Wembley. I want to do it all. But now I’m a lot more appreciative of it, and I’ve realised it’s about sharing and having moments with people. It’s not all about me.”China has accused the US of ignoring international treaty obligations and engaging in irresponsible and unsafe conduct in outer space after two near misses between the Chinese space station and satellites operated by Elon Musk’s SpaceX company. Zhao Lijian, a foreign ministry spokesperson, said on Tuesday that China “urges the US to act responsibly” after incidents involving SpaceX’s Starlink satellites, which he said had posed a serious threat to the lives and safety of astronauts. In a note to the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space earlier this month, China said Tiangong, its new space station, had to manoeuvre to avoid one Starlink satellite in July and another in October. Tiangong had to take “preventive collision avoidance control” during the two “close encounters” after the Starlink satellites had moved into orbits that obliged Tiangong’s operators to change its course, the document said. “The manoeuvre strategy was unknown and orbital errors were hard to assess,” Beijing said of the satellite involved in the October incident, adding that it took action to “ensure the safety and lives of in-orbit astronauts”. The note said the incidents “constituted dangers to the life or health of astronauts onboard the China space station” and asked the UN secretary general “to circulate the above mentioned information to all states parties to the outer space treaty”. Starlink, a division of Musk’s private company SpaceX, has launched more than 1,600 satellites. It has permission from US authorities to launch a total of up to 12,000 in a programme aiming to provide internet access to most of the planet. China’s note to the UN space agency in Vienna said state parties to the outer space treaty, which is the foundation of international space law, “bear international responsibility” for activities carried out by both government and non-governmental bodies in space. Evasive manoeuvres to reduce the risk of collisions in space were becoming more frequent owing to the number and speed at which satellites were being launched, said Jonathan McDowell, of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. “Starlink is a big part of that,” McDowell said, adding that it was “highly unusual” for a country to lodge a complaint through an “informational bulletin”. Any collision would be likely to “completely demolish” the Chinese space station, he said. McDowell added that China was also a big contributor to space junk. The International Space Station “has several times over the past 10 years had to dodge pieces from the Chinese military anti-satellite test of 2007”, he said. “It’s not like the Chinese had a clean record here. The biggest debris event ever was the Chinese anti-satellite test.” He said the incidents were a reminder the world had entered a new era in space. “There’s more debris and there’s more active satellites. Things are just getting a lot busier and a lot more crowded up there. It’s a commercially dominated space age … where we’re stressing the space environment for the first time.” The core module of China’s station Tiangong – whose name means “heavenly palace” – entered orbit this year and is expected to become fully operational in 2022. Beijing’s complaint prompted heavy criticism on Chinese social media of Musk, whose electric car firm Tesla sells tens of thousands of vehicles in China each month. Musk is widely admired in China, although Tesla’s reputation has been tarnished after a rash of recent crashes and scandals. One hashtag on the Weibo social networking platform recorded 90m views on Tuesday. “How ironic that Chinese people buy Tesla, contributing large sums of money so Musk can launch Starlink, and then he (nearly) crashes into China’s space station,” one user said. “Prepare to boycott Tesla,” said another Weibo user, echoing a common response in China to foreign brands perceived to be acting contrary to national interests. Some speculated that Washington would have imposed sanctions if the roles were reversed. “Why don’t we just do what they do?” one wrote. California-based SpaceX did not immediately respond to a request for comment. • This article was amended on 28 December 2021 because a reference to “the US space station” should have been to the International Space Station.Welcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s brand new gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every week, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. Welcome back to Pushing Buttons! I’m Keza MacDonald, the Guardian’s video games editor. I have been a video games journalist for 16 years, and my extended family only recently stopped asking me when I was going to get a real job over Christmas dinner. I guess they’ve given up on me now. This December, as usual, the release calendar has been as sparse as the hairs on Agent 47’s head. Last year we at least had Cyberpunk 2077’s fiasco of a launch to distract us from the end-of-2020 doldrums; you can only hope that it will fare better when the PS5 and Xbox Series X versions are, finally, released in the spring. On the plus side, right now there is actually time to catch up on things without the distraction of shiny new things coming out every week. Absorbing myself in a video game has always been a good way to stave off end-of-year ennui in the festive perineum between Christmas and New Year’s Eve. Those Christmas games loom large in the memory – one year it was Mass Effect 2, which I played for days straight wrapped in a duvet in my freezing cold Edinburgh flat; one Christmas as a teenager I persuaded my parents to get me Animal Crossing on US import and spent the subsequent days completely ignoring my family in favour of my new weird animal neighbours. (I’ve got my own kids now, and last year I did the same in Animal Crossing: New Horizons. Some things don’t change.) It’s been a strange year for games, partly because the knock-on effects of Covid-19 have delayed the process of game development so much that most of the things we thought we’d be playing now have drifted into next year. Game development is an extraordinarily collaborative endeavour, especially when there are 100 or more people on a team, and working from home has slowed things down massively at a lot of studios with whom I’ve spoken. Playground Games spent last year finishing off the excellent racing game Forza Horizon 5, and designer Anna Poliakova explains that testing multiplayer was much, much easier when you’ve got everyone playing together in the studio: “You can tell if one player is seeing something completely different from the other three. At home, you’re having to describe it to each other, like: ‘What can you see? Hold on, what colour is my car on your screen?!’” Even stuff like figuring out how to get the latest build of the game playable on every individual developer’s computer became a logistical nightmare. Applause, then, for the teams behind the great games that actually did come out this year: Forza, Hitman 3, Deathloop, Ratchet &amp; Clank: Rift Apart, the long-delayed and brilliantly surreal Psychonauts 2, which vies with intimidating time-loop space shooter Returnal for my personal game of the year. Our games correspondent Keith Stuart and I recently picked our top 15 games of 2021 – give it a read, and decide what’s going to soak up your time as the year limps to an end. The ongoing pandemic has changed my relationship with video games, and I know I’m not the only one. If 2020 was the year that games saved us all, giving us a safe and fun way to socialise and entertain ourselves when everything was terrible and nobody was allowed to outside for more than 20 minutes a day, 2021 was the year that we tentatively started living again. I found myself less drawn to virtual worlds; I abandoned my Animal Crossing island, only returning shame-faced to bear the resentful barbs from my neighbours when Nintendo released a raft of interesting new stuff for the game in November (who would say no to a pigeon called Brewster who serves coffee?). Psychologically, though, being back in Animal Crossing felt like returning to the depths of last year’s mentally brutalising lockdowns. Back then it was my escape, but now it feels like an unwelcome reminder. I wonder how many people will have a similar reaction when they think back on Among Us, or Fall Guys, or Fortnite, or any of the other games that got them through the pandemic, in years to come. What to play I’m going to cast my mind right back to the beginning of the year to recommend Olija, a game that missed out on our games of the year list but that nonetheless sticks in my memory. It’s a short, nostalgic, rather eerie action-adventure game about an aristocrat who sails to a forsaken place to try to find a better future for his people, and it has the freshest, most beautifully animated pixel art I’ve seen in years. You can tell when a game is a passion project – Olija was mostly made by one person, Japan-resident developer Thomas Olsson, and although it’s over quickly, it’s so atmospheric, enigmatic and snappy to play that it’s well worth the time it takes. Available on: Nintendo Switch, PC, PlayStation 4, Xbox One Approximate playtime: 5 hours What to click – some Guardian Games 2021 favourites The 15 best video games of 2021 How streaming went from dream job to a burnout nightmare Gaming in colour: uncovering video games’ black pioneers Why I started streaming video games on Twitch at the age of 43 Experience: I’m the best Tetris player in the world Xbox at 20, in the words of the people who made its first games ‘The popularity just didn’t wane’: Bethesda’s Todd Howard on 10 years of Skyrim What to read The end-of-year lists have been trickling out from all the specialist games sites for the past few weeks. I especially enjoyed Polygon’s, partly because it looks gorgeous, and partly because many of the 50 games on this list are ones that I didn’t already know about. Xbox’s Game Pass has continued to prove itself in 2021, putting Microsoft ahead of everyone else in the rush to become the (sigh) “Netflix of gaming”. (Google Stadia, looks increasingly beleaguered; Google shut down its only development studio early this year after a troublingly short period, and confidence in the service does not appear to be high.) Kotaku makes a case for 2021 marking the beginning of the death of the Xbox – and why that wouldn’t necessarily be such a bad thing. Another defining story of the year in games has been the flood of revelations about toxic working culture and harassment at Activision Blizzard, the company behind Call of Duty, World of Warcraft and much else, which is now facing several lawsuits. The allegations run right up to famously uber-wealthy longtime CEO Bobby Kotick, and have sparked walkouts and a unionisation push among its 10,000ish employees. If you’ve had trouble keeping up with all the ongoing and very revealing reporting on one of the games industry’s giants, this rundown from CNET will catch you up. Question block This week I asked our games correspondent Keith Stuart the question that has been preoccupying warring forum-dwellers since the 90s: what’s best, consoles or PC? No one who considers themselves a serious video game scholar would attempt to answer this question – which is why I’m doing it. In terms of sheer technical oomph, a cutting edge PC is unbeatable as a gaming platform. You’ll need to spend between £1000 and £2000, but that will get you the Imax of gaming, with astonishing visuals and ultra smooth animation. Within two years, however, your system will start to creak, and you’ll think about upgrading – and then you’re chained to the treadmill. In terms of value and ease-of-use, consoles rule: you get an expertly designed system that will last between five and eight years, and every game you buy will work perfectly on it. For most people, the visuals will be fine – in fact, for a few years, they’ll be spectacular – and landmark games that won’t be available anywhere else for years. Which is better? For experts, the PC, for the rest of us, consoles. Don’t @ me. I’d welcome your questions for Question Block in the new year – hit reply on this newsletter to submit them, and I’ll find someone interesting to answer them! • The main photo caption in this article was amended on 29 December 2021. Animal Crossing: New Horizons was released in 2020, not 2019 as an earlier version said.This course has now passed, but you can be the first to know about the next one - and other workshops like this - by signing up to our newsletter here. L.P. Hartley wrote that “the past is a foreign country: they do things differently there.” When we write historical fiction, our narrative needs to take into account the conditions in the period it deals with - whether it reaches back across twenty years or two hundred. In this weekend masterclass with Jem Poster and Sarah Burton, you will discover the fine art of bringing the past to life in fictional form. Through a combination of practical writing exercises and close reading of key passages from the work of well-known authors, this workshop will explore how you can avoid anachronisms and manage essential information, while immersing your reader in a compelling and convincingly recreated sense of a past time. This course is for … Aspiring writers of historical fiction - and writers of any genre Beginners seeking guidance, as well as more experienced writers wanting to sharpen and energise their practise Course structure Understanding the past Voices from the past The uses of research Beyond research Q&amp;A Tutor profiles Jem Poster is emeritus professor of creative writing, Aberystwyth University, and co-founder, with Sarah Burton, of Cambridge University’s master’s programme in creative writing. He is the author of two novels, Courting Shadows (Sceptre, 2002) and Rifling Paradise (Sceptre, 2006), as well as a collection of poetry, Brought to Light (Bloodaxe, 2001). He edited volume III of the six-volume Oxford University Press Edward Thomas: Prose Writings (OUP, 2018) and is co-author, with Sarah Burton, of a handbook for fiction-writers, The Book You Need to Read to Write the Book You Want to Write, due out from Cambridge University Press in March 2022. Sarah Burton’s publications include two biographies, Impostors: Six Kinds of Liar (Penguin, 2000) and A Double Life: a Biography of Charles and Mary Lamb (Penguin, 2003, shortlisted for the Mind Book of the Year award); a children’s book, The Miracle in Bethlehem: A Storyteller’s Tale (2008); and a page-to-stage guide, How to Put on a Community Play (2011). Her novel, The Strange Adventures of H (Legend Press, 2020) has been an Amazon historical fiction bestseller. With Jem Poster, she co-founded Cambridge University’s master’s programme in creative writing and is co-author of The Book You Need to Read to Write the Book You Want to Write, due out from Cambridge University Press in March 2022. You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 2pm (GMT). Details This course has now passed, but you can be the first to know about the next one - and other workshops like this - by signing up to our newsletter here. Date: Saturday 5 February &amp; Sunday 6 February 2022 Times: 2pm-4.30pm (GMT), both days Price: £249 &amp; £6.83 booking fee This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest classes and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.Shell will be forced to halt oil exploration in vital whale breeding grounds along South Africa’s eastern coastline after a local court blocked the controversial project. The court order calls for an immediate halt to Shell’s seismic tests which involve blasting sound waves through the relatively untouched Wild Coast marine environment, which is home to whales, dolphins and seals. The community campaigners behind the legal challenge welcomed the court’s decision as a victory for “voiceless” indigenous groups living near the coast which hold customary rights to undertake small-scale fishing in the area, as well as a cultural and spiritual connection to the ocean. Lawyers for the groups successfully argued that Shell had failed to meaningfully consult people who would be affected by the seismic survey and also provided evidence of the threat of harm to marine life. Wilmien Wicomb, an attorney at the Legal Resources Centre, said the case held “huge significance” because it showed that “no matter how big a company is, it ignores local communities at its peril”. “This case is really a culmination of the struggle of communities along the Wild Coast for the recognition of their customary rights to land and fishing, and to respect for their customary processes,” Wicomb said. Sinegugu Zukulu, a senior campaigner for Sustaining the Wild Coast, added: “The voices of the voiceless have been heard. The voices of the directly affected people have at last been heard, and the constitutional rights of indigenous people have been upheld.” The victory for local communities follows an unsuccessful 11th-hour legal challenge by environmental groups earlier this month to block Shell’s plans on the grounds that it could cause irreparable damage to the environment. Critics of Shell’s presence on the Wild Coast argue its plans were approved using outdated legislation. Shell received the green light in 2014 from South Africa’s then minister of mineral resources, Ngoako Ramatlhodi, just months before new environmental legislation was put in place. The oil company could be forced to comply with the tougher environmental regulation to move forward with its exploration plan for the sensitive ecological region, subject to a separate court hearing. “This case reminds us that constitutional rights belong to the people and not to government,” Zukulu said. “And that the only way that we can [ensure] that the rights of indigenous people are living – and not just written on paper – is if we challenge government decisions that disregard these rights. This victory is hugely significant because we have made sure that the rights of indigenous communities are kept alive.” A Shell spokesperson said: “We respect the court’s decision and have paused the survey while we review the judgment.”At least 18 peaceful environmental protesters have been sent to prison this year, with 10 spending Christmas Day behind bars. As concern about the climate crisis grows, activists have been jailed after blocking roads, disrupting court proceedings and in one case climbing on top of an aeroplane in an attempt to draw attention to the escalating emergency. Campaigners fear their “heavy-handed treatment” is part of a concerted effort by the state to crack down on the right to protest, with the government’s controversial police, crime, sentencing and courts bill criticised by human rights activists as “a dangerous power grab”. Ten members of the environmental protest group Insulate Britain spent Christmas serving prison sentences for contempt of court for breaching injunctions banning their road block protests, which demanded the proper insulation of the UK’s housing stock. Seven more have suspended sentences. At least eight other environmental activists have served prison sentences in 2021 for contempt of court actions, according to Extinction Rebellion, including livestreaming from court and gluing themselves to the dock. Six activists who occupied a tunnel close to Euston station in London in protest against the HS2 high-speed rail link earlier this year narrowly avoided a jail sentence after charges were dismissed by a judge. The jailed Insulate Britain protesters have sent unrepentant messages from behind bars. “Locked in my cell for twenty-three and a half hours each day, I miss my family, I miss my friends, I miss nature,” said Oliver Roc, 41, who is serving a four-month sentence at HMP Thameside in south-east London. “But when I think about the future we are facing I feel a deep conviction that [what] we have done is right, that this is the best place.” In a campaign of disruptive protests that began on 13 September, Insulate Britain activists blocked major roads in and around London, at the port of Dover, in Manchester and in Birmingham on 19 different occasions. Their tactics angered motorists and were fiercely criticised, with politicians calling the protesters selfish. The activists vowed to continue until the government agreed to a programme of insulating all Britain’s draughty and energy-inefficient homes by 2030 – or until they were sent to prison. The latest to be jailed was Dr Diana Warner, 62, a retired GP from Bristol. After a spree of activism, including being found not guilty over a 2019 Extinction Rebellion action at Canary Wharf, and then skipping her contempt of court trial to block a train headed for the Drax power station in North Yorkshire, Warner said she was finally sleeping well. “The first thing I think about is no longer the climate and environment emergency because I know I’ve done my best and can take a bit of a breather,” she told the Guardian from HMP Bronzefield in Ashford, Surrey. “Being in prison for climate activism seems very odd. But in such a disjointed world it feels to me like the right place to be.” Ben Taylor, 26, is serving the longest sentence. He was jailed for six months after telling judges if they freed him he would “go out and block the highway at the earliest opportunity” and would keep doing it until the government acts. He said life at Thameside was mostly boring. “I was treated a bit rough at first, made to feel alienated, vulnerable and powerless, but I’m on a good wing now and have made a few friends. It’s really not that bad for me.” James Brown, the Paralympian released this month after being jailed for gluing himself to a plane in an XR action in 2019, said it was important for those spending Christmas in prison to remember they had “done the right thing”. Brown, who spent 10 weeks in Wandsworth prison in London, said: “It is tough for them and their families at Christmas but it is necessary ... Most of the positive, radical changes we have seen have come about because of peaceful protest and civil disobedience and that is what we need to tackle the climate and ecological crisis. In the end, if you are not resisting then you are complicit.” Emmanuelle Andrews, the policy and campaigns manager at the human rights group Liberty, said: “Protest is not a gift from the state, it’s a fundamental right, and one that has been attacked for years by a government that wants to make itself untouchable. The heavy-handed treatment – both by police and the government – of protesters over the past year follows a long-term trend seen for several years from a government that has sought to threaten protesters into silence. “The government and police already have extensive powers to detain and criminalise protesters. But the policing bill is an attempt to take this even further. It is an attack on the rights of everyone who has a cause they believe in, from climate activists to grieving families looking for answers and justice.”Russia’s supreme court has ordered the closure of Memorial International, the country’s oldest human rights group, in a watershed moment in Vladimir Putin’s crackdown on independent thought. The court ruled Memorial must be closed under Russia’s controversial “foreign agent” legislation, which has targeted dozens of NGOs and media outlets seen as critical of the government. Memorial was founded in the late 1980s to document political repressions carried out under the Soviet Union, building a database of victims of the Great Terror and gulag camps. The Memorial Human Rights Centre, a sister organisation that campaigns for the rights of political prisoners and other causes, is also facing liquidation for “justifying terrorism and extremism”. Memorial International’s closure marks an inflection point in Russia’s modern history, as efforts to publicise crimes under Soviet leaders such as Joseph Stalin have become taboo 30 years after the secret government archives were opened after the end of the Soviet Union. While not quite seeking a return to the Soviet past, Putin has become deeply sensitive to any criticism of it by groups including Memorial. Genri Reznik, a lawyer who represented Memorial on Tuesday, called the decision to close it “political”, adding that the hearing reminded him of the Soviet show trials of the 1930s. The decision also follows a sustained assault on Russian civil society this year that has led to opposition leaders such as Alexei Navalny being imprisoned, prominent activists and journalists fleeing the country, and NGOs and media outlets hit with fines and closures under Russia’s “foreign agents” and “undesirable” laws. The judge, Alla Nazarova, ordered the organisation closed for “repeated” and “gross” violations of Russia’s foreign agent laws, a designation Memorial has called politically motivated but nonetheless claimed to have followed. The decision will close the “Memorial International Historical, Educational, Charitable, and Human Rights Society, its regional branches and other structural units,” she said. In his defence of the organisation, Reznik said: “The Memorial Society promotes the health of the nation. To eliminate this from the history of the country now means to contribute to the idea of ‘the state is always right’.” The Interfax news agency quoted a lawyer for Memorial as saying it would appeal, both in Russia and at the European court of human rights. The Russian prosecutor portrayed the organisation as a geopolitical weapon used by foreign governments to deprive modern Russians of taking pride in the achievements of the Soviet Union. Those arguments dovetail closely with the Kremlin’s use of Soviet history as a rallying point for society and reinterpretation of key historical moments in its confrontations with European countries. “It is obvious that, by cashing in on the subject of political reprisals of the 20th century, Memorial is mendaciously portraying the USSR as a terrorist state and whitewashing and vindicating Nazi criminals having the blood of Soviet citizens on their hands,” said Alexei Zhafyarov, a representative of the Russian prosecutor general’s office, during the hearing. “Why should we, the descendants of the victors, have to see the vindication of traitors to their homeland and Nazi henchmen? … Perhaps because someone pays for that. And this is the true reason why Memorial is so fiercely trying to disown its foreign agent status,” he continued. About 100 supporters of the organisation gathered outside the court on Tuesday. Many chanted “shame” after the verdict was delivered. Police made several arrests. Memorial’s leadership had hoped the broad public support for the group might save it from closure. At a previous hearing, the group submitted more than 127,000 signatures in support of the organisation, as well as the testimonies of those who had discovered the fates of their relatives thanks to gulag and other records uncovered by Memorial. “The long-term activity of Memorial has always been aimed at restoring historical justice, preserving the memory of hundreds of thousands of victims during the years of repression, preventing such things now and in the future,” wrote the former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev and the Novaya Gazeta editor, Dmitry Muratov, in a joint statement last month. They called on prosecutors to recall their claim against Memorial. The purge of Russia’s opposition and independent organisations has continued through the end of the year. In the past week a BBC Russian journalist announced he had fled the country after being named a “foreign agent” and realising he was being surveilled, and OVD-Info, a website that monitors arrests and court cases, was blocked as a “foreign agent”. Two former coordinators for Navalny’s nationwide political network were also arrested on extremism charges on Tuesday. The daughter of Natalya Estemirova, a former Memorial board member murdered in Chechnya for her human rights work in 2009, wrote in response to the verdict: “My mother always used to say: ‘It can’t get any worse than this.’ Turns out it can.”Man and Beast, as the Royal Academy’s winter blockbuster is subtitled, are the same thing when Francis Bacon is looking at them. They are both meat. The artist’s painted world is a butcher’s shop: slabs of beef hang vertically in his triptychs among umbrellas and swastikas, bisected beasts drained of blood, flattened into red and white fatty flesh. But the people in his paintings are just as beastly – and just as butchered. Bodies wrestle and kiss. Nudes are splayed on dirty mattresses. We are just biological stuff. Bacon would surely have seen the irony that the Royal Academy’s survey of his art through the lens of his interest in animals has been delayed by a virus. For Bacon sees no hierarchy of organisms, no sacred specialness in the human species. When the exhibition finally opens at the end of January, it will unveil a truly Darwinian artist in whose eyes a pope and a chimpanzee are equally tragicomic. Bacon painted screaming, solitary apes in cages in the same years he depicted isolated anguished papal figures in glass booths. In 1957’s Study for Chimpanzee, the animal looks like a sad prelate, sulking in the corner of a zoo enclosure. In the 1940s and 50s, when he defined his vision and established his fame, he also painted dogs, elephants and owls. To visit a zoo is to experience a Francis Bacon theme park. Apes, monkeys and birds of prey are isolated for observation behind bars, mesh or glass, provided with swings and dead branches just as Bacon’s people are given weird items of tubular-steel furniture in their claustrophobic orange or pink rooms. Bacon grew up close to nature. His father bet on, and tried to breed, horses. Young Francis had early sexual encounters with the grooms in his father’s stables. There were also plenty of dogs in this minor-aristocratic country house milieu. Bacon had siblings who settled in colonial Africa, where he went on holiday. Big game fascinated him. He started collecting books on African wildlife as a teenager and one of his most surprising paintings, Elephant Fording a River from 1952, is a tender portrayal of a big mammal dwarfed by a vast shadowy wilderness. Yet Bacon is a ruthless student of the human condition, not a sentimental nature artist. His studies of animals are essentially fodder for his art of ideas. By approaching him through his menagerie of symbols, Man and Beast invites us to focus on Bacon’s grand, scary vision of life and death. After sitting next to JMW Turner at a dinner, John Constable praised his “wonderful range of mind”. Bacon, the most important British artist since Turner, shared that big bold mentality. And he used animals to build his personal mythology of the perverse. The creatures who howl and crouch in his 1944 triptych Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion are part chicken, part owl, part dog – and all human. We are no longer angels created in God’s image, Bacon tells the war generation. The Royal Academy show features his 1988 painting, Second Version of Triptych 1944, that rams the point home for a new age. It was painted in the year Damien Hirst staged the group show Freeze that launched the Young British Artists and a year before the Berlin Wall fell, as if to insist that his vision of brutish gargoyles is as pertinent as long as humans exist. We are not holy. We are base. Monsters are what happen when humans and animals interbreed. Egyptian and Greek art created jackal-headed and horse-bodied beings that represent states between human distinctness and the impulses we share with our fellow animals. Bacon too, is an artist of myth. He set out to create a post-religious mythology of modern life, portraying people whose skin is like elephant hide, who crouch like apes and have sex like dogs. In Figure Study II, painted in 1945-6, a naked and partly formed man turns a face with no upper half towards us. From his comparisons of human and animal anatomy – including Eadweard Muybridge’s photographs of animals and humans in motion – Bacon creates a new, mutant Frankensteinian nature. Only the greatest artists can get away with such visions. The reason Bacon’s art doesn’t collapse into melodramatic pretension is that he exactly observes details of life, and renders it in richly decadent, bravura paint that is as satisfying as it is disturbing. By the 1960s he was ready to take on the other great animal artist of the 20th century. He started painting bullfights even though the corrida “belonged” to Pablo Picasso. Bacon’s bullfight happens in a room, of course. As 1991’s Study of a Bull reveals, Bacon could also look at animals alone, peaceful, existing for themselves. He never portrayed a person so tranquilly. • Francis Bacon: Man and Beast is at Royal Academy, London, 29 January-17 April.Ferran Torres has completed his transfer from Manchester City to Barcelona in a deal worth an initial €55m plus add-ons. The Spain forward has signed a five-year contract at the Camp Nou that includes a buyout clause of €1bn. The overall fee could rise to €65m depending on the player’s achievements. The 21-year-old has not featured for City since late September after injuring a foot on international duty but is fit again now. A tweet from City read: “Ferran Torres has left Manchester City and completed a permanent move to Barcelona.” Torres was a priority target for Barcelona’s manager, Xavi Hernández, particularly with the premature retirement of Sergio Agüero, who moved to the Camp Nou from City in the summer but managed only 339 minutes before suffering chest pains against Alavés in late October. Agüero confirmed his retirement this month due to a heart problem. City’s manager, Pep Guardiola, said he would not stand in the way of a player who wants to leave the club and having cost City €27m the sale to Barcelona represents good business.A leading video game maker, Riot Games, has agreed to pay $100m (£74m) to settle a gender discrimination lawsuit with California state agencies and more than 2,000 current and former female employees. Under the agreement, the company, which makes games including League of Legends, will pay $80m to members of the 2018 class action suit and about $20m towards legal fees. The settlement is awaiting final approval, which is expected at a hearing at a Los Angeles court in the next few months. The California state civil rights agency, the Department of Fair Employment and Housing (DFEH), hailed a “historic agreement” which it said would send a powerful signal to the gaming industry and others. Kevin Kish, the director of the DFEH, said: “If entered by the court, this decree will compensate employees and contractors affected by sex discrimination and harassment, ensure lasting change in this workplace, and send the message that all industries in California, including the gaming industry, must provide equal pay and workplaces free from discrimination and harassment.” The lawsuit, which was followed by two inquiries by California state agencies, was filed by female employees more than three years ago. It alleged gender discrimination, unequal pay, harassment and retaliation. “I am so glad we achieved this first step toward justice for the women of Riot Games,” said Jes Negron, a plaintiff. “I hope this case serves as an example for other studios and an inspiration for women in the industry at large. Women in gaming do not have to suffer inequity and harassment in silence – change is possible.” Genie Harrison, an employment and sexual harassment lawyer representing the plaintiffs, said: “This is a great day for the women of Riot Games – and for women at all video game and tech companies – who deserve a workplace that is free of harassment and discrimination.” As part of the settlement, the company agreed to workplace reforms including monitoring by a third party for three years, pay transparency and “limiting subjectivity and implicit bias in hiring and selection processes”. Riot Games agreed to settle the suit in 2019 for $10m but the agreement was blocked by the DFEH, which argued in a court filing that victims should be entitled to up to $400m. In a statement on Monday, Riot Games, which is owned by the Chinese internet company Tencent, said: “In an effort to drive ongoing transparency and accountability, Riot has also committed to having its internal reporting and pay equity processes monitored by a third party jointly approved by Riot and the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing for three years.” In an email to employees seen by the Washington Post, five company executives responded to the settlement. “We want to acknowledge that the timing of this announcement isn’t ideal,” they reportedly wrote. “The final details of the agreement came together quickly, and we wanted you to hear about it from us directly rather than read about it in the news while on break.”An effective and widely available treatment for Covid would be a significant breakthrough for managing the pandemic, but two antivirals recently authorized in the US come with some significant caveats, including low supply and use only among those at high risk for severe illness and death. Paxlovid from Pfizer and molnupiravir from Merck and Ridgeback Biotherapeutics were authorized by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) last week. The pills could be a game-changer for the most vulnerable, because they can be taken at home twice a day for five days to prevent hospitalization and death. For those considered at high risk of serious illness, Paxlovid was found to be 89% effective when taken within the first three days of symptoms and 88% effective in the first five days. Andrew Pekosz, professor of microbiology and immunology at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, described the pills as “very promising”. “There is an important role for these in terms of limiting severe disease,” Pekosz said. “It’s just going to be a challenge to use them effectively.” Those challenges include the fact that supplies of the Pfizer treatment are very limited, while the Merck treatment is less effective than hoped. And the pills aren’t for everyone. Both treatments will be given only to people at high risk of being hospitalized or dying from Covid-19, which were the populations studied in the clinical trials. The Merck treatment will not be given to children or pregnant people. Pfizer’s pills aren’t recommended for those with liver or kidney issues, and they may cause other medications to work differently during the treatment course. There’s also the issue of access. The pills must be taken as soon as possible after a positive test – and tests can be difficult to find in some of the hardest-hit places, with results often taking days to return. The treatments are also only available by prescription from a doctor or health worker, limiting those who can get hold of it. And only 65,000 courses of the more effective Pfizer treatment will become available this month, with another 200,000 courses arriving in January amid an anticipated surge of hundreds of thousands of cases as the Omicron variant spreads. Washington DC, for instance, will only receive enough for 120 people despite having the highest rate of new cases in the country. “It’s going to be very, very limited in terms of being able to find it,” Pekosz said. And those shortages are likely to persist in the short term. The antivirals are complex to create and it will take six to eight months to ramp up production, with Pfizer expecting to make 120m courses of the treatment in 2022. The US government pre-ordered 10m courses of Pfizer’s treatment and 3m of Merck’s. Like the vaccines and monoclonal antibodies, government-purchased antivirals will be given for free. Beyond supply, another challenge of Paxlovid will be drug-to-drug interactions. Not all medications are affected, but certain ones – some heart medications and blood thinners, for example, as well as herbal supplements like St John’s wort – could be affected by the treatment. Those who receive the Pfizer medication will need to work closely with their doctors to monitor these medication interactions. The Merck treatment will be more widely available at first, but it reduced hospitalization by only 30% among high-risk patients. “That was not a magic pill for sure,” said Peter Anderson, a professor of pharmaceutical sciences at the University of Colorado. The Merck treatment is only for adults, because it could interfere with bone and cartilage growth in children. It’s also not recommended for pregnant people, because animal studies showed there could be some effects on the fetus. Men who want to start a family should wait 90 days after the treatment, Anderson said. “This drug works by introducing mutations and errors in that replication of the genetic material, and the concern is that it could potentially be the same thing for replication of genetic material in gametes, or sperm and new embryos,” Anderson said. Molnupiravir will be used as an additional tool that is “limited to situations where other FDA-authorized treatments for Covid are inaccessible or are not clinically appropriate,” Cavazzoni said. Other treatments for Covid are likely to follow. On the same day the Pfizer treatment was authorized, a study on remdesivir published in the New England Journal of Medicine found the three-day antiviral is highly effective at avoiding hospitalization and death if given early in the course of illness. The US government is also ordering more sotrovimab, the monoclonal antibodies from GlaxoSmithKline and Vir Biotechnology that work against the Omicron variant. The last order of sotrovimab recently shipped, but the US is ordering 1m more doses, with 300,000 to be made available in January. Treatments for Covid should be used in addition to vaccines, not in place of them, the experts stressed. They are particularly important for people who can’t be vaccinated or who don’t mount a good response to vaccines, such as the immune-compromised and the elderly. Pekosz worries that patients will have unrealistic expectations of the antivirals. “We’ve got to be clear to people what their expectations are. These drugs are going to keep people out of the hospital. They’re not going to make you feel better the next day as you take it. They’re not going to shorten your symptoms,” he said. “It’s just going to keep you out of the hospital – an incredibly important thing for the high-risk groups,” Pekosz said, providing “one more weapon to help reduce the amount of disease severity, hospitalizations and deaths resulting from Covid-19.” These medications should work well against Omicron and other new variants, because unlike vaccines, they don’t target the part of the virus that tends to evolve. There have been some concerns that Merck’s drug, which works by forcing the virus to mutate until it’s no longer effective, could drive the emergence of new variants. But experts believe this is unlikely. “It’s really as if the antiviral drug is just taking a hammer to multiple parts of the virus and breaking multiple parts of the viral genome,” Pekosz said. In fact, molnupiravir was named for Mjölnir, Thor’s mythical hammer. “So the risk for mutations that result in other variants of concern emerging from people who are on these drugs is probably minimal.” But Pekosz is concerned the virus could evolve to be resistant to these treatments, as has happened with some monoclonal antibodies and, in one study, remdesivir. Giving a mix of different drugs, instead of just one kind of antiviral, would probably prevent resistance, he said. “That’s a place where the federal government may be able to really step in and broker some deals across pharmaceutical companies, to get them to work together to make multi-drug cocktails,” Pekosz said. In the meantime, the treatments represent a “very important step forward”, Anderson said. “Now you’ve got a really effective treatment for those people that we worry about the most.” If at-risk people are able to access the treatments quickly, “before the virus has a chance to take hold, you can basically shut down replication,” he said. “You can save that person … It’s a big deal.”After the turmoil of the past two years, the consensus among economic pundits is that 2022 will be calmer. But in late 2019, when the first reports of a new coronavirus started to filter out from Wuhan in China, few imagined within months that the world economy would be flattened by a pandemic. So what are the big risks for the coming year? A new Covid variant derails the global economy It is too early to say how serious the Omicron variant of the virus will prove to be but it has already put paid to hopes that life was about to return to pre-pandemic normality. Consumers have not needed to be instructed to obey restrictions; often they have tempered their own behaviour. A return to full-scale lockdowns would have much more severe consequences. Dhaval Joshi, an economist at BCA Research, says more and more variants will emerge and one of them will spell trouble. The danger from a variant comes from three properties, he says: its contagiousness; its ability to evade vaccines and natural immunity; and the severity of the disease that it causes. “The big issue is not whether the omicron variant is a ‘super-variant’. The big issue is that, eventually, a new variant will be a ‘super-variant.’” Inflation takes off The unexpected pick-up in price pressures has been one of the big stories of 2021. The Bank of England, the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank were all caught unawares by a sharp increase in inflation, caused by a combination of rising energy prices, labour shortages and supply-side bottlenecks. The Bank of England expects the annual increase in the cost of living to be above 5% by next April but then start to fall. But central banks will face some tricky decisions if inflation proves more ingrained than they envisage. Just before Christmas, Saxo bank came up with its 10 “outrageous” predictions of unlikely but under-appreciated events for 2022 and one of them was a wage-price spiral in the US sending inflation in the world’s biggest economy above 15%. Even a much more modest rise would cause the Fed to tighten policy aggressively. China hits the buffers and turns nasty For years there has been speculation that the world’s second-biggest economy is about to have a severe economic downturn and it hasn’t happened. But legacy problems have now started to fuse with current difficulties to whip up what could prove a perfect storm. Problems from the past are exemplified by Beijing’s attempts to manage the failure of the property company Evergrande, and prevent its problems infecting the entire economy. Along with many other companies in the sector, Evergrande expanded when Beijing loosened policy and ran into trouble when the authorities took steps to deal with the economy overheating. China has taken a no-risk approach to Covid-19 and has been central to the global economy’s supply-side problems. As the economy has cooled, the nationalist rhetoric from Xi Jinping has been ramped up, particularly towards Taiwan. Economics and geo-politics threaten to collide in 2022. A crisis in emerging markets The 30% drop in the Turkish lira in November alone has alerted financial markets to the dangers of a crisis in emerging markets. In truth, most of Turkey’s problems are country-specific, caused by the unorthodox approach to monetary policy of Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. Currency dealers have been unimpressed by Erdoğan’s insistence that the way to cope with soaring inflation is to cut interest rates. Faith in the other big emerging market economy viewed as high-risk – Argentina – is also in short supply. There is, though, a more systemic issue, which is that many emerging markets have borrowed heavily in US dollars often using future export earnings as collateral. In the event that the US Federal Reserve tightens policy, the dollar is likely to strengthen, making it more expensive for poorer nations to service their debts. If the global economy also slows, they will face a double whammy. The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are already warning of increased debt distress. A financial crash Asset prices – shares, bonds and property – have all risen since the initial sell-off at the start of the pandemic. Rock-bottom interest rates and the flooding of financial markets with money created by quantitative easing programmes have made it cheaper to move home and to borrow money for speculative activity. Asset prices have also been boosted by the message sent out from central banks that any tightening of policy will be limited and gradual. But economies have started to slow after a period of catch-up growth in the aftermath of lockdowns. The risk is that despite weaker activity, central banks are forced into more drastic monetary policy action by higher-than-expected inflation, thereby kicking away the prop that has been supporting richly valued assets.US health authorities have halved, to five days, the recommended isolation time for people with asymptomatic Covid. The US is facing a huge surge in Covid cases, driven by the Omicron variant, which contributed to travel chaos over Christmas and stoked worries about damage to the economy and education. One expert told the New York Times: “All 50 states are in the soup at the same time. It’s like every state is being hit by a viral hurricane.” But in a statement on Monday, Rochelle Walensky, director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the new recommendations “balance what we know about the spread of the virus and the protection provided by vaccination and booster doses”. The CDC said that after isolation, asymptomatic people should wear a mask around others for another five days. It also recommended a five-day quarantine for those exposed while unvaccinated, more than six months out from their second dose or more than two months out from a single-dose Johnson &amp; Johnson shot and not yet boosted. “These updates ensure people can safely continue their daily lives,” Walensky said. The move proved controversial. Michael Mina, an epidemiologist, called the new recommendation “reckless”. “Some people stay infectious three days, some 12. I absolutely don’t want to sit next to someone who turned positive five days ago and hasn’t tested negative. Test negative to leave isolation early is just smart. “I am 100% for getting people to drop isolation early. Heck, I formally recommended it to CDC in May 2020 and published the recommendation in the Journal of Clinical Infectious Diseases in April 2020. But it was always with a negative test. What the heck are we doing here?” Others pointed to the need to avoid significant disruption to daily life. Ashish Jha, dean of the School of Public Health at Brown University, said: “You isolate for five days. Now you feel well (are asymptomatic). You still need to wear a mask for five more days. Do I prefer a negative antigen test on top? Sure. Have said as much. But this seems pretty reasonable.” Earlier, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser floated another controversial proposal: a vaccine mandate for domestic air travel. Amid cancellations caused in part by Omicron, Anthony Fauci said a mandate might confer stronger protection on flights, for which federal regulations require all those aged two and older to wear a mask. “When you make vaccination a requirement, that’s another incentive to get more people vaccinated,” Fauci told MSNBC. “If you want to do that with domestic flights, I think that’s something that seriously should be considered.” Two officials told the Associated Press advisers had yet to make a recommendation, as a mandate could trigger logistical and legal concerns. The US mandates that most foreign nationals traveling to the US be fully vaccinated. Citizens and permanent residents only need show proof of a negative test. Federal rules don’t require people traveling within the US to do so. Hawaii requires a test or proof of vaccination. At the White House, Biden told reporters the subject was discussed with governors. “They asked Dr Fauci about everything from whether or not he thought he was going to move to test at home – I mean, on air flights and that kind of thing,” Biden said. Biden pledged full federal support to states facing Omicron and a run on tests. “My message is: If you need something, say something, and we’re going to have your back any way we can,” Biden said. “Seeing how tough it was for some folks to get a test this weekend shows that we have more work to do,” he said, referencing his plan to make 500m rapid tests available beginning next month through a yet-to-be-developed website. The Arkansas governor, Asa Hutchinson, raised concerns Biden’s plan could get in the way of state efforts. Biden said the federal effort would not interfere. A White House official said new tests would come from new manufacturing capacity. Earlier this year, the White House explored a domestic vaccination requirement for flights, or requiring vaccination or a negative test. Officials expected legal challenges. The CDC says more than 241 million Americans, about 77% of the eligible population aged five and over, have received at least one shot. The administration has instituted requirements that federal workers, contractors and those in healthcare get shots, and that companies with 100 or more employees have vaccination or testing mandates. Those moves have been mired in legal wrangling. The supreme court is set to hear arguments on 7 January. Such legal moves are likely to play out amid more distressing scenes nationwide. Michael Osterholm, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota, told the Times the national character of the Omicron surge meant resources would be stretched and healthcare workers hit hard. “We’re already stretched so thin,” he said.Nothing good happens in the morning. As far as I’m concerned, we would be better off without them. While the larks among us are attempting to #seizetheday with meditation or punishing exercise, my mornings are usually spent waiting for the caffeine to kick in and overcome the bleary-eyed anxiety. In 2021, lockdown and the lingering disappointment of a cancelled Christmas made winter mornings even more unbearable. For about eight weeks, from Blue Monday to the middle of March, I owed my fragile sanity to one man: Radio 1 DJ Greg James. The world is never darker than when you have just woken up alone, but listening to his nice-lad nattering as my brain began to whirr genuinely gave me hope that the world was a friendlier place than it seemed through the frosted glass of my bedroom window. “I always feel a little bad when people say thanks for cheering me up, because it cheers me up throwing myself into work,” says James, whose show has more than 4 million listeners. “It’s really saved me, particularly over the last two years.” As host of Britain’s most iconic, if not necessarily most popular, radio show (that title belongs to Zoe Ball), James readily admits that broadcasting to an anxious nation, often from an empty office, has been more than he bargained for. “It became a much more serious job than I ever hoped it would,” he says. “But then, when I took over, I did think about how it’s weirdly quite a responsible position. Trying to get the tone right has been a bigger challenge than ever, but this is not the 90s – Chris Evans [could] go out and get pissed every night.” James recalls his uncertainty on the day of Boris Johnson’s initial lockdown announcement. “I didn’t know how it would go the next day. There’s no handbook really: ‘Open the pandemic book and turn to page five,’” he bellows, with the perfect diction of one of his 1940s predecessors. They explored retreating into a pop-insulated bunker of inoffensiveness and leaving the serious stuff to the likes of Adam Fleming, Fergus Walsh and Laura Kuenssberg. “My brief has always been to try to make the day go quicker and distract people from what’s going on,” he says. But ploughing on as though nothing had changed ran the risk of appearing tone-deaf. “It’s been a bigger challenge than ever. You don’t want to be ‘too fun’ when people are anxious or sad.” It’s this quality that won me over. Prior to lockdown, I found the relentless pep of morning radio insulting; the crater between the way I felt and the way they sounded only compounded the morning blues. James’s show found another gear: breakfast radio as bulletin, breakfast radio as companion, breakfast radio as lifeline. “We tried to remove any sort of barrier of ‘I’m a radio presenter and you’re listening’,” he says. “It felt more natural to say: ‘It’s OK that I feel terrified, and you feel terrified; we’re going to try to muddle through it together. There are shitty jokes, but it became a safe space away from the rolling news coverage … Maybe one day I’d like to be a therapist!” Aside from the small matter of his weekday programme, James took on a bevy of lockdown projects to keep himself busy through the winter. Not least, growing out his hair in homage to Jake “hair goals” Gyllenhaal, much to the delight of his wife, the author Bella Mackie: “She says I must never cut my hair short again!” James also wrote a children’s book with Chris Smith, The Great Dream Robbery, which he describes as “all about imagination – dreaming your way out of a nightmare … It doesn’t take a genius to see we wrote that when we were feeling trapped but it was another great excuse to get out of my own head.” Lockdown also provided the space for James to complete his passion project, a seven-part podcast series for BBC Sounds, Sport’s Strangest Crimes, about Allen Stanford, the Texas billionaire and Ponzi-schemer who scandalised the sporting world after buying his way into the cricket establishment. “It’s something that I would like to do more of,” he says of the forensic new lane he has found in the pandemic. Despite the podcast’s success, James has no plans to depart the breakfast show anytime soon. “You’d be silly not to want to do the biggest show,” he adds, reiterating his commitment to the job. “During the pandemic, it became a crutch for a lot of people. I trust the listeners more than ever and they trust me back. It’s been a great experience doing shows where you have to judge the mood of the nation and set up the rest of the day.” Recent weeks have seen an increase in Covid anxiety that is eerily reminiscent of this time last year. I expect I will be leaning on James to get me through another winter. “Yeah, lots of things are happening now but we’re still having to balance that with people being anxious, or unsure about what they can and can’t do safely,” he says. “It’s taken on a whole new life [in the pandemic] – but I quite like the challenge of a Tuesday morning in February.”The two images are as stark as what they represent: the cause and effect of Haiti’s increasing woes. In one, a masked and armed gangster keeps lookout on a Port-au-Prince rooftop, just a few blocks from the presidential palace. In the other, a family recently displaced by gang violence takes shelter in a school that now houses dozens of families, a stone’s throw from their homes. “Port-au-Prince is almost entirely controlled by gangs, and we wanted to show the efforts of people that are running businesses to survive,” says Rodrigo Abd, 45, an Argentinian staff photographer with the Associated Press who took the images. “But I was also trying to show another side to Haiti, to avoid the stereotypes that we always repeat, to show the violent without the violence, or the poor without the poverty.” Haiti is beset by overlapping crises. The country’s president, Jovenel Moïse, was assassinated in early July in circumstances that remain mysterious. A 7.2 magnitude earthquake wrecked the country’s rural south in August. In September, thousands of Haitian migrants that had been living across South America were deported from Texas after years away from their homeland. Meanwhile, in the political vacuum, local rights groups estimate that as many as 165 gangs continue to terrorise residents, throwing up roadblocks and kidnapping rich and poor alike for ransom. Aid deliveries to the quake-struck south are often turned back by militiamen, who in October kidnapped a group of 17 US and Canadian missionary workers and their families. Over 600 people have been kidnapped in Haiti this year, over triple last year’s total. Fuel shortages have added to the woes, especially in a country without a reliable electrical grid. “You can feel an aggressive landscape, that it is a place that could explode very easily and at any time, because the situation is so bad,” says Abd, who has photographed war zones around the world. Abd has worked several times in Haiti, travelling to the Caribbean country first in 2004, just before the coup that removed then-president Jean-Bertrand Aristide from office in another wave of instability. Aristide had empowered local gangs to implement his will in the poorer neighbourhoods, and some of the groups operating today trace their roots to his presidency. “Here, now we are back to what it was in those days, where in some communities, neither the police nor any other type of law enforcement institution can enter, and therefore the population becomes hostages to the armed gangs,” says Fiammetta Cappellini, the Haiti representative for international charity AVSI. “Having no other point of reference, the people develop a sort of cohabitation with the gangs that have become the authority running the neighbourhood.” Despite the menacing pose of the masked gangster on a rooftop terrace in Abd’s image, the photographer saw a similar desperation to that of the terrorised residents. “Most of those people that we interviewed said that being in a gang was just a way of survival,” says Abd, adding that he had hoped to photograph gang members without masks, though met steadfast refusal. “It was very difficult to understand the story from outside; we spent three weeks trying to understand, and talking to gang members to understand why they were trying to contest territory and fight the government.” “My impression was that they are almost normal guys who put on the mask and pick up the gun when they need to defend territory or extort someone, or kidnap someone,” says Abd. “I think that if the situation improves, they may even go back to being normal citizens. “It’s not only a story that has been going on for the last two or three years, but one that is getting worse now,” he says. “There’s a relationship between the gangs, the city, and the people that are always having to move from one place to another.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Donald Trump has claimed 5,000 dead people voted in 2020 in Georgia, a state he lost to Joe Biden on his way to national defeat. He was off by 4,996. As the Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported on Monday, state officials have confirmed four cases of dead people voting. All involved family members submitting votes for the deceased, cases in which the state has the power to levy fines. In one case detailed by the paper, a widow submitted an absentee ballot for her husband after he died in September, two months before polling day. An attorney for the 74-year-old woman reportedly told officials her husband “was going to vote Republican, and she said, ‘Well, I’m going to cancel your ballot because I’m voting Democrat.’ It was kind of a joke between them. She received the absentee ballot and carried out his wishes. “She now realises that was not the thing to do.” Even if Trump’s claim about dead voters were true, it would not have saved him from being the first Republican to lose Georgia since 1992. Biden won the state by nearly 12,000 votes. Nor could Georgia alone have overturned Trump’s electoral college defeat, by 306-232. But Trump included his claim in a notorious call in which he pushed the Georgia secretary of state, Republican Brad Raffensperger, to “find” enough votes to give him victory. “Dead people,” Trump said. “So dead people voted, and I think the number is close to 5,000 people. And they went to obituaries. They went to all sorts of methods to come up with an accurate number, and a minimum is close to about 5,000 voters.” He also claimed that “a tremendous number of dead people” voted in Michigan, adding: “I think it was … 18,000. Some unbelievably high number, much higher than yours, you were in the 4-5,000 category.” Referring to a claim of “upward of 5,000” dead voters he said was presented to Georgia officials, Raffensperger, said: “The actual number were two. Two. Two people that were dead that voted. So that’s wrong.” Trump insisted: “In one state, we have a tremendous amount of dead people. So I don’t know – I’m sure we do in Georgia, too. I’m sure we do in Georgia, too.” Trump’s chief of staff, Mark Meadows, told Raffensperger: “You say they were only two dead people who would vote. I can promise you there are more than that.” Raffensperger refused to help Trump, prompting threats to his safety. But the call also placed Trump in legal jeopardy, as a district attorney investigates whether he broke electoral law. The call was part of scattershot attempts to overturn a defeat Trump insists in the face of overwhelming evidence to the contrary was the result of electoral fraud. A few days after the call, on 6 January, Trump told supporters in Washington to “fight like hell” in his cause. Rioters then attacked the US Capitol, seeking to stop certification of Biden’s win, in some cases seeking to capture or kill officials including Trump’s vice-president, Mike Pence. Five people died.“The east is rising, the west is declining”, according to the narrative propagated by the Chinese Communist party (CCP). Many outside China take its “inevitable rise” as read. On the way to becoming a “modern socialist country” by 2035, and rich, powerful, and dominant by 2049, the centenary of the People’s Republic, China wants to claim bragging rights as its GDP surpasses the United States, and project its power based on its expanding economic heft. There is, however, a critical flaw in this narrative. China’s economy may fail to overtake the US as it succumbs to the proverbial middle-income trap. This is where the relative development progress of countries in relation to richer nations stalls, and is normally characterised by difficult economic adjustment and often by unpredictable political consequences. Historically, China’s growth miracle has been remarkable. In the 30 years to 1990, the money GDP (the market value of goods and services produced in an economy) for China and the US in American dollar terms grew more or less in tandem at just over 6% and 8% per annum, respectively. . But in the next three decades, China’s GDP growth doubled to more than 13%, while the US’s halved to 4.5%. That pushed China’s GDP up from 5% of American GDP to 66%. Yet, China’s growth spurt is now over, and the huge disparity in GDP growth has been eliminated. In the last few quarters, China’s GDP has been growing at half the rate of the US. Although that discrepancy is probably unsustainable, the US’s estimated $7tn GDP margin over China in 2021 means that comparable rates of GDP growth in the future will sustain and even widen the margin. A Japanese thinktank has recently extended the date when it expects China to overtake the US, from 2029 to 2033. Deferrals like this are now a feature, and there will be more. The issue though is less about the maths and more about why China is at a turning point. Remember we have been here before. In the 1930s, Germany was going to dominate Europe, if not the world. In the 1960s and the 1980s, the Soviet Union – which had already stolen a march on the US in space technology – and later Japan, which was the rising economic force on the planet, would within 10 to 20 years overtake the United States to become the dominant economic and technological power. History was not kind to the consensus. There is a serial tendency going back to the 1920s to underestimate the self-rectifying capacity of American institutions and enterprise. Equally, the Soviet Union and Japan both pursued similar development models, based around distortions that emphasised unsustainably and excessively high savings, high investment, and eventually high debt. Their development models cracked with spectacular consequences attributable to chronic failures of institutions and governance. China is our 21st-century version of this phenomenon. Its investment rate is a good 10 percentage points of GDP higher than it was at the peak in the USSR and Japan, and strongly associated with misallocation and inefficiency of capital, and widespread debt servicing problems. Its zero-Covid policy could keep barriers in place between China and the world economy until 2023 or even beyond, but this aside, a protracted slowing in trend growth, exacerbated by over-indebtedness and the tipping point now in real estate, as illustrated by the crumbling development giant Evergrande, is already under way. China’s $60tn real estate sector is four times GDP and accounts for a quarter to a third of annual growth. It faces years of awkward adjustment, not least as developers cut debt, the first-time buyer age cohort contracts, and probably as real estate prices decline. China’s economic structure, moreover, is unbalanced. It has income per head that is the equivalent of Mexico, but consumption per head that is no higher than Peru. Consumer spending accounts for about 37% of GDP, little higher than it was in 2010, and much lower than in 2000. Productivity growth, closely associated with liberalising reform, has stalled. China’s development model urgently needs a makeover to avoid the middle-income trap. The longer it is delayed, the bigger the costs. China’s leaders recognise that change is necessary, and Xi Jinping recently revived the slogan of “common prosperity” to mobilise the Communist party and citizens around a strategy to reduce income and regional inequality, and improve living standards. Yet these political goals require precisely the kind of liberalising, progressive and redistributive reforms to the economy to which Xi Jinping is opposed. He has pursued an increasingly ideological and totalitarian governance style in which the already dominant position of the party and state in the economy has been strengthened further. Perversely, he has created a contradiction in which even the CCP’s expertise in dialectical argument may be of little help. The recent blizzard of new laws and regulations aimed at private firms and entrepreneurs, for example, is designed to nail down the party’s control and bring the private sector to political heel. This is hardly compatible with the productivity growth and innovation on which China’s lofty economic ambition depends. Overtaking the United States is going to need a lot more than narrative. It requires policies to which Xi’s China is opposed, and might just remain a mirage. The consequences for China and the rest of the world have not been properly thought about. • George Magnus is a research associate at Oxford University’s China Centre and at Soas. He is the author of Red Flags: Why Xi’s China is in Jeopardy. • This article was amended on 29 December 2021 because an earlier version cited “the US’s $9tn GDP margin over China”. In fact the figure is estimated to be $7tn.The tale of Stripe the squirrel began cheerfully enough with Corrine Reynolds, an animal lover in north Wales, feeding the creature titbits and watching its acrobatic adventures in her back garden. But the story took a distinctly unfestive twist when Stripe – named after the sharp-toothed creature in the Christmas horror comedy Gremlins – began nipping at Reynolds and other neighbours. After the grey squirrel bit more than a dozen people in the town of Buckley, Flintshire, drawing blood on several occasions, Reynolds caught it in a humane trap and had the animal taken away by the RSPCA. Reynolds, a 65-year-old carer, began feeding Stripe in the summer and for months it made regular trips to her garden, but then it began to bite the hand that fed it. She reported what had happened on a local social media group page and was shocked at how many others said they too had been bitten. “In the space of 48 hours he attacked 18 people,” she said. “He started attacking people who are just taking their recycling bags to the bin, and they are quite gruesome injuries.” One neighbour, Scott Felton, 34, said he had been having a cigarette at his back door when the squirrel pounced. “This squirrel came out of nowhere, jumped on to my arm and bit me on my hand before I even had chance to get it off – it all happened so quick.” He went to hospital for a tetanus jab. Another victim, Sheree Robinson, 42, who was bitten on her finger, said: “He had five or six of my neighbours. He had me when collecting my recycling bags. He jumped out from behind my green bin. It had me good and proper. I’ve got teeth marks on the top and bottom of my finger. It latched on and I had to shake it off.” Another resident said Stripe had attacked her two Bengal cats, who usually feared nothing, and admitted she did not go out of her house when the squirrel was lurking. Reynolds felt she had to take action and bought a humane trap to catch Stripe. The RSPCA came and picked the squirrel up, transferring it from her cage to theirs in her bathroom to stop it from escaping. There is no happy ending. The RSPCA said it had no choice but to put Stripe down as it is illegal to release a grey squirrel back into the wild. An RSPCA spokesperson said: “We were incredibly sad to have to put this squirrel to sleep but were left with no choice due to changes in legislation in 2019 making it illegal to release grey squirrels back into the wild. We do not agree with this law and opposed it, but legally we have to comply.” It said there were ways to humanely deter grey squirrels, such as keeping bird food away from them and blocking access points, and it urged people not to trap them. The charity does not suggest that people do not feed squirrels but asks them to think about whether it could cause problems in the neighbourhood and points out that they are very good at finding their own food. The British Pest Control Association says it is very rare for squirrels to bite humans, but if they do it can be a deep wound and medical advice should be sought. Reynolds said she was sad for Stripe but there was relief in the neighbourhood. “I feel it is now safe to go in my garden. I did feel incredibly harsh doing what I did by putting it in a cage, but when people didn’t feel safe in their garden, I had to do it. A few people in Buckley are certainly breathing a sigh of relief.”Stella Creasy has criticised the “absurdity” of parliament’s approach to new mothers, after the Commons Speaker said it was up to the chair of a debate to decide whether MPs could bring in their babies. Creasy, a Labour MP who was reprimanded for bringing her baby into a Westminster Hall debate earlier this year, criticised the position of Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Commons speaker, who suggested he and his deputies should use their discretion. In an interview with the Daily Telegraph, Hoyle said that it should be up to the MP chairing the debate to decide whether the presence of a baby would cause any disruption. But Creasy rejected this as a solution, saying it would not work in practice because an MP with a baby would have to decide whether to use her proxy vote 24 hours in advance or turn up to the debate and risk being turned away. “Given there is no published list of who is chairing a debate and I have to give up my proxy a day in advance in order to speak, there is every possibility I could turn up but find when I get to a debate that I couldn’t take part because the chair wouldn’t let me,” she said. “The whole thing reflects the absurdity of how parliament operates when it comes to new parents and why we need proper maternity cover for MPs and an actual proper maternity policy because in any other workplace creating barriers for pregnant and new mothers would be illegal.” She highlighted research from Delta Poll that found 57% of people thought there should be proper maternity cover for MPs, and 48% of respondents thought bringing a baby into the chamber should always be acceptable or acceptable in some circumstances, while 39% stated it should never be allowed. Creasy had asked for clarification from Commons authorities after being reprimanded for having her infant son in a sling as she spoke in parliament last month, saying it had not been a problem on previous occasions. Commons rules state that MPs should not have children or infants with them in the chamber, but Creasy has taken both of her children into the chamber before without any complaints being made. Hoyle requested a review into whether the rules should be updated and reiterated his view that the “chair on the day has got to make a decision”. Referring to Creasy’s son, he said: “I saw that baby come into the chamber when I was in the chair. And did it affect the debate? No. Was it a quiet and peaceful baby? Absolutely. Did it disrupt? Not in the slightest. So did it matter to me? Absolutely not. “What I would say, and I’ll be quite honest with you, is each chair will make a decision. Unfortunately it’s become highly political. “It is now for others to decide, that’s why the committee is reviewing it. And I will then have to respect its decision.” He also said he had asked the cross-party procedure committee to examine the rules and whether changes were needed, and that he and his deputies could use their discretion in applying the existing measures. The issue caused an outcry when Creasy, the MP for Walthamstow, tweeted an email she had received from Commons authorities, which read: “We have been made aware that you were accompanied by your baby in Westminster Hall earlier today.” It referred to the latest edition of the Commons rulebook, which says MPs should not take their seats in the chamber with a child. The email from the private secretary to the chairman of ways and means, the formal title for the most senior deputy speaker, read: “I would like to draw your attention to the fact that this also applies to debates in Westminster Hall.” Creasy had been leading a debate about buy-now-pay-later consumer credit schemes in the hall, a subsidiary chamber where MPs can raise issues of interest to them. She has repeatedly argued that MPs should have proper maternity cover so that they would not have to turn up to debates in person in order to properly represent their constituents. They are currently given some money for extra case workers for constituency matters but not to carry out their parliamentary work. Writing in the Guardian about the argument, she said: “With little support from the authorities or indeed my own political party, I have worked as best I can while managing the needs of my now 13-week-old son. That’s why I was baffled to be told I could not take him into parliament with me. “It doesn’t have to be like this. Whether in New Zealand, Canada or in Europe, parliaments around the world have shown a family-friendly legislature is possible. “There are thousands of mothers out there who have something valuable to add to our politics, and they want to run. For now they see the mother of all parliaments discouraging mothers and rightly wonder if they will be welcome.”North Sea gas producers could face a windfall tax on the near-record profits they are likely to make from booming prices, in an effort to help protect households from the soaring costs of the energy crisis. The government faces growing pressure to take urgent action to prevent a national energy crisis that could double home energy bills to £2,000 a year, including a multi-billion pound raid on North Sea gas earnings. Operators in the North Sea are expected to rake in their highest profits since the 2008 financial crash after a surge in global market prices, while UK households shoulder record high heating bills as well as the cost of dealing with energy suppliers that have gone bust. “What the government needs to do is step in,” Dale Vince, the chief executive of the energy supplier Ecotricity, told the BBC. “If they really believe the energy prices are too high and truly want to control them then they should subsidise the cost of energy right now.” “The North Sea operators, for example, supply 40% of Britain’s gas [and] they have made a killing in this crisis because they’re getting paid at nine times more than they were last year – and nine times more than they need because the cost of getting gas out the ground has not gone up,” he said. The UK’s North Sea oil and gas companies are expected to report near-record cashflows of almost $20bn (£14.9bn) for the current financial year, according to industry experts at Wood MacKenzie, after prices on the UK’s gas market climbed nine times higher in the last year. In recent years, many of the larger publicly-owned oil and gas companies, which once dominated the North Sea, have been replaced by smaller companies. Some are listed, such as Harbour Energy, but a growing proportion of North Sea companies are backed by private equity, including Siccar Point, or overseas governments. Emma Pinchbeck, the chief executive of the trade association Energy UK, told the BBC that the government’s thinking had “shifted over the last few weeks” because the crisis was likely to affect the whole economy. “There’s definitely scope to look at how we intervene in the price shock, and I think it would be very welcome for [the Treasury] to be involved in discussions on what to do next, and to be looking really broadly at the energy sector,” she said. The UK’s gas market breached the record high set in October this year by climbing to about £4.50 a therm last week, from about 50p at the beginning of the year, reigniting calls for an urgent intervention to protect customers from spiralling costs. The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, met energy bosses for emergency talks on Monday, but the discussions failed to produce a solution to what the Ovo Energy boss, Stephen Fitzpatrick, warned could lead to “an enormous crisis for 2022”. Windfall taxes were first raised in September after the Spanish government set out plans to subsidise bills through a raid on companies which profited from the crisis. At the time, Kwarteng told a committee of MPs that the government was considering “all options”, including Spain’s €3bn (£2.5bn) windfall tax on generators and energy traders. “I’m not a fan of windfall taxes,” the business secretary added. “But of course [the energy system] is an entire system and we have to think about how we can get the energy system as a whole to help itself.” Wood Mackenzie said a windfall tax on the UK’s North Sea companies “cannot be ruled out”, particularly in light of the UK government’s ambiguity towards fossil fuel development within its 2050 net zero climate plan. “There would be strong resistance from producers, who would typically stop investment in response. But if the government is already considering winding down the sector, this threat may not be as persuasive as it has been in the past,” the consultancy said. The government is also reportedly considering a £20bn Treasury-backed fund, which could provide loans to help struggling energy companies cover the cost of rising wholesale energy prices, according to the Daily Telegraph. The loans would be repayable over a number of years to help protect households from a sudden rise in home energy bills next year. The business department did not respond to a request for comment.At the end of 2002, Australia retained the Ashes inside 10 days. In 2021, the official figure will be 12 days. But that includes a surrender just after lunch on the fourth day in Brisbane, and well before lunch on the third day in Melbourne, scarcely enough in each case to be included as a day’s play. On Monday, in these pages, we wrote about the extraordinary emergence of Scott Boland. On the second evening, his two wickets before stumps set the match on a path towards an inevitable conclusion. On the third day, Boland realised that conclusion himself, taking four more wickets to round out an astonishing second innings on debut, finishing with six wickets for seven runs. The second Indigenous man to play Test cricket for Australia won the Johnny Mullagh medal named for his long-ago predecessor, Unaarrimin, in an extraordinary moment of symbolic and practical significance. In raw numbers, only once in Test history has a six-wicket haul cost fewer runs, across 144 years of the game. More than anything, this emphasises how right everything has gone for Australia, even when things have gone wrong. The home team would have gone into this series expecting Josh Hazlewood, Patrick Cummins and Mitchell Starc to play as many matches as possible, with a couple of rotations where required. Instead, Hazlewood has been missing since the first game. The captain, Cummins, missed the second game and only the notionally least reliable of the three, Starc, has played every match. And yet Starc has led the lot, bowling an excellent line with consistency, reliability and perseverance, despite the doubts thrown his way before the contest commenced. Behind him, every substitute that Australia have employed has delivered above expectations. Jhye Richardson took five for 42 in the final innings in Adelaide. Michael Neser was his support act, doing everything he could in exactly the style that we have come to expect from him. Then when the pair were rested, there was Boland as the Melbourne specialist polishing off a usually attritional Test in the shortest possible time. Perhaps this is the benefit of playing at home, where most things can work out well for the home team. But that was not the case for Australia against India in the previous home summer, in which India found ways to survive and then prosper against the local attack. This leads to the final question, which is how good this Australia team actually is. A couple of months ago, the focus was on the coach Justin Langer’s fractious relationship with senior players in the national team. A few weeks ago, the focus was on the former captain Tim Paine’s resignation amid stories that still require closer examination. Now, having retained the Ashes in straight sets, as has been the practice in several recent series, glowing reviews will be written. But that could be very different by the end of 2022, after the Australian players have travelled to Pakistan, Sri Lanka and India. There is no clear way to define this team’s quality against the lack of quality of England’s tourists. The visiting captain, Joe Root, spoke after the Melbourne loss about pride in the badge and the need to deliver. But that can’t mean much when players are not given adequate preparation for a contest. Nobody batting in the county championship in the last couple of years has demanded a place in England’s team. It looks increasingly evident that the competition itself is not fit for purpose. But that is equally the case when Australian players tour Asia, and has been for a long time. Recent visits include a loss to Pakistan in 2018, a tie in Bangladesh in 2017, a loss to India earlier the same year, and a whitewash by Sri Lanka in 2016. There will be deserved celebrations after winning the Ashes at home, but far sterner tests await in the year to come. As for England, the problems are vast and complicated. Neither Root nor coach Chris Silverwood wanted to damn their current squad, but neither was prepared to deny that there are broader systemic problems in providing England players who can handle the challenges of overseas tours. There are two Tests remaining in this Ashes series, but neither can change anything in terms of these bigger problems. For now, Australia’s team can enjoy the primacy of home conditions. There is little more significant than the fact that the home team’s most questionable player in the series, Marcus Harris, made 76 in Melbourne and outscored England’s second innings on his own. What can a visiting team do from there? With the series decided, there are bigger challenges now awaiting Australia. The meaning of beating England, given England’s now evident weaknesses, remains very much a point for debate.Shortages of lateral flow tests (LFTs) and lack of walk-in test slots across England are threatening to undermine the government’s plans for New Year’s Eve celebrations to go ahead unimpeded. Pharmacies across England report having run out of test kits for distribution to the public before Christmas, and have been unable to receive additional kits as the supply chain has been disrupted by the Christmas and Boxing Day holidays. Some community pharmacies in rural areas said they had not received deliveries of LFTs since early last week, although many remained closed on Monday and Tuesday because of the extended bank holidays. People turning to the government website were also out of luck: on Tuesday morning it said no delivery slots for LFTs were available, for the second day in a row. But by mid-afternoon deliveries were again being offered, with a warning that the LFT kits could take three days to arrive. The site also indicated that there were no walk-in LFT or PCR tests available anywhere in England on Tuesday morning. By early afternoon the site was indicating availability of PCR tests in most parts of England, although some areas were close to running out. The UK Health Security Agency said it encouraged people to revisit the sites “every few hours” if they were unable to order tests, as more would become available, and to use any tests they may already have before ordering or collecting more kits. A spokesperson said: “Despite unprecedented demand, we are continuing to supply millions of rapid lateral flow tests every day. Our total delivery capacity has doubled to 900,000 test kits per day since Saturday 18 December so more people can order tests. “During periods of exceptional demand there may be temporary pauses in ordering or receiving tests, to ensure we manage distribution across the system and support changing requirements for LFD [lateral flow device] and PCR tests, and delivery capacity was reduced over Christmas and the bank holiday.” Tests were available in all regions of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, according to the site. On Monday the government declined to impose further Covid curbs in England, allowing nightclubs and pubs to open for New Year’s Eve and giving other mass events the go-ahead. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said; “Of course people should remain cautious as we approach new year celebrations and take a lateral flow test if that makes sense.” Covid cases in England reached a new high of 113,628 on Christmas Day, and 1,281 people were admitted to hospital, the highest daily figure since mid-February. Official data on new Covid cases, which was delayed over the festive period, also showed 98,515 new confirmed cases reported in England on Monday. Data for Boxing Day from England and Wales combined revealed 108,893 new cases reported. Case numbers have also hit new highs in Scotland, where 8,252 cases were reported for Christmas Day, 11,030 on Boxing Day and 10,562 on Monday. Demand for tests has soared during the Christmas holiday period, with positive test results reaching record levels in England as the Omicron variant continues to spread rapidly. Demand further increased last week after the government cut the self-isolation period for England from 10 to seven days for those with negative LFT results on day six and seven. The 10-day self-isolation period remains in force in Wales and Scotland. Pharmacies are limited to receiving one carton of tests a day. The Pharmaceutical Services Negotiating Committee said its members were struggling to meet demand, and asked for the public to be patient with pharmacists, who were working extremely hard over the Christmas period. A spokesperson for Boots said: “Boots provides access to Covid-19 lateral flow device test kits on behalf of the NHS. We are able to order more stock from the NHS each day and are therefore restocking regularly, but due to high demand over the holiday season, some stores will run out before the end of the day.” Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said: “People are trying to do the right thing, follow the government’s own advice, and test themselves regularly, but are prevented by the Conservative government’s incompetence. “They need to get a grip and provide enough tests so people can keep themselves and everyone else safe.”The US has announced it is cutting the recommended self-isolation time with Covid to five days. How long are people with Covid infectious for, and why do the rules vary between countries? What are the rules for self-isolation in the UK? Since 22 December, people in England who have tested positive for Covid have been allowed to cut their self-isolation from 10 days to seven if they have negative lateral flow tests on days six and day seven. Fully vaccinated close contacts of someone who has tested positive do not need to self-isolate, but those who are not vaccinated have to isolate for 10 days. In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, the self-isolation period for those who test positive remains 10 days, although rules around close contacts vary between the nations. How long is someone with Covid infectious for? It has been clear for some time that people can be infectious from about two days before they develop symptoms. Estimates for how long an infected person remains contagious vary, but as Harvard Medical School notes: “By the 10th day after Covid symptoms begin, most people will no longer be contagious, as long as their symptoms have continued to improve and their fever has resolved.” Dr Julian Tang, a professor of respiratory sciences at the University of Leicester, said although the Omicron variant showed some escape from vaccine-induced and past immunity, he would expect the immune response to follow a similar timeline to that in previous variants. However, Prof Lawrence Young, a virologist at Warwick Medical School, said it appeared that the time from infection to becoming infectious was shorter with the Omicron variant, at two or three days, and it was very likely that the infectious period was also shorter and probably affected by vaccination status. “This infectious period can occur before the onset of symptoms and last for between two to three days after you become symptomatic,” he said. The UK Health Security Agency says the new approach for England “reflects latest evidence on how long cases transmit the virus for, and supports essential public services and supply chains over the winter, while still limiting the spread of the virus”. Dr Richard Tedder, a member of the Clinical Virology Network, said the shift was a compromise, and was based on the assumption that people with two negative tests are unlikely to transmit coronavirus to contacts. “On a balance of probabilities this is probably correct,” he said, although he suggested the situation may be different for some people, such as those who are immunosuppressed, and it may not hold if future variants are not picked up by lateral flow tests. Young agreed. “The approach adopted in the UK is sensible based on seven days and two consecutive negative lateral flow tests. These tests are a great way to determine if you are infectious.” How do the UK’s rules compare with those of other countries? In France, people with Covid must self-isolate for 10 days, while in Germany the mandatory self-isolation period is 14 days unless a PCR test comes back negative or the local health office confirms release. In the US, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has recently cut the recommended self-isolation period to just five days provided the person has no symptoms at that point. “The change is motivated by science demonstrating that the majority of transmission occurs early in the course of illness, generally in the one to two days prior to onset of symptoms and the two to three days after,” the CDC said. “Therefore, people who test positive should isolate for five days and, if asymptomatic at that time, they may leave isolation if they can continue to mask for five days to minimise the risk of infecting others.” Close contacts of positive cases are also recommended to isolate for five days, followed by strict mask-wearing, although those who have had their booster jabs or have recently completed the primary course of Covid vaccines do not need to self-isolate but should wear a mask around others for 10 days. Tang said the approach was essentially following the same 10-day isolation cut-off that the World Health Organization proposed last summer. “But they are also taking into account the viral load drop-off after the first five days, with five days of masking to follow,” he said. Whether it was sufficient would depend, he said, on how conscientiously masks were worn during that period to limit further transmission as the viral load drops. “It’s just another compromise as we learn to accept and live with this virus,” Tang said. “Different countries will approach this differently based on their local knowledge, studies, experience, and competing resources and priorities.” However, some experts, including Young, have raised concerns over the shift in rules in the US, noting there is no requirement for a negative Covid test before ending self-isolation. Dr Michael Mina, a former assistant professor at Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health and now CSO of eMed, noted that some people stay infectious for 12 days. “CDC’s new guidance to drop isolation of positives to five days without a negative test is reckless,” he tweeted. “I absolutely don’t want to sit next to someone who turned Positive 5 days ago and hasn’t tested [negative].”Germany’s highest court has ruled that disabled people must be protected by legally binding guidelines in case hospitals are forced to introduce a triage system as the country braces itself for a new, more infectious wave of coronavirus. The constitutional court announced its decision on Tuesday, ordering legislators to create a legal framework that would prevent disabled people from being unfairly treated. It urged the state to establish a set of criteria to which doctors would have to refer before deciding which patients received lifesaving treatment if intensive care units were overwhelmed and resources were exhausted. The case was brought by a group of nine people with disabilities and pre-existing medical conditions who feared that current medical guidelines would not protect them from being overlooked or disregarded if they became seriously ill with Covid-19. They called for the state to lay down the selection criteria that would be used to determine which patients continued to receive possibly lifesaving treatments if a choice had to be made. One of the complainants, Nancy Poser, a 42-year-old judge at a district court in the western city of Trier, who has spinal muscular atrophy, said she was relieved by the ruling. “Lawmakers are now obliged to protect us based on the clear understanding that disabled people like me are protected by the basic law – in an emergency situation this law cannot be simply levered out and that is very comforting,” she told the news magazine Der Spiegel. In its ruling the court said that parliament had flouted the constitution, which states that “no person shall be disregarded because of disability”. The issue has been a matter of debate for years, and the court has been considering the case for the past 18 months, since the issue was brought into sharp relief in the early stages of the pandemic. So far Germany has not had to resort to a triage situation, though there is heightened awareness of the method having had to be used elsewhere in Europe, in particular Italy, during the pandemic. In recent months patients have had to be transferred to other regions in Germany and abroad in an operation involving the air force, as intensive care units have filled up in some areas. The decision was welcomed by Karl Lauterbach, the health minister, who tweeted that “people with disabilities need the protection of the state more than any other, especially in the case of triage”. But he added that Germany now needed to try to prevent triage situations, through “effective protection measures and vaccinations”. The onset of a new wave of coronavirus in Germany driven by the new, more infectious variant Omicron has led to the introduction of tighter contact reduction measures in recent days, and is driving the demand for third booster jabs of Covid vaccines as well as increasing the number of people getting the vaccine for the first time. With just over 70% of Germans fully vaccinated, legislators are due to debate the introduction of a vaccine mandate next month, in an effort to tackle the slow uptake. With the expectation that infection rates are likely to rise exponentially in the coming days, medics and lawyers have broken a taboo by raising the ethical question of whether those who have chosen not to be vaccinated can be turned away for treatment or face an increase in health insurance costs should they need a hospital. Tatjana Hörnle, the director of the Max Planck Institute for the Study of Crime, Security and Law in Freiburg, has argued that it is time for a rethink of “the prevailing opinion that a patient’s previous actions” – in this case, not getting a vaccination – should not play a role in treatment decision-making. She said that a person’s own decisions if they were of legal age and mentally capable had to be taken into account in an emergency situation such as a pandemic, in which not all patients needing intensive medical care would be able to receive it if resources were short. Hörnle told Spiegel it was “legitimate and rational to point out” to those who might have “essentially or exclusively caused their own emergency situation” that other sick people might be treated ahead of them. The German Institute for Human Rights has rejected the idea of using vaccine status as a criterion for deciding whether to treat anyone. “Vaccine status should not be allowed to play any role as to who should receive intensive medical treatment or not,” said its director, Beate Rudolf. “Not even amongst those who have behaved carelessly or without solidarity.”After taking a drag on a cigarette thought to be laced with spice, Gyula Remes collapsed in the freezing underpass at Westminster tube station, three years ago last week, just across the road from the Houses of Parliament. The Hungarian national’s lips went blue, and he stopped breathing. He had come here for a better life but was soon being rushed a few hundred yards across Westminster Bridge to St Thomas’ hospital, where he died, aged 43. Remes was one of 726 people estimated to have died homeless in England and Wales in 2018, and his death could so easily have been prevented. A week before he died, Remes had applied to the Connection at St Martin-in-the-Fields, a highly regarded homeless night shelter that benefits from the Radio 4 Christmas appeal every year. The Connection said it was unable to let Remes access its night shelter because, in its words, he did not have a “realistic and sustainable route off the streets”. Kafka would have been hard pressed to come up with a more dystopian scenario. Ironically, it emerged later that Remes was doing part-time kitchen work and had just been offered full-time work. His death (the second in 10 months in the same underpass) sparked outrage in parliament. The next day, the then secretary of state for housing, communities and local government James Brokenshire, who died in October this year, told parliament: “Every death of someone sleeping rough on our streets is one too many. Each is a tragedy, each a life cut short. We have a moral duty to act.” However well-intentioned Brokenshire’s words, the government reneged on this duty. In 2019, the number of deaths among homeless people in England and Wales rose for the fifth year in a row to a record high of 778. Meanwhile, the number of people who were entirely homeless or living in temporary accommodation and hostels in England soared to 280,000 in 2019 from a low of 40,000 in 2009 and 2010. While the government failed to tackle homelessness, many members of the public continued to do the same thing they had always done to address the issue – donate to charity. Over the Christmas appeals of 2017 and 2018, Radio 4 listeners raised more than £5m to support the Connection at St Martin-in-the-Fields and another charity. Then the pandemic came along and proved what many of us have always known: by and large, eradicating street homelessness can be done (though some people will inevitably return to the streets), and it’s the responsibility of government, rather than charities, to do this. Under the policy introduced at the beginning of the first lockdown called Everyone In, the government found £105m to get England’s homeless people off the streets and into emergency accommodation to keep them safe from Covid-19. The idea behind Everyone In was to provide rough sleepers with accommodation; hopefully support, tailored to individual needs, would follow. But there is already a name for a policy that combines immediate housing with the crucial “wrap-around support” that should follow it: Housing First. In Britain, Housing First is still regarded as a radical model to end homelessness, but it shouldn’t be. It’s common sense. You house people, then address their complex needs, rather than tell them that if they manage to address behaviours such as addiction, they will qualify for housing. Housing First was developed in New York in the early 1990s, and has virtually ended rough sleeping in some states – Utah, for example, has reduced chronic homelessness by 91%. Meanwhile, in Finland Housing First has been an unqualified success since being introduced in 2007. Rough sleeping has been all but eradicated in the capital, Helsinki, where there remains only one night shelter, of 50 beds. In Britain we cannot measure the effectiveness of Housing First because we have been neither brave nor humane enough to trial it on a national level. But we can look at how successful our impromptu version of it was, and the fact is, we managed to get most of Britain’s rough sleepers housed within days. According to one study, the scheme saved an estimated 266 people from death in the first lockdown. Boris Johnson had won a huge majority only three months earlier and was terrified of his popular support being eroded by the prospect of homeless people dying on the streets in large numbers. But the concern over street homelessness did not last long. By June 2020 only 16 of the 46,687 deaths registered as Covid-related in England and Wales were identified as people who were homeless. The government reverted to type, and the homelessness crisis once again became a low priority. In February 2021, according to Shelter, 77% of the 37,430 people helped under the Everyone In banner were not living in settled accommodation (somewhere they could stay for at least six months); and almost one in four were no longer being accommodated at all. As for wraparound support (the second, vital, part of Housing First), the project did not last long enough and was insufficiently resourced (understandable in those chaotic days). This was a real opportunity to transform homelessness and British society. Johnson had a chance to steal a huge head start on his promise to eradicate street homelessness by May 2024, and he blew it. But as he’s shown throughout his career, he’s never given a tuppenny toss for his own pledges. Promises are simply there to be broken. As London mayor in 2009, he promised to “end rough sleeping in the capital by 2012”. By the time he left office, the number of homeless people on the street had more than doubled, from 3,673 to 7,500. As early as January 2021, Citizens Advice was already reporting that half a million people had gone into rent arrears during the pandemic, while a study by the debt charity StepChange in September showed that 225,000 people feared losing their homes. The ending of the £20 uplift in universal credit, and rocketing energy prices, make it even more likely that people will be turfed out of their homes. In summer, the Big Issue launched a Stop Mass Homelessness campaign, and last month it estimated that if the government pays off the £360m rent arrears accrued over the pandemic it could save £2.6bn in the long term by preventing homelessness. Last Tuesday the government announced that Everyone In would be reintroduced for rough sleepers this winter, as well as funding of £310m for councils to prevent vulnerable people from becoming homeless. At first glance, it looks great. But the reality is, it’s little more than a repeat of emergency pandemic measures. The risk is that it becomes another temporary fix, which falls off the priority list as soon as winter passes. Everyone In has already proved how simple it is to tackle rough sleeping. Now the government needs to go further. The countrywide introduction of Housing First (funded by central government) is in the interests of homeless people, the economy, society at large and Johnson himself. All Johnson has to do is put his money where his mouth is to show that he is capable of keeping a promise, and he will create a legacy worthy of Remes and the thousands who have died needlessly on our streets, as well as for Brokenshire – and, dare we say it, even for himself. • This article was amended on 29 January 2022 to clarify that the money raised by Radio 4 listeners for the Christmas appeals of 2017 and 2018 was donated to two different homeless charities, not just the Connection. Simon Hattenstone is a Guardian features writer Daniel Lavelle is the author of Down and Out, published next year. Together they wrote The Empty Doorway, a Guardian series about people dying homelessMost of Australia will swelter through New Year’s Eve as the heatwave hitting Western Australia moves across to the south-east of the country. And elevated fire danger levels across parts of south-eastern Australia could affect New Year’s Eve celebrations. While the heatwave in WA was expected to ease on Thursday, bringing much-needed relief to the state, other parts of the country would begin to feel its effects. Sarah Scully, a senior meteorologist at the Bureau of Meteorology, said the conditions “are expected to gradually ease over the next couple of days with the focus of the extreme heat shifting across to south-eastern Australia”. “We’re forecasting severe heatwave conditions for South Australia through Victoria and also for parts of Tasmania leading into the weekend.” The Bureau of Meteorology is forecasting Melbourne’s maximum will reach 38C on NYE, a result that would make it the city’s second-hottest day in 2021 if reached. Only 25 January’s 39.2-degree reading has been hotter. Felix Levesque, a meteorologist at Weatherzone, said: “We should see temperatures drop away from the high 30s and 40s on Thursday, and then that heat will then filter into South Australia and Victoria.” Much of the eastern seaboard could expect to see temperatures around the 30C mark. In Queensland and the Northern Territory, some rain was expected. In Sydney a high of 29C was forecast. With temperatures in Adelaide expected to reach up to 36C, the country fire service assistant chief officer, Brett Loughlin, said the CFS was preparing for extreme heat and dry conditions across the state. Loughlin said fire services would be working closely with planned events on New Year’s Eve, but could not rule out the possibility that celebrations would be cancelled or modified. “It could very well be that if conditions aren’t conducive to allowing safe use of fireworks then we might see those events … cancelled or conducted differently. “Exceptions can be made where there are suitable precautions put in place,” said Loughlin. But he added it was “too early to give people that sort of hope that things can safely go ahead.” Loughlin encouraged residents of south-eastern SA to take measures to prepare themselves, including creating a bushfire action plan and staying informed. “Have the radio, have social media, … our website, the ABC, a broad range of information sources.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He also urged people to work cooperatively with the CFS and observe the bans in place. “We don’t want our brave volunteers to be seeing in the new year risking their lives somewhere just so someone could have their 30 seconds of whiz-bang.” Highs of more than 40C were forecast for inland south-eastern Australia. “[It] is hot, but it’s not record-breaking territory,” Scully said. Fire danger levels for Victoria’s north and west were forecast to be very high to severe over New Year’s Eve and New Year’s Day. Wimmera was expected to receive a severe fire danger rating, while all regions except the north-east and Gippsland would receive a very high fire danger rating. “There might be a risk for that to increase, maybe not on Friday, but on Saturday into Sunday with those temperatures peaking,” Levesque said. WA’s severe heatwave conditions, described as “historic” by Jackson Browne, a senior meteorologist at the BoM, had brought temperatures of over 40C and caused bushfire emergency warnings to be issued for parts of the state’s south-west. In Perth, thousands of homes were left without power as temperature records for Christmas and Boxing Day fell.The New South Wales government’s Covid contact-tracing system has been all but abandoned, with efforts now focused only on those in the highest risk categories. NSW Health authorities are under increasing strain as the Covid Omicron variant pushes up hospital admissions, while its virulence means contact tracers have all but given up tracking its spread in the wider community. A senior NSW Health official has revealed to Guardian Australia that tracing would now only be done for only those in aged and disability care, Indigenous communities and prisons. He said, even then, staff were “flat out keeping up” with cases. “There’s a big internal discussion about whether tracing is still worthwhile,” he said. “People are asking ‘what’s the point of it? What are we trying to achieve?’” With another day of long waits for Covid testing on Tuesday – and some sites turning people away – NSW politicians traded barbs over the seriousness of the state’s growing caseload. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet dismissed claims by the Labor opposition the hospital system was at a breaking point as “utterly irresponsible” and “reckless”. He conceded, though, staff were stretched as the state recorded more than 6,000 new daily cases on Tuesday, with 557 people in hospital, including 60 in intensive care units. “We have the best doctors and the best nurses who have worked tirelessly and I know there is exhaustion,” Perrottet said. “We’re in a very strong position here in the state. We are opening up, we are learning to live alongside the virus.” However, Ryan Park, Labor’s health spokesperson, said that with more than 2,000 health staff furloughed because of Covid contact or infection, it was time for the government to call in extra help. “We’ve got to be honest about this,” he said. “If they need federal government support, if they need federal government resources and assistance, and we have a national cabinet, ask for that help and assistance now.” Within the health system there is a growing fatigue after months of battling to contain different Covid variants, particularly Delta and now the more virulent Omicron strain. Guardian Australia revealed yesterday that exhausted New South Wales health workers were being pressured to return from Christmas leave as hospitals and testing facilities are crippled by surging Covid numbers and staff furloughs. About 2,000 health workers have been furloughed across the state after being listed as close contacts, prompting NSW Health to slash the isolation time for health workers from two weeks to seven days, provided they return a negative PCR test. Perrottet has called for the focus to shift away from case numbers. “What is most important as we move through this next phase is our ICU numbers, [our] hospitalisation numbers,” he said. Hospitals, though, were bracing for further increases in patient numbers, with new Covid admissions more than doubling since mid-December. Just over half of those presenting are positive for the Omicron variant, with the rest having Delta. One senior doctor said the number of new cases in NSW was likely far higher than 6,000 a day since many people were not able to get tested or weren’t bothering to do so. If numbers in hospitals kept rising at the current rate “by late January, we’ll be overwhelmed”, the doctor said. For now, though, big hospitals in Sydney, such as Liverpool in the south, have spare capacity which they did not have at the height of the Delta wave. Perrottet said the government had made changes to the definition of close Covid contact for health workers that would allow an extra 1,000 health staff back to work. Previously staffers were unable to work following exposure to a Covid case for a fortnight, and this furlough had now been cut to seven days, he said. Gerard Hayes, NSW state secretary of the Health Services Union, said the hospital system was not at breaking point, and the high take-up of vaccines and now boosters was making a big difference. “The presentations at hospitals are not as bad as what they were during Delta,” Hayes said. “However, bit by bit, they’re sort of increasing.” “There’s a fear within our members [who were] seeing a light at the end of the tunnel, and now that light’s disappearing,” he said. “There’s a lot of apprehension, a lot of fatigue, and a lot of frustration.” Park said the government needed to “get in front of it and ensure that an exhausted system is brought back to life” with some help from the commonwealth or elsewhere. The help could include putting more staff into testing clinics or vaccination hubs to free up staff for clinical work. “I think the community at the moment don’t really care where they get that help from, but they can understand that [it’s needed] when they’re waiting in a queue for six or seven hours to get a test, or they’re waiting days on end to get test results,” Park said. “They understand they need more resources and they would expect I think governments to be working cooperatively at all levels.”The gratification of an Indian mother at the words “I love your food” is matched by the dread of hearing “I am leaving home”, so when my 10-year-old wistfully announced that he couldn’t wait to move out, my maternal guilt peaked as I tried to figure out why. In the world he inhabited, “every parent” imposed fewer screen restrictions and “no parent” ever expected a child to excel at school. These two assertions made it easy enough for his parents to point out that a combination of excessive screen time and no work seldom gave rise to the ability to move out of home. But this time, his words sounded less wishful thinking and more genuine desire, moving me to ask why. “So I can get a dog.” After raising three children to the point of relative independence, all I saw was a fourth who would remain needy and dependant. And not for a moment was I fooled by, “You just have to get the dog, we will do everything.” But given the profound fondness Australians have for pets, we simply couldn’t shake off the topic. Friends and the unlikeliest of relatives acquired dogs, sent cute photos and cuter videos, and casually remarked, “Get a dog, they’re so much fun!” But amid the occasional froth these comments ignited, I stayed resolute – we didn’t need a dog to complete our life – and the kids gave up. Until the day their sibling voiced the fact that he couldn’t wait to move out of the house and they murmured their appreciation. Suddenly, the equation shifted: gain a dog or lose a child? Then came the pandemic and, with it, a wonderful reprieve. Rescue homes were emptied of dogs and the cost of buying a puppy from a breeder soared. Every family driven mad by isolation wanted a dog and a hypoallergenic one – the kind we needed – cost a ridiculous $10,000! And then too, there was a waiting list nearly as long as the one for elective surgery. Suddenly my statement of intent, “We can look into it,” was matched by a harrumphing disclaimer, “But I refuse to pay $10,000 for a dog!” Yes, love had a price. I shared my dilemma with my friend who owned dogs, cats, ponies and birds (who probably found me weak for not owning even one pet) and she connected me to her breeder friend whose first ominous words were, “No child should grow up without a dog.” But then lamenting the extortionist pandemic pricing, he maintained that the right price for a puppy should not be outright unaffordable but one that made buyers pause for thought because there was nothing worse than a momentary indulgence quickly abandoned. I found his view so sensible and his love for dogs so endearing that I decided to visit him. When the litter was born, we took a surprise trip to the countryside. I will confess that watching a gel-like mass of blind things clinging to their weary mother (while their father happily chased birds) resurfaced all my previous misgivings but it was too late. Amid squeals of delight, we anointed one of the unclaimed puppies as ours – the breeder put a tag on him and bid us return after eight weeks. The child who wanted to move out of the house was allowed to name the dog. A fan of the cartoon character Garfield, he named the puppy Odie after Garfield’s friend. The choice was passed by unanimous resolution in an Irish-Indian household, where nothing happens unanimously. At eight weeks and not a day later, Odie came home. I warmed to the breeder’s dim view of expensive training programs and his advice that dog owners must take responsibility for instilling the rules at a young age, which sounded just like parenting. So we kept an eagle eye on his propensity to pee on the good carpet and chew shoes in preference to his toys – and he soon learned. One day Odie stole a grape. The vet said he could be fine, need dialysis or die without another window for intervention. I rued that it was the kind of useless “choice” I gave my cancer patients. After the $800 grape heist, we stopped buying grapes. I am glad to say that my worst fears about dog care were not realised. The sink, dishwasher and laundry, loaded but inanimate, might groan for my children’s attention, but Odie is dutifully walked, washed and fed, and endlessly loved because he both demands and merits attention. There is a running joke in our house that I am jealous and resentful of a little dog who has become a big hit, but in truth my heart catches when, in the quiet of the night, I hear one of the kids telling Odie their day was better because of him. We strive to parent our children in wholesome ways – I underestimated the added dimension of love and responsibility that a dog would teach mine. On a hot day, my daughter cut short her outing to check if Odie had enough water. When Odie was sick, her teenage brother made fresh broth and patiently fed it to him. Such acts of reciprocity are hard to manufacture and, if a dog quietly teaches my children how to give and receive love, I am all for it. Odie turned one this week. You should have seen the toys and treats, although I drew the line at the high-top dog sneakers with matching socks. My in-laws ended up with Odie’s cousin, Rory, who brings them unparalleled joy in retirement. My children no longer talk about leaving home because there is the vexed issue of who will take the dog. The obvious compromise is living together for a long time or being close enough to each other to freely visit. I am realistic enough to know that this might not hold true in the modern world but, if having a dog means knitting my children even closer together, it will be a mother’s prayer answered. Happy birthday, Odie!Over 40% of Australians believe marijuana should be legalised, a figure that has nearly doubled since 2013, according to new analysis. Australian researchers have looked into changes in public attitudes towards drug use over time, as measured by responses to the National Drug Strategy Household Survey. The nationally representative surveys, last conducted in 2019, have been collating data on drug use and attitudes every two to three years since 1985. A review of the survey data showed that 41.1% of respondents supported the legalisation of cannabis for personal use in 2019 – a significant rise from 25.5% in 2013. Don Weatherburn, a professor at the University of NSW’s National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre and a co-author of the analysis, said the increase may be linked to growth in marijuana use. The proportion of people who say they have used cannabis at some point in their lifetime has increased slightly over the last 20 years: 33.5% in 2001 up to 38.1% in 2019. “It’s gradually become more prevalent, probably because the law has become less draconian,” Weatherburn said. “Most states now have some form of cannabis cautioning scheme, which makes the drug somewhat less stigmatised than it had been back in the 80s and 90s. “It’s also partly true that the people who first tried cannabis are now in positions of authority in and around government and major institutions,” he said, citing the US, “where they had very harsh laws against cannabis to a situation now where you can legally sell it in many of the American states”. While the researchers found strong support for legalising marijuana for personal use, their analysis showed that support for other illicit drugs was much lower. “Support for legalising ecstasy and cocaine, although still low, has risen significantly since 2013,” Weatherburn said. In 2019, the proportions of people who wanted to legalise ecstasy and cocaine were 9.5% and 8.1% respectively. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The analysis found “a significant shift in support for treatment and education … away from prison and punitive sanctions,” he added. “Even though people are not supporting the legalisation of these drugs, they are supporting a different kind of approach to the traditional imprisonment, high fines, [and] supervised orders.” Weatherburn attributes changing public attitudes to the advent of drug courts in the early 2000s and the success of drug treatment programs, as well as a sharper perceived distinction “between those who use drugs and those who sell them”. “People have come to … realise that the sanctions we used to impose on drug users are quite severe and there are other credible options such as treatment,” Weatherburn said. “There doesn’t seem to have been any significant change in the level of support for legalising heroin or methamphetamine,” he added. The study was published in the journal Drug and Alcohol Review.A tribunal has overturned a decision by the National Disability Insurance Agency to refuse to fund an assistance dog for an eight-year-old autistic boy. In the latest case where a family has been forced to take the agency to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) over an assistance dog, the tribunal this month ruled in favour of the boy and his mother, more than two years after they first requested the funding. It comes amid a string of other cases in which NDIS participants have reported seeing their plans cut and with appeals to the AAT having increased by more than 300% this financial year, as revealed by Guardian Australia recently. The boy, whose name was not published by the tribunal, is autistic, has generalised anxiety disorder and ADHD, with the anxiety a “prominent” feature of his life that “impairs his ability to spend time at different places in the community”. His mother also told the tribunal that her son often experienced “meltdowns” at home while his therapists gave evidence that much of their sessions were spent trying to calm him down. Despite several of his treating professionals recommending an assistance dog given his love of animals and the success of equine therapy, the NDIA refused the funding request in August 2019, saying it was not “reasonable and necessary”. The dog, which was to be trained and provided by the Queensland not-for-profit Smart Pups, would have cost the agency $20,000. The tribunal heard the dog would be trained to “lap” (dog places head on the child), “nuzzle” (dog pushes into the child to disrupt behaviour), and “over” (dog lays across the child to provide weighted comfort). The agency told the tribunal there was insufficient evidence an assistance dog would help the boy to regulate his emotions and any impact it did have could also be gained through the purchase of a pet dog, which the family should pay for themselves. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It questioned whether funding for an assistance dog could be considered “value for money”, as required under the NDIS Act, because it was not clear it would be successful. The agency, represented by an externally funded barrister, also called several expert witnesses, including one who suggested it was possible the boy could harm the dog. The NDIA later cited that evidence to argue the assistance dog’s welfare could be a concern. The tribunal heard the boy previously experienced violent outbursts directed at his mother, but never towards animals, which were his “happy place”. Another expert called by the NDIA backed its call that there was no need for an assistance dog because the support could be provided by an ordinary pet. The boy was represented pro-bono by barrister John Gurr, who said the agency was trying to “downplay the benefits” of an assistance dog by saying it would do “little more than provide a calming influence”. “[The boy] suffers from profound anxiety,” Gurr said. “His anxiety is such that his ability to leave the house and participate in the broader community is severely constrained. “[The boy’s] anxiety – and the meltdowns which follow – have the regular consequence that [he] is often so emotionally dysregulated when he attends his regular therapy sessions that half the time is spent trying to calm [him] down. Much of the benefit of the sessions is lost.” AAT member Kim Parker sided with the family, saying there was evidence an assistance dog was likely to “provide tremendous benefits” and might assist the boy to “improve his communication skills and to have fewer meltdowns”. Parker said it was “ not reasonable to expect [the boy’s] mother to provide a pet dog for [him] as a substitute to him having access to a professionally trained assistance dog.” Unlike a family pet, an assistance dog would also have public access rights to accompany the boy in all public places. The case is one of several in recent months where the agency has refused to fund assistance dogs but had the decision overturned by the AAT. For example, in February, a 63-year-old cancer survivor living with a rare autoimmune disorder gained access to an assistance dog after the AAT ruled in her favour, three years after she first applied to the NDIS. The NDIS minister, Linda Reynolds, pledged in June to work with the agency to get “more consistency in policy and more clarity in terms of animal support”.Have you read the report? Do you accept the science? Shouldn’t the Great Barrier Reef be put on the in-danger list? These prickly questions are not from a Canberra press conference, but are the lines of attack anticipated by Australian officials when they briefed Angus Taylor on how to respond to a dire new report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. A 12-page list of talking points, obtained under freedom of information laws, gives an insight into how the government prepared for the release of findings that the UN secretary general would describe as a “code red for humanity”. The document – originally marked as “Official: Sensitive” – outlines suggested responses to potential questions as of 11am Monday 9 August – more than two months before the prime minister, Scott Morrison, finally landed a deal with the Nationals to set a target of net zero emissions by 2050. It was compiled by the Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources and was attached to a ministerial briefing sent to Taylor, the emissions reduction minister, to prepare for the publication of the IPCC report later that day. It includes preparation for the classic “gotcha” journalistic question: “Have you read the report?” The suggested response is: “I have been briefed on the Summary for Policy Makers that has been publicly released. I understand that the IPCC will release the full report, which is over 2000 pages, in the near future.” The document also pre-empts a particularly biting question about whether the Australian government’s intense international lobbying effort to prevent the Great Barrier Reef being classified as a world heritage site “in danger” was misguided. The anticipated question – particularly forthright given it appears in a government planning document – says: “Your own report into the Great Barrier Reef says that at 1.5 degrees Celsius that the Reef will not survive – does this not now mean it should be on the in danger list?” The suggested response is that the Australian government “has said time and again that global warming is the greatest threat to the reef and that is why we are investing so heavily in adaptation and resilience strategies”. “This report highlights that there is a threat to reefs around the world – not just the Great Barrier Reef – and Australia’s position has always been to look at the issue in that context and not to single out one nation over another under the pretext of the World Heritage Committee.” The document includes a response to the question: “Do you accept the science of the latest IPCC report?” Suggested response: “Yes, the IPCC is a trusted source of scientific advice and its work continues to inform the Australian Government.” A response to a follow-up question: “Why should I trust the science? Are the climate models accurate?” is that previous climate change projections from the IPCC “have been confirmed by real-world observations”. “Past IPCC estimates of global temperature, extreme events and other changes in global systems have proven accurate,” it says. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, said after the report’s release he would not be “berated into complying” with specific IPCC conclusions, including the finding that global heating “of 1.5C and 2C will be exceeded during the 21st century unless deep reductions in CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions occur in the coming decades”. Joyce said he believed “humans have an influence on climate” but he was “not going to participate in some sort of kangaroo court of now you will agree to every statement I say because the IPCC said it”. Calls for stronger action anticipated The 9 August talking points document shows industry department officials anticipated potential calls to speed up climate action, proposing an answer to the question: “If global temperature increase is likely to reach 1.5 °C in the near term (2021-2040), does Australia need to meet net zero before 2050 to meet Paris Agreement goals?” The suggested response is that Australia “is committed to the Paris Agreement and its goals, as well as to achieving net zero emissions as soon as possible, and preferably by 2050” – the formulation Morrison had used for months before the formal commitment to 2050 was locked in. In a line that will be familiar to anyone who has been observing the government’s climate rhetoric this year, the talking points say: “While ambition and targets are important, it is ultimately action and achievements that matter for the planet. When we make commitments, we meet them, and we are on track to meet and beat our 2030 target.” Officials also anticipated the government being asked whether it was now “too late to act on climate change” and if it should “give up on mitigation” and instead focus on adaptation. The suggested response is to acknowledge it “will be hard to limit warming to 1.5°C” but “we need to continue global efforts to reduce emissions”. Taylor statement appears to reflect briefing A press release issued by Taylor later on 9 August in response to the IPCC report appears to draw heavily on the talking points, with some tweaks. Taylor’s release did not explicitly welcome the IPCC report – even though this was suggested in the talking points – but it did include the proposed language that “it reinforces the need for a coordinated, global effort to reduce emissions”. The talking points document includes the phrase “Australia has a clear plan” – more than two months before the government announced its “Long-Term Emissions Reduction Plan” following negotiations with the Nationals. The latter document noted it was based on existing policies, including the technology investment roadmap. Guardian Australia has previously revealed that the industry department privately advised Taylor in a four-page briefing that the latest IPCC report was “balanced and transparent” and he should expect intensified calls “for more ambitious climate targets, such as net zero emissions by 2050 or earlier”. The talking points document was an attachment to that briefing and was obtained after a follow-up FOI application. Intriguingly, given that the talking points are meant to be usable when responding to media questions, one question and answer was redacted. In blocking that passage of the talking points, the decision maker cited the section of FOI laws that exempts disclosure of information that would cause damage to “the international relations of the commonwealth”.From 1-6 January, Sydney’s Cahill Expressway will be transformed into a music stage. The historic freeway will be the site of a new festival called Elevate, which is delivering a free six-day program of music and performance. Among the line-up is neo-soul artist Ngaiire, who will come with a new album’s worth of songs to show off. Released in August, Ngaiire’s third LP – aptly titled 3 – explored both her experiences of new motherhood and growing up in Papua New Guinea, where she was born and lived from age seven to 16. Proudly staking claim to the latter was a line in the sand for Ngaiire – in earlier years, she says, she stopped identifying herself as Papua New Guinean because she worried it might impede her music career. At home on the New South Wales Central Coast, a certain quintessential PNG kitchen tool has recently become Ngaiire’s most cherished object. Here, she tells us what that utensil represents to her, as well as the story of two other important personal belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire Probably our coconut scraper. My parents were living with us for about six months at the start of Covid as they’ve both lost their jobs. So as a thank you to us, they’d do real Backyard Blitz-level renovations on the house and garden, as cute surprises while we’d be out running errands or jobs. Once, we came home and they’d erected a much-needed shelving unit in the laundry and, in addition to neatly stacking all our laundry items on the shelf, they had tucked in a brand new coconut scraper. It’s a staple in most PNG kitchens but big and dangerous enough to need a space somewhere like a laundry. My parents have since moved back to PNG after 20 years in Australia, so I see that scraper as a real representation of their love and sacrifice, but also connection to home. My most useful object My studio mic. I have a little Røde mic that I won in a competition run by Happy Mag during the start of Covid. They wanted to support artists who were doing it tough while we watched our gig calendars get completely wiped. It’s not a big fancy condenser mic, but previously I didn’t have a proper studio mic at all, and I can honestly say that the only reason I have been able to do most of my vocal sessions remotely and still make money is because of this little USB mic. It’s probably the most used gift anyone has given me in the last two years. The item I most regret losing My son’s hairbrush! He has the most glorious afro you’d ever see on a three year old but the maintenance on it is a commitment. There are at least four of these plastic pharmacy brushes floating around the house and when “hair washing day” comes along – usually a Sunday – do you think I can find any of them? Heck no! After his hair gets washed, the trick is to lather and brush hair cream through before the moisture evaporates from his curls, then wrap them up in plaits for a few days so you have less knotty hair the rest of the week. When you can’t find a brush in sight, it’s a race against evaporation time to get those curls in plaits, otherwise you’ve gotta be that parent brushing the knots out of his hair the next day while he’s crying through every brush.The critically endangered swift parrot has returned to Tasmania for another breeding season but, with logging threatening its habitat, the species faces an uncertain future. The world’s fastest parrot is a colourful and secretive migratory bird that ranges across Australia’s south-east before returning to tree hollows in Tasmania’s old-growth forests to breed and raise its young. The birds’ arrival is timed with flowering blue gum trees, and with different patches flowering each year, the precise location they land changes each season. This year’s sightings began at the end of spring in Lonnavale forest, an area of old-growth in southern Tasmania. Though the parrots have returned in good numbers this year, their future remains uncertain. Without intervention, peer-reviewed research anticipates they will go extinct by 2031. Swift parrot population numbers have collapsed from 8,000 breeding pairs to fewer than 1,000, due mostly to the logging of their habitat. Current estimates put their numbers at about 750 individual birds. Mick Roderick from BirdLife Australia said a “matrix of threats” was putting pressure on the species, both on the mainland and in their breeding grounds. “One of the issues with swifties is that on the mainland they’ve lost their wintering habitat, so they’ve got fewer options,” Roderick said. “Then there’s an issue in Tasmania where the government wants to keep logging.” “They are as threatened as they can be before being extinct in the wild. The next step is extinct in the world.” Logging resumed in 2018 after a brief pause on activity in some sensitive areas of Tasmania. In July last year the Tasmanian government released a wood production plan allowing logging companies to fell areas – referred to as coupes – where the swift parrot is known to breed. Jenny Weber, campaign manager for the Bob Brown Foundation, said a survey undertaken by conservationists last week found a logging operation within 500 metres of swift parrot feeding grounds. “Last week, 124 Australian species were listed by IUCN [International Union for Conservation of Nature] on the threatened species list and if the Swift parrot is anything to go by, it’s not clear the Australian government will do anything prevent their extinction either,” Weber said. “It has been more than six years since the Swift parrot was listed as critically endangered and its habitat continues to be logged and the species is declining.” The operation was temporarily halted after a volunteer informed authorities about the presence of the birds near the logging site. Tom Allen, campaign manager for the Wilderness Society, said the area being logged was “spectacular” and the presence of the critically endangered birds made the idea of logging the area “tragic”. “Anyone wondering why the world’s fastest parrot is going extinct has the answer right there in front of them,” Allen said. “It’s unbelievable that high conservation wood and swift parrot habitat is signed off as sustainable by the Responsible Wood certification scheme.”Scott Lansbury had his first encounter 25 years ago. It was in the Victorian town of Upper Beaconsfield, close to midnight, where he and his brother saw the animal walking up the footpath across the road from where they lived. “It was bigger than any dog I’ve ever seen,” he recalls. “Bigger than a labrador, bigger than a [German] shepherd.” Lansbury is convinced the mystery animal, which he says was black and walked with a feline prowl, was a big cat. He says he has seen similar animals several times in the intervening years. “I kept hearing other stories,” Lansbury says. So a decade ago, he started a Facebook group, Black panther sightings in Victoria, “sort of as a joke”. Since then, the group has grown to 36,000 people. Members post a mixture of blurry images and footage, videos of big cats clearly taken in other countries, and avowed testimonies of personal encounters. “I look at every video that’s been posted on the group,” Lansbury says. Sightings of mysterious cats in the wild – and accompanying reports of strange livestock deaths – are not a new phenomenon. Large felids have been rumoured to prowl the Australian bush for nearly 200 years, says David Waldron, a folklorist and historian at Federation University. The earliest reported phantom cat sighting Waldron has identified was near Adelaide, in 1836. A sailor said he had found “a cat-like animal with orange fur, black stripes down its back and white tufted ears, hunting for marsupial rats near a body of water”. In the 1890s, panic erupted in the South Australian town of Tantanoola, when stories emerged of a predator stalking properties, terrifying farming dogs and slaughtering sheep. The exotic animal trade was widespread in the late 19th century, Waldron says. Classified ads of the day offered leopard and panther cubs for sale. The Tantanoola tiger, as it became known, was eventually caught. The beast turned out not to be a felid, but a Eurasian wolf. Equally misplaced in the Australian bush, the wolf was hypothesised to have been a boat stowaway that survived a shipwreck off the coast. It was stuffed and remains on display at the Tantanoola hotel. In the last century, rumours of wild big cats have also been fuelled by stories of escaped circus animals such as lions and tigers, and American soldiers bringing exotic pets into the country as military mascots. In Victoria, sightings have been reported in Gippsland and the Grampians national park, while in New South Wales there have been hundreds of reported sightings of big cats in the Blue Mountains – known as the Blue Mountains panther or the Lithgow lion. Last year, a video of a black cat was captured on Sydney’s upper north shore by a university student, who described it as longer than 1m, “with a body on ‘roids”. To the untrained eye, accurately estimating the size of an animal after a fleeting sighting is a difficult task, says Peter Menkhorst, an ecologist at the Arthur Rylah Institute for Environmental Research in Melbourne. Feral domestic cats – Felis catus – can occasionally reach impressive sizes, and have been behind at least some reported big cat sightings. “If you see a [feral] domestic cat that maybe weighs something like 10kg, which is about twice what most pet cats weigh … your initial impression might be: gee, that’s a big animal,” Menkhorst says. In 2005, a deer hunter, Kurt Engel, shot dead what he believed to be a black panther near Sale, in east Gippsland. He estimated the cat was about 1.5m long. Engel kept the animal’s tail as a trophy, which was 60cm long – roughly twice the length of a regular domestic cat’s tail. However, DNA testing later revealed the animal was actually Felis catus, a large feral cat. Inadequate evidence In 2012, a report commissioned by the Victorian government concluded that the available evidence was “inadequate to establish that a wild population of ‘big cats’ exists in Victoria”. Menkhorst, who co-authored the report, says the chances of there being unknown big cats out in the Victorian wilderness is “minuscule”. “No one has ever actually brought in a carcass or even a part of one of these mythical beasts.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning One piece of unexplained evidence was a scat found in Winchelsea in 1991. Barbara Triggs, an expert in animal scats, identified the faecal sample as most likely belonging to a leopard, and isolated several hairs from the scat that she believed the animal may have inadvertently ingested while grooming itself. Mitochondrial DNA in the hairs was tested in 2000, and the sequence was confirmed as belonging to a leopard, though the scientist who tested them said he could not rule out contamination. “There’s a lot of uncertainty around the origin of that scat,” Menkhorst says. “It’s very inconclusive.” Menkhorst’s scepticism is also grounded in years of wildlife monitoring. “We’ve done literally hundreds of thousands of what we call trap nights,” he says, where camera traps that detect heat and motion are set out in the bush to monitor continuously for weeks at a time. “We’ve taken millions of photos, literally, and we’ve got nothing we can’t explain, everything from … dunnarts up to dingoes. Lots of feral cats, no other species of cat,” he says. “Given the intensity of fauna surveying we’ve done in Victoria in the last 50 years, it’s an almost inconceivable thing that we would not have found [a big cat] if it did exist.” ‘It re-enchants the bush’ Waldron agrees. “I am sceptical in that there’s simply insufficient evidence as yet,” he says. “There’s nothing inherently wrong with the idea, you’ve just got to find positive evidence.” Despite the lack of evidence, big cats in the wild have continued to hold a certain appeal. “It re-enchants the bush, it makes it mysterious, magical,” Waldron says. He has joined big cat hunters out on tracking jaunts at night, listening for animal sounds using directional microphones. “It’s quite an exciting and evocative thing to do.” Unexplained livestock deaths may have a simple rather than eerie explanation, Waldron says. “At the heart of these panics is usually stock kills that look different to how they’re done normally by wild dogs. When people have gotten into it forensically – as in the animal mutilation panics in US – what they find causes it is multiple predation on the same carcass by different predators.” A Twitch streamer by the name of Rainey Jay, who lives on the mid-north coast of NSW, has been fascinated for years by big cat stories and online groups dedicated to them. Though she is sceptical about their existence, she says there is something “romantic about the whole notion that maybe there are still some big mysteries out there for people to solve”. “You’ve got people that look for Bigfoot or aliens, but for giant cats living out in the wild, that does have something plausible about it.” The enchantment with the idea of big cats in the Australian wild “overshadows the problem that we have with feral cats”, Jay says. Feral domestic cats, which cover all but an estimated 0.2% of Australia, are both ecologically and economically damaging. It has been estimated that they kill 1m birds a day. “That’s something I think we should look at more,” she says. Lansbury has no doubt he wasn’t mistaken that night 25 years ago, and wants others to keep an open mind. “You can definitely see why people don’t believe in them,” he says. “You’ve got to see it to believe it.”Most – if not all – of us would like memories of 2021 erased from our minds post-haste so we can move on from a year which – just like the previous one – has been aptly and regularly described as a “shitshow”. But moving on, we would want to bring with us the films that helped us through, including several from our national cinema, which offered more than a few treats to break up the chaos and drudgery. It was a particularly strong year for documentaries, with five making this list – three of them exploring artists who have had a profound impact on Australian culture. To qualify for this list, films needed to have had a release outside the festival circuit, either theatrically or on a streaming platform. 10. Streamline The sports movie genre is filled with cheesy stories about triumphing on the field or in the pool, or even in the competitive world of paper plane throwing. Writer-director Tyson Wade Johnston initially seems to be steering Streamline in the rah-rah “must win at all costs!” direction of so many films before, emphasising that teenager Benjamin Lane (Levi Miller) could be a champion swimmer if he buckles down and gives it everything. But the drama becomes something quite different when life, as they say, gets in the protagonist’s way, with major distractions including the release of his father (Jason Isaacs) from prison and the bad influence of a belligerent brother (Jake Ryan). This smart and gripping film is more interested in masculinity (toxic and otherwise) than laps of freestyle. 9. My First Summer There are two beautiful things at the core of writer-director Katie Found’s feature debut: first, a pair of wonderful performances from Markella Kavenagh and Maiah Stewardson, playing teenagers who profoundly connect during a formative period in their lives; and, second, a lovely and tactile visual style that covers them like a warm blanket. Simple moments (such as one of the girls resting her head against the chest of the other) resonate with complex feelings, and elements that might have felt heavy-handed (such as a ruminative voiceover reflecting on the death of one of the girls’ mothers) feel earned and unpretentious. Found evokes a bittersweet feeling: that precious things can’t last, though they can be remembered always. 8. The Witch of Kings Cross Sonia Bible’s trippy documentary about artist and self-professed witch Rosaleen Norton is aesthetically audacious, and the so-called “witch of Kings Cross” surely wouldn’t have wanted it any other way. Bible’s film uses all sorts of techniques to illustrate Norton’s life, joining a collection of documentaries that not only investigate Australian artists but channel the look and feel of their work – among them Ecco Homo, Whiteley and Women He’s Undressed. I loved the film’s educationally hallucinogenic vibes: an Australian history lesson thrown into a cauldron. It is a vivid picture of a colourful individual and an ode to the joys of bohemian life, particularly life in the city, where the setting of the sun marks the beginning of a new night rather than the end of a day. 7. Strong Female Lead The style of British documentarian Asif Kapadia, who assembles his films mostly using pre-existing materials, has been channelled in two electrifying Australian productions: the 2019 Adam Goodes doco The Final Quarter and now Tosca Looby’s account of the sexism and misogyny experienced by Julia Gillard during her time as Australia’s first female prime minister. Strong Female Lead, which belongs to SBS’s Australian Uncovered suite of feature-length documentaries, is shudder and wince-inducing – a catalogue of national shame. It’s important, visceral viewing. 6. June Again Suffering from debilitating dementia, June (a terrific Noni Hazlehurst) suddenly snaps out of it and comes good but is told by her doctors that her newfound lucidity won’t last long. So she does a Randle McMurphy and escapes a nursing home to reconnect with her family. It sounds like the stuff of sentimental mush, but instead June discovers a surreal world outside her known reality in which things have changed for the worse, including through family fallouts – a concept not dissimilar to the classic Australian film Bliss and Peter Carey’s novel on which it was based. Writer-director JJ Winlove juggles dramatic and funny elements, crafting a film about inevitability in numerous forms: the limitations of body and mind, for starters, and also other things we cannot change – such as the nature of relationships between other people. 5. The Dry Jane Harper’s page-turning book about a detective investigating a potential murder in a small arid town is an engaging read, but a bit of an airport novel, with a clear genre formula and boilerplate elements. Director Robert Connolly’s sparsely handsome adaptation is an example of a film that’s classier than its source material. Harper’s timeline shifts prove perfect for flashbacks detailing events long ago, when the aforementioned detective (a morose Eric Bana) lived in the town he reluctantly returns to. There are two core mysteries: one involving the distant past when the protagonist may or may not have committed some kind of crime, and the other the present, when there may or may not have been a murder. Sounds vague, but the scripting and direction is pinpoint precise and given atmospheric intensity with a wide-lensed, tinder-dry look. 4. Firestarter: The Story of Bangarra The amazing performers of the Bangarra Dance Theatre take us to places that transcend words. It’s fitting that Wayne Blair and Nel Minchin’s documentary about the group’s history and formation – including the story of artistic director Stephen Page and his family – is crafted with a sense of motion and movement, almost as if it too is dancing. Understanding that this is a story hooked to many things – including art, expression and of course Indigenous culture, both ancient and modern – they create a beguiling kind of history lesson. 3. Burning The Australian government’s abominable handling of the climate crisis is an emotive issue for many of us who have watched in horror as our elected leaders not only fail to act but pour gasoline on the fire. Eva Orner’s gooseflesh-raising documentary, centred around the catastrophic black summer bushfire season of 2019-20, approaches a difficult subject with courage and clarity, spotlighting the contemptible failures of the Morrison government and more generally a world that cannot sustain its devotion to fossil fuel. Many important talking points are canvassed briskly but densely, including the role of the media in fuelling climate denialism, and the differences (in frequency and severity) between bushfires as they used to be and as they are now in a so-called “new normal”. Burning is one of the most important Australian documentaries of the 21st century. 2. Nitram About the time that Justin Kurzel’s hauntingly poetic drama about the life Martin Bryant was released, I binge-watched a tonne of films focused on mass shootings – a frankly awful way to spend one’s time, full of the kinds of things Kurzel and screenwriter Shaun Grant (who worked together on Snowtown and True History of the Kelly Gang) assiduously avoid. Their film has no gratuity, no sensationalism, no simple definitions of mental illness, no crude messages about the banality of evil. Every scene in Nitram navigates a minefield of ethical issues; they know every moment will be scrutinised for its implications. It’s challenging but made brilliantly and boldly, with an important message at its core about gun control – an issue that should not be allowed to disappear from the national conversation. 1. My Name Is Gulpilil The great actor David Gulpilil died late last month after a lengthy bout of sickness following a diagnosis of terminal lung cancer. Molly Reynolds’ amazing documentary plays like a kind of living wake, with one Buñuelian image that has clung to my mind like glue: of Gulpilil lying in a coffin, covered in strips of film, which flow out of it as if they were a natural part of the man himself – or a natural part of the environment from which he emerged. After Gulpilil’s death, many writers (including myself) attempted to articulate with words the magic of Gulpilil’s screen charism – an impossible task. Reynolds recognised that a straight recollection of the actor’s life would have been a disservice to his enigmatic talent, instead crafting a beautifully unconventional film that moves in fluid rhythms, edited as if its cuts and segues were coils of memories.The lurid yellow jacket with bold black lettering on the art historian Anne Marsh’s weighty 2021 tome screams one thing to art lovers and feminists alike: this is not a coffee table book. Although the Melbourne University Publishing volume (weighing in at 3kg) features almost 400 beautiful, confronting and thought-provoking glossy colour illustrations and photographs, Doing Feminism is a rigorous and scholarly critique on how women’s art has influenced and changed the Australian and international contemporary art landscape from a feminist perspective. Punctuated with artists’ statements, curatorial writing and critique, Doing Feminism is possibly the most comprehensive literary dive into Australian women making art since the 1970s. It took Marsh more than five years to compile, although the author of five other books and professorial research fellow from the University of Melbourne’s Victorian College of the Arts says the idea had been bubbling away for a decade. The subtitle, Women’s Art and Feminist Criticism in Australia, is significant, she says. “There’s a lot of women in the book who wouldn’t be card-carrying feminists, so I was interested in making a juxtaposition between what was happening in the critical literature, in the catalogues and so on, and what artists were doing on the ground.” Along with celebrating individual artists’ achievements, the book is peppered with tales of women’s struggles for recognition in the male-dominated art world of the 20th century. Vivienne Binns’ first solo exhibition at the Watters Gallery in 1967 drew howls of outrage from male and female artists and critics, with her controversial Phallic Monument and Vag Dens singled out for particular ridicule. According to Melbourne’s Potter Museum of Art, the art historian and collector Stephen Scheding wrote that the Binns exhibition “would be the most unprofessional work I have seen in a well-known gallery”. Binns abandoned painting after the exhibition, began experimenting with enamel and took to calling herself a craftswoman. “I’d taken as much as I could take,” she revealed in a 1975 interview in Refractory Girl, Australia’s first women’s studies journal, revealing the toll the works had taken on her personal life. “I’d put myself in isolation and cut myself off from the more enjoyable things in life … I’d made people afraid of me. My images were touching them in areas that they didn’t want to be touched. I felt there was a sheet of glass between me and people. I was very lonely … I’d aged about six years, my face had changed. To other people I’d lost my sense of humour.” A decade after its creation, Vag Dens was bought by the National Gallery of Australia. In 1993 the NGA also bought Phallic Monument. ‘Her works offend me’ “Specious, ham-fisted, gimmicky, dismal, phoney, unappealing, incomprehensible, shabby, repellent, empty” were just some of the adjectives critics and members of the public used to describe the works of the artist Jenny Watson as she was emerging on the scene in the 1980s. Reflecting on the reaction in a 1999 Art Monthly essay, the artist Virginia Fraser quipped: “After a while you start to think, gee fellas, what’s this about?” Fraser quotes one of Watson’s fiercest critics – Peter Timms, a former editor of Art Monthly. “If I’m honest with myself, I’d have to say, yes [Watson’s] works offend me,” Timms told Fraser. “And it’s because they seem to be saying ‘up you’ to me as a viewer. They seem to be dismissing me … ” Six years after 1987’s public pillory of her seminal confessional work The Key Painting, Watson represented Australia at the 45th Venice Biennale. In 2017 Sydney’s Museum of Contemporary Art and Melbourne’s Heide Museum of Modern Art both staged major retrospectives of her work. ‘A powerful contribution’ In 2018 the comedian and University of Tasmania art history graduate Hannah Gadsby picked Marsh’s brain for her ABC documentary miniseries Nakedy Nudes, the same year Gadsby attracted international acclaim for her Netflix live standup special Nanette. While primarily known as a contemporary art historian, academic and critic, Marsh is also something of a statistician, crunching the data on gender imbalance in the Australian art scene. In some ways the trend appears to be mirroring the trajectory of Australian female writers, who have dominated prestigious competitions such as the Miles Franklin award for the past decade. Data on Australian females artists’ representation at the Venice Biennale, for example, shows an encouraging trend. Female artists were represented at just three Venice Biennales throughout the 1980s and 90s (Rosalie Gascoigne in 1982; Jenny Watson in 1993; and a joint exhibition by Emily Kame Kngwarreye, Yvonne Koolmatrie and Judy Watson in 1997), but since 2001, Australia has been represented by a female artist in eight of the 10 Venice Biennales. At the first Sydney Biennale in 1973, the work of just one female artist was exhibited, and she wasn’t even Australian. By 2014 women accounted for more than half the works displayed in the show. But when it comes to the collections and retrospectives in many major Australian public galleries, Marsh believes more affirmative action is needed. “A retrospective exhibition for a living artist is the most significant one … and you see the male artists getting those retrospective shows but you don’t see the female artists,” she says. “Making sure our public galleries have as many women as they have men in this field would really change the public’s perspective. “When I talk to people around a barbecue and none of them know a lot about art, when it comes to women artists, they will say ,‘Oh, we know about Margaret Preston,’ and that’s about it. They might go to a gallery twice or three times a year but each time they go, there’s a bloke on. “If one in three times it was a major exhibition of a woman, then they would know more names … so I think that’s a failure on the part of most major institutions – they really need to pick up the game.” Marsh says it was encouraging to see major institutions such as the NGA acknowledge this oversight and move to rectify it. Know My Name, Australia’s largest exhibition of female artists, opened at the NGA in November 2020 and runs until July 2022. Doing Feminism is out now through Melbourne University Publishing ($199) This article was amended on 19 January 2022. An earlier version incorrectly stated that Know My Name opened in November 2021.A growing sense of frustration with people who have not been vaccinated against Covid has been creeping into the speeches of senior government figures from Sajid Javid to Boris Johnson in recent weeks. The health secretary has accused those who have chosen not to take up the offer of free vaccination of taking up hospital beds, damaging society and potentially harming their families as well as themselves. The prime minister also began rolling the pitch for a possibly tougher approach towards the unvaccinated when he spoke of the need for a “national conversation” about how the NHS would cope with the Omicron wave and further new variants. “I don’t believe we can keep going indefinitely with non-pharmaceutical interventions, restrictions on people’s way of life, just because a substantial proportion of the population still, sadly, has not got vaccinated,” he said. Given the libertarian instincts of today’s Tory party, No 10 has followed the path of allowing people to choose freely whether or not to get vaccinated, unless they want to work in the NHS and the care sector. A mandatory vaccination policy would almost certainly result in a challenge to Johnson’s authority from his backbenches. Those same MPs, however, are also opposed to national restrictions that hit all of society to prevent the NHS from being overwhelmed. If another Covid wave were to push the health service to the point of collapse, Downing Street would face two possibilities: lock down everyone or reserve the harshest restrictions for the 5 million people who have declined to be vaccinated in the hope it would ease the burden on hospitals and slow the spread of an outbreak. Javid has estimated that 90% of the most severely ill in hospital at the moment are unvaccinated. Urging people to have a “jabby new year”, the NHS said on Wednesday that research from the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre (ICNARC) found that at the start of last month about three in five patients in London’s intensive care units had not had a jab, and that the figure was rising. Some countries have already decided that choosing not to be vaccinated should carry a cost, given the impact on wider society of Covid spreading more quickly among the unvaccinated and the greater potential for hospitalisation. Greece and France went down the Covid passport route as early as July. Israel and Denmark also adopted pass systems early, phased them out, and then brought them back when infections were surging. In Italy, proof of vaccination, recovery or a negative test has been required for many indoor public places since October and a new super-green pass was added in December that is available only to people who have been vaccinated or recovered from Covid in the last six months. All moves by the UK government so far to encourage vaccination have been firmly rooted in persuasion and “nudge” theory. It has been almost all carrot and no stick, even when it comes to Covid passports. Ministers insist they should not be called “vaccine passports” because people will be allowed to show a recent lateral flow test result instead. The approach of encouragement is continuing, with a campaign texting everyone to “get boosted now”. But there also now appears to be an attempt to introduce an element of social stigma to vaccine refusal, and a move to suggest it is people’s civic responsibility to get jabbed. No 10’s view is that there is still scope to drive up vaccination rates further – particularly when it comes to the booster – and that this is preferable to using vaccination status as a dividing line. Almost 90% of over 12s have now had a first dose, 82% have their second and 56.5% are boosted. One major missing piece of the puzzle, currently under consideration, is a strategy that gets to the bottom of why 5 million people remained unvaccinated, especially those in communities with an ingrained distrust of authority. No 10 even turned to an artificial intelligence (AI) company earlier in the year to determine the causes of vaccine hesitancy, but Whitehall sources acknowledge there is still a lack of understanding about how many of the unvaccinated remain so because of entrenched anti-vax ideology, misconceptions that could be turned around, a lack of time or transport to get to vaccine centres, or just apathy. One option being weighed is the idea of greater personal outreach – learning from the personal touch of GPs who have phoned all their most vulnerable vaccine refusers. Ministers are even thinking about teams of door-to-door vaccinators who could deliver shots on the spot. If this last push were not to work, however, and further restrictions are deemed necessary, Johnson may have to confront a difficult choice, unpalatable to his party, about whether everyone – the vaccinated and the unvaccinated – are all in it together any more.My friend Brian Barnes, who has died aged 77 of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, was a celebrated muralist and a leading light in the community arts movement. Warm-hearted, funny, outspoken and a hugely gifted artist, he created murals around south London for more than 45 years. He was born in Farnborough, Kent, and raised in nearby St Paul’s Cray, the first child of William Barnes, chief executive of the Mullard electrical components company, and his wife, Eileen (nee Hiley), a seamstress at Morphy Richards. His parents supported him in everything and he had a happy childhood. Brian’s first school was Gray’s Farm primary, then Midfield secondary school for boys. He began a course at Ravensbourne College of Art (now Ravensbourne University London) in 1961, leading to a national diploma in design. There he met Aileen McKeegan, studying fabric design, and they married in 1964. Brian stood out as a determined realist painter and went on to study at the Royal College of Art, where he graduated in 1969 with beautifully composed and detailed work. Moving to Battersea, south-west London, the couple found a leftwing group of friends and became activists, campaigning for better social provision in housing, parks and jobs and protesting against rent rises and the redevelopment of Battersea power station and the riverfront for the wealthy. The necessity of creating art expressing social concerns gave Brian a new direction, and a bolder style for his work. In 1973 he began printing silkscreen posters at home for campaigns. Demand grew and by 1977 his print workshop was producing hundreds of posters for the community. Then came the murals. His first, The Good, the Bad and the Ugly, in 1975, was vast, and was painted with 90 volunteers, near Battersea Bridge. On the “good” end were pictures of socialist goals, in the centre a “rainbow” broom swept away the capitalists’ failure. It became a popular landmark. A year later the wall was demolished. Protesters arrived in thousands, Battersea Bridge was closed and the artist arrested. More large scale gable-end murals followed; sunny evocations like Day at the Seaside and Battersea in Perspective. Then anti-war murals: Nuclear Dawn in Brixton, with its threatening skeleton, and Riders of the Apocalypse in New Cross, featuring world leaders riding rockets around a besieged world, above a tender rendering of messages at Greenham Common. There were many more murals for creches, nurseries, schools, towns, estates and railway stations. The Stockwell war memorial, begun in 1999, was the work he returned to often. It is a joyful mural with many images, dedicated to the fallen in the world wars, and celebrating local residents such as Vincent Van Gogh and the second world war special operations agent Violette Szabo, as well as the Windrush immigrants who spent their first night in Britain in the area. Brian was appointed MBE in 2005 for services to the Battersea community. He is survived by Aileen and their children, Eloise and Glenn, and grandchildren Daniel, Lilya and Natalya.After enjoying what could be the warmest New Year’s Eve on record, the UK is expected to return to freezing cold temperatures at the start of January. Temperatures are to return to average from New Year’s Day onwards after an unusually mild late December, the Met Office has said. Low pressure systems moving across the Atlantic were bringing in milder air and wet weather but next week things should return to normal and parts of northern England and Scotland could see frost in the new year. The prediction comes after parts of the UK had a white Christmas, with snowfall in Yorkshire and Scotland. “(After New Year’s Eve) there is a trend for temperatures to return nearer to normal,” meteorologist Craig Snell told the PA news agency. “That’s not surprising as temperatures are way above average.” Snell added: “For this time of year, if we see any clearer slots at night then that does give some risk for frost, particularly across the northern half of the UK.” Normally the UK sees average daytime temperatures of 7-8C in the south and 3-4C in the north in January, he said, with night-time temperatures of 2-3C in the south and 0C in the north. The UK is experiencing an unusually warm end to December, and forecasters believe New Year’s Eve could be the warmest on record, with temperatures set to reach 15C in some parts of the country. Met Office meteorologist Greg Dewhurst said: “The record is 14.8C on New Year’s Eve and that was in 2011. Temperatures look like they’ll be 14-15C (57.2-59F) so it is possible that temperatures could be that value.” Dewhurst said the weather throughout the week will be “on the mild side”, adding: “We’re going to see across the whole of the country, through the rest of this week, temperatures that are above average for this time of year. “The average temperature in the UK around this time of year should be around 7-8C (44.6-46.4F). Going forward, we’re looking at highs of around 12-14C (53.6-57.2F), possibly locally 15C in one or two spots, so it’s going to be well above average.”Nothing summed up David Moyes’s influence on West Ham more than the sight of Jarrod Bowen tearing clear in added time to lay on Nikola Vlasic’s first goal in claret and blue. Once such a soft touch, this team does not know how to stop running. After all just look at Lukasz Fabianski sprinting the length of the pitch to join in the celebrations when Vlasic rounded off a superb fightback from West Ham, whose push for European football has fresh impetus after this resounding win. Fabianski’s charge from his goal was typical of the togetherness that West Ham have developed under Moyes. This group is far fitter and sturdier than previous generations and there was a defiance to the way they responded after falling behind to Emmanuel Dennis’s early goal, the quality of their football too much for Watford to handle.” They’ve got a resilience to them,” Moyes said. “We’re not accepting them rolling over.” This was a reminder they still intend to rival Arsenal, Tottenham and Manchester United for a place in the top four. Watford, two points above the bottom three after five consecutive defeats, could not cope with their power. Claudio Ranieri’s struggling side were horribly ragged after having three games called off because of Covid and they could not contain Bowen, who played a pivotal role in three of West Ham’s goals. Bowen, a scurrying presence on the right, was outstanding. The winger sparked West Ham’s resurgence by creating Tomas Soucek’s equaliser midway through the first half and it was also satisfying for Moyes to see his side survive in the absence of the suspended Declan Rice. Mark Noble, who had not started a league game all season, had an excellent game once he had adjusted to the pace of it. “He gave me the leadership I wanted,” Moyes said of Noble, whose penalty made it 3-1 early in the second half. Watford, by contrast, looked rudderless. They have lost eight times in 10 games since appointing Ranieri and could be in trouble if Dennis leaves to represent Nigeria at the Africa Cup of Nations next month. It is easy to see why Ranieri wants to keep Dennis, although his hope that Watford can block the striker’s departure by arguing that Nigeria’s call-up arrived too late felt as convincing as his team’s defending. “We must find solutions,” Ranieri said. “It is not possible to continue in this way.” Watford had seen a chance to attack West Ham, who had only 48 hours to prepare after losing to Southampton. The hosts had barely managed to train because of the disruption to their schedule but they did not look rusty during the early stages.They led after four minutes, Joshua King finding Dennis, who left Craig Dawson on the floor with a deft shimmy and sent a rising shot beyond Fabianski. West Ham, who have struggled at the back since losing Angelo Ogbonna, Aaron Cresswell and Kurt Zouma to injury, stayed calm. Michail Antonio tormented Francisco Sierralta and Craig Cathcart, Watford’s centre-backs, and it was not a surprise when the equaliser arrived in the 27th minute. The pressure had been growing, Saïd Benrahma hitting the bar with a bending effort, and Watford paid for sitting on their lead when Bowen released Soucek, who spanked a low shot past Daniel Bachmann. Moussa Sissoko was the player guilty of dozing off when Soucek made one of his trademark runs from midfield and it was not long before West Ham were ahead. Manuel Lanzini released Antonio and the striker sped clear before picking out Benrahma, who beat Bachmann with the aid of a deflection off Adam Masina. West Ham, who had lost Pablo Fornals to a positive Covid test, had clearly decided that Watford’s full-backs were weak links. Benrahma had plenty of joy against Kiko Femenía, who went off injured before the break, and the hosts were fortunate not to fall further behind at the start of the second half. Bowen had volleyed past Bachmann from close range but a VAR review confirmed that Soucek had fouled Dennis at the start of the move. Watford tried to hit back, Sissoko testing Fabianski, but they remained shaky at the back. Masina, skittish at left-back, let Antonio charge on to a loose ball and cross to the far post, where Bachmann brought Bowen down after more indecision. Another VAR check confirmed the inevitable and Noble confidently tucked the penalty away, allowing West Ham to cruise along before Vlasic made it 4-1.It threatened to be an ominous afternoon for Southampton when Mohammed Salisu was sent off after 39 minutes but Tottenham Hotspur had to make do with a point from this breathless encounter. Antonio Conte may have preserved his unbeaten league record, becoming the first Spurs manager in history to go without defeat in his first seven matches in charge but there was no escaping the air of annoyance in his demeanour at the final whistle, after they failed to build on Harry Kane’s first-half equaliser from the spot. In fact, Southampton could have snatched victory had Davinson Sánchez not blocked from the substitute Armando Broja after Eric Dier made a hash of a routine clearance during five minutes of stoppage time. Tottenham surely would have stretched their legs had Kane’s strike seven minutes into the second half stood. A flare thrown from the away end was still billowing into the air when the goal was disallowed for a marginal offside, the video assistant referee, Martin Atkinson, adjudging that Kane strayed beyond the Southampton backline before effortlessly taking a flighted Harry Winks pass in his stride and arrowing the ball into the corner with his next touch. Southampton survived another contentious episode 15 minutes later. Fraser Forster clutched at thin air as he attempted to claim Emerson Royal’s cross under pressure from Tottenham’s half-time substitute, Matt Doherty, and inadvertently backheeled the ball into his own net. But the referee, Anthony Taylor, blew for a foul by the Spurs defender. For Southampton this was a draw that felt like a victory. At the final whistle Ralph Hasenhüttl cut a delighted figure and embarked on a mini lap of appreciation, exchanging hearty applause with a buoyant home support. James Ward-Prowse was typically dogged but there were other, more unlikely, heroes. Yan Valery impressed at centre-back on his first league start since January and Shane Long did not relent on his first league start in more than a year, although he should have hit the target with an early header. “We love to play here at this ground,” Hasenhüttl said. “It wasn’t always like this but we are getting more and more positive support from the fans because we deliver. At the moment we have a team you [the fans] can really identify with.” Conte was mindful of disrupting the momentum fostered in the last few weeks and so stopped short of radically changing things but decided to give Lucas Moura – arguably Spurs’ star performer in victory over Crystal Palace on Boxing Day – a breather, until calling on him to replace the muted Dele Alli with an hour gone. Alli, Ben Davies and Winks, all of whom impressed from the off against Liverpool before Christmas, were restored to the starting lineup but Conte’s fear about his team losing its identity was apparent as Southampton sped into the lead through their captain, Ward-Prowse. At one point, after haring down the touchline, Conte in a blue puffer coat had to be reined back into his technical area by the fourth official, Tim Robinson. Spurs were shy of rhythm and appeared overwhelmed by Southampton’s desire to play them at their own game as Hasenhüttl, who made six changes from the win at West Ham, mirrored Tottenham’s 3-4-3 shape. Southampton looked sharp and Ward-Prowse put his team in front with a wonderful, arcing first-time strike. Alli did not deal with a Salisu long throw and Ward-Prowse hammered in a shot that curled away from Hugo Lloris and flew into the top corner. Southampton supporters gasped as replays of the goal appeared on the big screens. Yet it was clear from early on that Kane was in the mood. He showed great craft to nutmeg Salisu on halfway before drifting past the challenge of Jan Bednarek and slipping a ball through for Alli. Fortunately for Southampton, it was slightly overcooked and Forster rushed out of goal to smother. A couple of minutes later Kane spied Sergio Reguilón on the overlap and telegraphed a ball out to the left flank. Kyle Walker-Peters tugged at Reguilón’s shirt and Davies headed in the subsequent free-kick – but from an offside position. Spurs huffed and puffed after falling behind, with Winks lucky Southampton did not profit from him dawdling on the edge of his own 18-yard box. Tottenham were toiling but then Winks killed the Southampton defence with a perfect pass and Salisu, already booked for a foul on Emerson, chopped down Son Heung-min. Forster walloped the ball downfield in frustration and Hasenhüttl knew what was coming. Southampton were reduced to 10 men and Spurs pulled level, Kane ruthlessly dispatching a flawless penalty high into the corner. It should have been Tottenham’s cue to ram home their one-man advantage but, ultimately, they failed to make Southampton suffer. “After they went down to 10 men, we’ve got to win the game,” Dier said. “They defended very well and fought for each other but that doesn’t matter from our side of it. We have to be able to break them down. We weren’t good enough.”On a mild, drab day in south London Crystal Palace eased their way past the yellow and green substance currently passing itself off as Norwich City of the Premier League with a performance that barely needed to slip out of second gear. The score finished 3-0 at Selhurst Park but the actual numbers seemed by-the-by, a result of Palace’s players easing through the entire second half like men stoically seeing out some clock-watching festive obligation. Odsonne Édouard scored one, made one and was a constant source of menace whenever Palace chose to press at the seams of the Norwich defence. Will Hughes, who does a fine, spiky job for Palace in central midfield, ran the game before leaving for a rest after 73 minutes. For Osian Roberts this was a first win as stand-in for the Covid-afflicted Patrick Vieira, and three points that leave Palace ninth in the table. Not that Roberts will be taking any personal satisfaction. He said: “I don’t enjoy it at all because I want Patrick here back in the technical area. My sole focus is making sure we do everything he wants to the best of my ability. “Patrick is doing well, he’s delighted with the result. We’re in constant dialogue, so we can follow his instructions during the game and during the week.” Norwich, for their part, looked bright, neat and almost totally ineffectual. Somehow the table continues to suggest Dean Smith’s team are just three points from safety, but they looked like a zombified presence, bereft of heart and edge. The defeat made it five in a row with a combined aggregate score of 14-0, the kind of run from which even “Comical” Chris Silverwood, mastermind of England’s Ashes meltdown, would struggle to pick out the positives. “We’ve got some major injury problems, we’ve got some big players absent from this club right now,” Smith said afterwards. “The physicality and experience of Crystal Palace was the difference today.” Odd to think now that back in August there were whispered hopes that this well-run club could somehow “game” the system with its left‑field transfer policies. In the meantime the season has dissolved into a long march to nowhere. Palace had six fitness-related absentees of their own plus Wilfried Zaha serving a ban for the kind of red card he seems always to be seeking, and which he finally achieved on Boxing Day thanks to an impressively sustained spell of narkiness and petulance. With Connor Gallacher also unfit and Christian Benteke on the bench Palace were missing the combined source of 15 of their 24 league goals before today. They do not tend to win much without Zaha. But then, they do not often get to play Norwich either. It took eight minutes for the first little huff to blow the door in. Hughes picked up the ball on the edge of the box, turned sharply and was tripped by a clumsy challenge from Kenny McLean. Édouard paused over the kick, drifted into a brief state of reverie, then stepped up and rolled it into the corner. Norwich did not sag immediately. Instead they waited a few moments. This is a team that always seems to be one thrust away from disaster, even as the midfield runs through its neat patterns, as the ball is zipped about with a brittle sense of urgency. Édouard shot into the side netting. Jeffrey Schlupp had a shot blocked by a desperate lunge. Midway through the half there was a moment of farce as the entire ground waited five minutes for the referee Paul Tierney’s microphone to be fixed. At which point Norwich did something fatal, pressing upfield and winning a couple of corners. From the second of these Palace broke the length of the pitch, the Norwich players hanging back weirdly from Édouard as he made ground down the left. His cut back was clipped first time into the far left-hand corner by Jean‑Philippe Mateta, the placement rather than the power beating Angus Gunn’s slightly limp dive. Four minutes later it was three, Palace players lining up to tiptoe through the Norwich cover, before the ball broke to Schlupp. His shot zinged into the far corner from a narrow angle. Norwich might have pulled one back before the break, Sam Byram heading Przemysław Placheta’s free‑kick on to the crossbar from close range. But both teams came out for the second half with a sense that the day was already settled. It took Palace 15 minutes to muster the energy to try to score another goal. Late on Placheta had a close‑range shot brilliantly saved by Vicente Guaita, by which point the Norwich end had taken to amusing itself by bursting out into wild do‑it-yourself celebrations, just for the laughs. It looks like a long old half‑season from here.Ben Fisher was at St Mary’s. Thanks for reading today. Barney Ronay was at the Colosseum. Jacob Steinberg was at Vicarage Road. David Moyes speaks to Amazon. It was a really good result, we did some really good things we could do some things better. [No Declan Rice] We won quite a few games without him last season when he got injured with England. We have got a good team, it’s not just Declan. On VAR: it looks like we have gone back to where we were a year and half ago when they have gave soft free kicks. I can’t believe that third goal wasn’t given. Some stats from today’s matches. Despite the complaints, that was an exciting afternoon of football, no matter what your Tuchels, your Klopps and your Rangnicks might say about the scheduling. Just ask football man Sean Dyche. The table, as it stands ahead of Leicester v Liverpool tonight. West Ham step ahead of Spurs, while Norwich fail to take advantage of that Newcastle draw last night. Watford look in big trouble should Burnley put a run together. Claudio Ranieri’s prospects of seeing out the season don’t look too strong. West Ham ran them ragged after an early Dennis goal to set themselves back on track. It was done in the first half, though it probably happened even before kick-off. A fifth straight loss for Norwich and Dean Smith - already - looks beleaguered. Dogged rearguard stuff from Saints, who survived Salisu’s red card in the first half. Tottenham’s goal came from a penalty and they were not great in attack. James Ward-Prowse scored a beauty for the opener. 90+5 min: Two Tottenham chances. Son has a shot saved by Forster. Sanchez has a header deflected behind. Saints clear...and that’s it/ 90+4 min: Tottenham queue up to try and score but once again it’s Kyle Walker-Peters who stops the danger, cutting off the angle from which Kane shoots. That’s it for the Watford resistance. The excellent Jarrod Bowen sets up Nikola Vlasic for his first-ever Hammers goal. 90+2 min: Winks finds space, and his cross looks made to be headed in. Son, rather than Harry Kane, gets the chance and makes a mess of it. 90 min: Southampton will see a draw as a win, and with four points from their last two matches they have had a decent Christmas period. Tottenham seem to have too many attackers on the field; their attacks have lacked coherence. Five minutes added on at St Mary’s. The word from Vicarage Road is that Watford are giving it a go but remain 3-1 down to West Ham. Norwich are still losing 3-0 but at least it’s going better in this half. 88 min: Nathan Redmond scampers back and hooks the ball away from Moura just as the Brazilian shaped to shoot. 87 min: Walker-Peters, against his old club and recovered from that smash to the chops, stops a Gil cross. Then he heads away when Dier tries a header himself. Man-of-the-match material from KWP. Paul gets out the tinfoil: “Do you think the ref establishment has secret discussions after every matchday where they actually change the interpretation of how particular scenes should be judged? It would seem that during certain weeks it is very difficult to get a penalty, but now we seem to be in a period where there is a far more generous view of what constitutes contact. Next week they might decide that they have given too many penalties and decide to be stricter about what they consider ‘soft’ penalties. Likewise fouls on the goalkeeper: Forster gets protected although he clearly makes a mess of handling the ball and collides with the back of the Spurs player’s head. I think the refs and their superiors need to educate us on how they interpret the rules by coming out after matches and explaining.” 84 min: Ben Davies wallops the ball and Kyle Walker-Peters shows real bravery in getting in its way. He looks very dazed and falls to the ground where he receives some treatment. 83 min: Spurs are still pushing on, and still don’t look like scoring. Adam Armstrong leaves the field for Saints, and on comes Nathan Redmond. Some emails: Phil Haran: “Hi John, The goalkeeper did what every defender does every time the ball is heading off the pitch including in the penalty area, he blocked the opposition from getting it. That should not be a penalty.” Phil Grey: “Is it already time for sports journalists to wheel out the old analogy of Norwich looking like the orchestra on the Titanic? (determined to carry on playing even though they know they’re going down) “ Charles Antaki: “I had wondered whether there was going to be a Bachmann Turner Overdrive gag. so thanks for that; and it makes people of a certain age remember that the zenith of pop music was indeed BTO’s You Ain’t seen Nuthin Yet, according to expert popsters Smashy and Nicey.” Eric Peterson again: “Question out of curiosity from across the Atlantic: do they have the same infomercials in the UK? There’s a frequent host of those here who looks just like Darren England. The sight of him in charge of Watford - West Ham wearing his headset microphone and waiting for VAR to do its thing makes me want to buy a ShamWow or a Slap Chop or something.” 79 min: Son gets a chance from a Gil cross. Spurs push on and on and on but without looking too likely. 77 min: Off goes Emerson Royal, and on comes Bryan Gil for Spurs. 76 min: Son is crowded out as he is in the vanguard of a counterattack. Doherty is again caught on the wrong foot when a ball into the middle finds him in space. He ends up shanking the ball into the stand to jeers from the home fans. 74 min: All Tottenham, all Southampton on the defensive. Spurs do seem to be running a little out of ideas. Bryan Gil, who looks like a small boy, is set to come on. 71 min: Sub for Saints: Broja on, off goes Long. 70 min: St Mary’s is the game still in the balance, and Tottenham continue to plough on. Forster redeems himself by closing the angle as Doherty speeds on to a Son flick. In truth, it was also on Doherty’s wrong foot. 67 min: Tottenham have the ball in the net. Winks dinks in the ball and Forster makes a terrible mess. He drops the ball under the breath of Matt Doherty, but is lucky the ref’s whistle blows. Goalkeepers are different. 66 min: The witching hour for Tottenham? Son is thwarted down by the byline. They are pushing and pushing but Saints have been defending well and with plenty of the discipline they lacked in the first half. At Selhurst, Angus Gunn is keeping the score down for Norwich with a couple of saves. Rob Green, on Amazon, reminds that the son of the Norwich legend Bryan has let in 17 goals in his last 2.5 matches. Ouch. 62 min: Off goes Dele Alli, and on comes Lucas Moura for Spurs. He was a surprise omission in the first place, the Brazilian flier. 61 min: Southampton claim handball when Armstrong’s shot comes off what looks like a Tottenham hand. It was ball to hand, a natural position and all that jazz. 60 min: Spurs continue to press on at St Mary’s with Southampton defending manfully. That Kane ‘goal’ still looks onside to these tired eyes. Noble, the skipper, steps up and send Bachmann the wrong way. The Turner Overdrive gags will have to wait for now. Bachmann, the Watford goalie, clatters into Jarrod Bowen after a bad back pass. Mark Noble, of course, will take. 55 min: Spurs are flying now, and Son has a shot blocked. In the dressing room at half-time does Antonio Conte simmer or does he explode? Both would probably work. Harry Winks’ pass is a pearler, and Kane surges on, taking it down with a neat touch. The finish is even better...but here’s a VAR call. Kane went too early. That was marginal. Richard Arthur gets in touch: “On your “Norwich are mathematically relegated.” If Norwich win all their remaining games after this one, they would finish on 48 points. If Mac City lose all their remaining games, they would be on 47. If Liverpool beat City, draw with Chelsea, and lose all the rest, they would have 45. Then if Chelsea, Arsenal, Spurs, and the rest also cooperate in turning the table upside down, Norwich could still be champions. Mathematically. If my maths is correct.” Soucek from the left gets the ball in, and then it comes across to Bowen, who slots home. Then there’s a VAR monitor call for a foul by Soucek earlier in the move, and as soon as the referee makes his way to the screen we all know what follows. Harder to overturn than an FA charge, those things. 47 min: Shane Long, as willing a workhorse as is in the game, will have to do plenty of running for Southampton. We are back underway at St Mary’s, and soon enough the same will be true at Vicarage Road and the Selhurst Colosseum. The half-time emails are in: Neill: “It’s nearly 3am in Melbourne &amp; I started drinking when, apropos of nothing at all, my afternoon plans were depressingly canceled &amp; I had an early lunch. But even I can see that Ranieri isn’t going to get the best out of these Watford players. This team should be aggressive, front-foot, pressing etc. Since taking over, Claudio has had them playing a passive, compact style; the players have looked lost during transition and I wouldn’t be surprised if Claudio loses his job this week. Watford lose their best attacking players to AFCON shortly, so if they fail to win today, they’re in as much trouble as Norwich &amp; Newcastle.” Peter Crosby: “I get prioritizing the fitness of Son and Kane for 2 games in 2 days but I’d say Lucas is just as, if not even more important to preserve - he’s in a real hot streak and until the pen, we’ve looked like we really missed his energy.” Eric Peterson: “I have a neutral’s fondness for the Saints. Far from the most talented team out there from top to bottom, but I always see endeavor, and I see quality often enough that they can be dangerous on their best day. Those days don’t happen all the time, but they happen often enough. And, “often enough” will keep you in the Premier League. Other than a healthy Everton, I see no club under them in the table that’s capable enough of that to be worth fearing in the long run.” Boos from the away fans; their team has been - and will probably remain - hopeless. Norwich’s has been a case of poor finishing and poor defending, all adding up to another heavy defeat and the near-certainty of going down. An early goal from Dennis gave Watford hope and then West Ham attacked in waves and and scored two well-taken strikes through Soucek and Benrahma. Watford can’t defend. Saints were edging things and ahead after that Ward-Prowe goal, only for Salisu to lose the run of himself in conceding a penalty and a second yellow card. 45+2 min: Three minutes were added on at St Mary’s, where it’s been a pulsating encounter, Christmas spirit a distant memory. 45 min: Tottenham now piling on the pressure on Southampton who are hanging on until half-time when they may be able to regroup. Reguillon is booked himself for a lunging tackle for which he complains, though has no case. Oh Norwich, oh no. They fail to clear their lines and then Will Hughes and then Eduoard have chances, only the ball to land with Schlupp, who wallops home. It’s offical: Norwich are mathematically relegated. Harry Kane makes no mistake, smashing the ball home. And now Tottenham are level and have a man advantage. Salisu has been a walking yellow card all game, and eventually they added up to a red. Salisu is red-carded for his foul on Son, too. All change? At one end, Norwich miss a golden chance and in ten passes, Palace score with Mateta slotting home. Update from Selhurst. Tierney was just about to sing his version of Livin’ La Vida Loca but ended up doing a Norman Collier. 35 min: Ward-Prowse whips in a corner that Spurs struggle with. Harry Kane clears. Spurs are bad again, it seems. Though a counterattack from Reguillon and Son lifts matters only for Son to be too ambitious with his shot. Paul Done replies to Gary Naylor. “He didn’t specify a league starting 11 without a shirt from 1 to 11, so here’s the U-23 lineup Liverpool fielded in the League Cup when the first team was competing in the Club World Cup. Lowest jersey number? 51 for Ki-Jana Hoever.” 31 min: At St Mary’s, Ralph Hasenhuttl has been booked for having a go at the fourth official. So far, this has been breathless stuff across the board. Typical power and skill from Antonio who looks up and picks a pass to his teammates who slides the ball in. Wasn’t Claudio supposed to tidy up the Watford defence? 29 min: Free-kick chance for Spurs, from 28 yards or so. Harry Kane fancies this one but it’s a scrubber and is saved by Forster. Coufal’s ball inside and Soucek cuts in from the edge of the box and slots home. The pressure telling from West Ham. Dele Alli makes a mess of clearing a corner and that’s a deadly finish from the cultured right foot of Saints’ star man. Great goal. 22 min: Emerson Royal has something of a limp after tacking a whack. He should be fine to continue on. Kane forces a corner at the other end. It’s wasted on a training-ground routine gone wrong. 19 min: At St Mary’s, there’s a camera shot of David Pleat in the stand with Michael McIntyre. One of them is one of the most amusing people I have ever made the acquaintance of, a raconteur par excellence. I have never met Michael McIntyre. Up at Vicarage Road, West Ham have been piling on the pressure, with Benrahma thwacking the bar with a rasping shot, though it looks like Watford keeper Bachman made a decent save with his fingertips. 17 min: Plenty of defensive work for Tottenham, though Southampton look to lack a bit of quality. 16 min: Gary Naylor is in: “Some high numbers around, but has a starting XI ever started without a shirt from 1 to 11?” 15 min: Kyle Walker-Peters is booked for a tactical foul on Reguillon, who looked to have escaped down the left for Tottenham. Free-kick chance for Spurs. Son chips in, Davies heads in...but four Spurs players offside. Good defending from Saints. 11 min: Southampton look up for this one at St Mary’s. Spurs caught a bit cold? You never know what Saints you are going to get. Ralph Hasenhuttl certainly doesn’t seem to know. After Kenny McClean fouls Will Hughes for a clear penalty, Édouard coolly sends Angus Gunn the wrong way, winning the battle of wits. Norwich: oh dear. 7 min: Down at St Mary’s, Shane Long has just missed a header for Saints. Not like him, and I say that as a big Shane Long fan. A lovely finish from the Nigerian, who times his run and shoots back across goal. That was superb. If anyone keeps Watford up, it’s him. 4 min: Dele Alli, one of those players revived by Conte, is into the action early at St Mary’s. On the sideline, Conte is already raging. Seems like a lively enough atmosphere at St Mary’s, though the game has been slow to get moving. Kick-off! We are go across the three matches actually being played - yes, actually - in the Premier League. Those rather odd selections suggest there could be a random factor at play. And before we kick off, how about some David Squires? Our news story on the death of Hugo Maradona. There was football last night, too. A great game though one to forget for Manchester United. They were absolute rubbish and got very lucky. Newcastle were not so lucky with injuries stacking up, and look even more in need of spending that Saudi loot than ever. Crystal Palace fact: they have lost 18 of the last 24 matches that didn’t feature Wilfried Zaha. Norwich fact: they have scored eight goals all season, and Teemu Pukki, dropped today, scored five of them. And some very sad news from the world of football. Hugo Maradona was just 52. Some more detail on that Ferran Torres move. No Conor Gallagher for Crystal Palace, which is a blow, while Wilfried Zaha is suspended after his silliness against Spurs. Marc Guehi is back, though, in place of James Tomkins. Dean Smith has made six changes from the team that lost 5-0 to Arsenal though he probably wanted to make more than that. Antonio Conte has shuffled his pack at St Mary’s for Tottenham, Ben Davies is in for Japhet Tanganga. Oliver Skipp out, Harry Winks in. Dele Alli returns in place of Lucas Moura, bench despite being very good against Crystal Palace on Boxing Day. Six changes for Ralph Hasenhuttl, which must be reaching into the depths of his squad, and despite beating West Ham 3-2. Tino Livramento, Oriol Romeu, Theo Walcott, Armando Broja, Nathan Redmond and Mohamed Elyounoussi are dropped as Yan Valery, Romain Perraud, Ibrahima Diallo, Stuart Armstrong, Adam Armstrong and Shane Long come in. No Che Adams, either. No party? Some decimated squads out there in those teams. Watford can’t name a full bench, even if their team is not wholly dissimilar to that which lost to Brentford all those years ago. Tom Cleverley, William Troost-Ekong and Jeremy Ngakia are all wholly absent from the squad. Mark Noble has stepped in for a suspended Declan Rice for West Ham, though Ben Johnson and Michail Antonio return. And some transfer news: Ferran Torres has left Manchester City to join Barcelona, taking the Eric Garcia route. Some football news ahead of the action. And it’s bad news for Chelsea. Watford v West Ham teams Watford: Bachmann, Femenia, Sierralta, Cathcart, Masina, Tufan, Sissoko, Kucka, Hernandez, King, Dennis. Subs: Angelini, Louza, Pedro, Sema, Gosling, Fletcher, Morris, Conteh. West Ham: Fabianski, Coufal, Dawson, Diop, Johnson, Soucek, Noble, Bowen, Lanzini, Benrahma, Antonio. Subs: Areola, Yarmolenko, Vlasic, Fredericks, Masuaku, Kral, Alese, Ashby, Oko-Flex. Crystal Palace v Norwich teams Crystal Palace: Guaita, Ward, Andersen, Guehi, Mitchell, Hughes, Kouyate, Schlupp, Ayew, Edouard, Mateta. Subs: Butland, Matthews, Milivojevic, Tomkins, Benteke, Kelly, Ferguson, Riedewald. Norwich: Gunn, Byram, Gibson, Sorensen, Giannoulis, Lees-Melou, Gilmour, McLean, Tzolis, Idah, Placheta. Subs: McGovern, McCracken, Dowell, Kabak, Williams, Sargent, Mumba, Rowe. Southampton v Tottenham teams Southampton: Forster, Walker-Peters, Valery, Salisu, Bednarek, Perraud, Diallo, Ward-Prowse, S. Armstrong, A. Armstrong, Long. Subs: Caballero, Romeu, Redmond, Small, Broja, Tella, Walcott, Simeu, Elyounoussi. Tottenham: Lloris, Reguilon, Royal, Davies, Sanchez, Dier, Hojbjerg, Winks, Alli, Son, Kane. Subs: Gollini, Doherty, Gil, Rodon, Tanganga, Moura, Ndombele, Skipp, White. There will be football. Though maybe not much of it. Even if the fixtures either side of the 3pms have gone the way of the Great Unpleasantness (Arsenal v Wolves and Leeds v Villa), there will be some actual games played, and - as it stands - three of them. Crystal Palace v Norwich: Palace attempted to get their Boxing Day game with Tottenham called off and yet named what looked suspiciously like a full team. They lost 3-0 and their Covid outbreak was described as an ongoing process. Norwich meanwhile played a full team against Arsenal and got done 5-0. So far, Dean Smith has been unable to arrest their inexorable slide. Southampton v Tottenham: Spurs are cooking along nicely under Antonio Conte, and demolished Palace with Lucas Moura to the fore and Harry Kane scoring. Southampton won a first game in seven in beating West Ham, and continue to be one of the Premier League’s mystery teams. Watford v West Ham: Watford were last seen on 10 December, losing in the last minute at Brentford. Covid has done for their fixture list since, and they have been left teetering over the relegation zone. West Ham meanwhile are on the crest of a slump, and looked tired in that loss to Southampton. Their Champions League dream is dwindling but there’s still a good season to be rescued. Red-hot soccer awaits. Hopefully. Join me.My father, Alan Ward, who has died aged 96, was a physicist who profoundly influenced science education in Africa. Born in Woodford, Essex, to Ursula (nee Vale) and Edward Ward, who worked in a bank, Alan went to Chichester high school for boys in West Sussex. Following a wartime degree in physics at the University of Birmingham, he completed a PhD in 1949, after which he was sent by the Atomic Energy Research Establishment to study Thorotrast poisoning in Denmark for two years. He married Honor Shedden, also a physicist, in 1950. The following year he took up a lectureship at the University College of the Gold Coast (now the University of Ghana), becoming associate professor in 1963. There he set up a radioactivity laboratory, supported by the Radiochemical Centre in Amersham, Buckinghamshire, and conducted experiments that established the toxicity of Strontium-90, an isotope of concern in fallout from nuclear weapons. Alan built an international network of scientists involved in peaceful uses of radioactivity, and was part of the Atoms for Peace Geneva conference in 1958. His work expanded into using nuclear markers for agriculture and health. When France set off a nuclear device in Algeria in 1960, he proved the extent of radioactive fallout in Ghana, and provided insights into the impacts on the local population. This resulted in an irate French government sending in an army officer to verify the findings. Ward presented his findings to President Nkrumah, contributing to Ghana breaking off diplomatic relations with France. In the early 1960s Alan used information from contacts at Cern and the International Atomic Energy Agency to suggest that a proposed Soviet nuclear research project at Kwabenya in Ghana was deeply unwise. His warning upset Nkrumah, and as a result he was asked to leave the country in 1965. For the next 10 years he worked at the University of Zambia in Lusaka, founding a physics department there. He then moved to the Kwaluseni campus of the University of Botswana and Swaziland, lecturing there until 1986. Throughout their careers, both Alan and Honor played an active role in developing science education, teaching physics at all levels, and supporting the development of applied physics infrastructure in Africa. Their Christian faith was always at the centre of their lives. Both were quiet but vociferous opponents of racist and colonial attitudes and expressed their aspiration to “make themselves redundant”. In 1976, Alan was made OBE. He retired to the village of Hermitage, in Dorset, in 1986, where he worked for the Open University and the University of the Third Age, became chair of the Battery Vehicle Society, and built electric vehicles both for the road and for his grandchildren to drive in the garden. Honor died in 2016. Alan is survived by their children, Kristina, Sheena, James and me, nine grandchildren and 14 great-grandchildren.Thousands of New Year’s Eve revellers are expected to escape strict Covid-19 restrictions in Wales by hopping across the border to visit nightspots in English towns and cities. Leaders of the nightlife industry in Wales are angry that they will lose trade to their counterparts in England because Welsh nightclubs have been ordered to shut and pubs told to put in social distancing measures. But the Welsh government said on Tuesday that its restrictions were proportionate, with the latest seven-day coronavirus rate per 100,000 people rising to 1,004 – the highest since the pandemic began. About 6,000 new infections are being confirmed daily, the majority caused by the Omicron variant. Nick Newman, the chair of the Cardiff Licensees Forum, said he expected many people to leave Wales for England. “It’s 40 minutes from Newport to Bristol and it’s easy to get from north Wales into Manchester or Liverpool. English businesses are going to benefit. “We’re hugely disappointed with the stance the Welsh government is taking, especially not presenting the evidence that links the virus to the hospitality industry.” Mark Finlay, the operations manager for a number of pubs and bars in Wrexham, which is close to the border, said people were bound to pop over to places like Chester for a night out with few restrictions. “It’s frustrating that a few minutes down the road you can celebrate a normal New Year’s Eve but we’re not allowed that opportunity here. For us it will be an average night serving people at tables. There won’t be the normal party atmosphere. I’m fully expecting everyone to go to Chester.” Debbie Evans, who runs the Kerry Lamb pub in Kerry, mid Wales, said in 2019 it had 70 people dining at New Year’s Eve and up to 100 in the bar. This year staff are gearing up to serve only about 50 in total. “But to be honest we’re not getting the bookings,” she said. “People are either worried about coming out or if not they will be taking the short hop over the border for a restriction-free evening in England. It feels to me it would be safer for them to stay in their own community rather than mixing with strangers.” Edmund Inkin, a founding member of the Welsh Independent Restaurant Collective, said: “The feeling that economic value is being taken away and going across the border at a very difficult time is not good for morale.” The Welsh government is making £120m of emergency support available but Inkin said the few thousand pounds most would get was a “drop in the ocean”. He said owners and workers were demoralised because there was no end in sight for the restrictions – while hospitality in England has been told it can carry on over new year largely as normal. Michael Kill, the chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, said he was concerned that some Welsh partygoers would be tempted to attend packed house parties or illegal raves in Wales. “People will push the boundaries and would be safer in regulated settings with safeguards in place.” The leader of the Conservatives in the Welsh parliament, Andrew RT Davies, said it was unacceptable that the Welsh government had not published the scientific advice and evidence behind the restrictions. He said: “Many Welsh businesses will be severely hit this Christmas and new year, and I can understand their anger and frustration given they’re not being afforded the advice that’s provided to ministers.” A Welsh government spokesperson said: “The Omicron variant is causing a rapid rise in coronavirus cases across Wales. Already, people are off work sick, putting essential services under strain and we expect this situation to get worse. “New protections have been put into place to help businesses continue to trade, and updated and strengthened guidance has been issued to help people stay safe in their homes. We all need to do everything we can to protect ourselves and keep Wales safe.”My husband, Chris Honer, who has died aged 73 of cancer, was artistic director of the Library Theatre Company (LTC) in Manchester for 27 years, from 1987 to 2014. While at LTC his many acclaimed productions included The Merchant of Venice, The Life of Galileo, Someone Who’ll Watch Over Me and Waiting for Godot, all of which won Best Production in the Manchester Theatre Awards. He was also noted for his memorable Brecht productions. Under Chris’s leadership LTC produced 14 shows a year, including, in his early years, some at the Forum theatre in Wythenshawe. Right from the start he placed an emphasis on reaching out to communities with limited access to the arts and on fostering new talent. Chris was an only child, born in Chingford, Essex, and brought up in Croydon, south London, where his parents, Douglas and Margaret (nee Keslake), were school teachers. He attended the local Whitgift school, where he discovered not only a love of the theatre and literature, but a passion for birdwatching. He went on to study English language and literature at Lincoln College, Oxford, and the two of us met at an Oxford University Dramatic Society production of Hamlet, on which he was student director. We married in 1972, divorced in the mid-1990s, and remarried in 2012. Chris started his directing career under the repertory theatre trainee director scheme at the Belgrade theatre in Coventry, going on to be the first director of the Studio theatre at Birmingham Rep before becoming artistic director at the Gateway theatre in Chester and then at the Derby Playhouse. His productions in those earlier years included the premieres of Anthony Minghella’s Love Bites, Stephen Bill’s Over the Bar, and David Edgar’s O Fair Jerusalem and Death Story. In 2012 the refurbishment by Manchester city council of the Central Library led to the closure of the theatre space. After that, Chris oversaw the merging of the theatre company with the Cornerhouse cinema and arts centre, to form the multicultural venue HOME. During the transition he continued to direct shows for the company, including an outstanding production of Tom Stoppard’s Arcadia at the Lowry and an extraordinary site-specific production of Hard Times at Murray’s Mill. Chris stepped down from his role as artistic director of LTC just before HOME opened in 2015, but continued to work as a freelance, directing productions at Oldham Coliseum, Manchester School of Theatre and Theatre by the Lake. He also served as accreditation panel chair for the National Council for Drama Training, chaired the Drama Centre Advisory Council and was an examiner for the Trinity College London examination board. Chris was given a special achievement award at the Theatre Awards in 2014 for his contribution to theatre in Manchester. He is survived by me, our sons, Tom and Nick, and our grandson, Robin.In a terrible year for human rights in Russia, beginning with the imprisonment of the opposition leader Alexei Navalny, the closure of International Memorial stands out for its ruthlessness. Founded in the late 1980s by Andrei Sakharov and other Soviet-era dissidents, the group took the new freedoms offered under Mikhail Gorbachev and used them to reveal raw truths about the fate of millions of victims of Stalin’s repressions. It was a poignant symbol of Russia’s new openness, but for many the meaning was anything but abstract: Russians discovered the tragic fates of their parents, grandparents and great-grandparents after decades of secrecy and official cowardice. Memorial’s closure is also a potent symbol – one of Russian civil society being dismantled at lightning speed. Its leadership had hoped that public support, including from prominent Russians such as Gorbachev, would stay the Kremlin’s hand. Or that closing down an organisation dedicated to uncovering Soviet atrocities would be a step too far, even for Vladimir Putin. But on Tuesday, almost exactly 30 years after the Soviet Union was dissolved, a judge showed otherwise. “When Russia chose to take a democratic, legal path forward, I couldn’t in my darkest dreams have imagined that everything would eventually start going in reverse,” Nikita Petrov, a historian and researcher who helped found Memorial, told the Guardian last month. “Probably I was naive then.” It is not hard to see how Putin, mired in historical conflicts over Crimea, Nato expansion and the fall of the Soviet Union, the second world war and more, sees investigation of Soviet history as a threat to national security. He is far more interested in perceived historical injustices committed against Russia than in the uncomfortable truths dug up by Memorial during the organisation’s three decades of work in the Russian archives. “Our country needs an honest and conscientious understanding of the Soviet past; this is the key to its future,” the organisation wrote in a statement after its liquidation. In place of Memorial, which spoke out eloquently and aggressively about mass atrocities, the state is creating a more manicured and careful presentation of the deaths of millions, one that condemns their deaths more than their murders, identifying victims but not their killers. The Russian government would like to portray Memorial’s closure as a simple, bureaucratic extension of its “foreign agents” laws. But on Tuesday a prosecutor in court made the political motive explicit, saying in an impassioned speech that Memorial was “mendaciously portraying the USSR as a terrorist state”. “Why should we, the descendants of the victors, have to see the vindication of traitors to their homeland and Nazi henchmen?” the prosecutor asked. A lawyer for Memorial said it reminded him of a 1930s show trial. Memorial’s leadership has said it is useless trying to understand which of the government’s red lines it crossed to prompt the authorities to shut it down. Some believe it has to do with its archival and historical work on Soviet terror, others with its support for political prisoners such as Navalny. Yet the truth is that Memorial has continued to do what it did since day one, while it is Russia that has changed again, perhaps ending a brief window when it would tolerate an independent reckoning of its past. “It speaks to the fears of the government that it is no longer willing to tolerate the honest accounting of its conduct that Memorial provides,” said Kenneth Roth, the head of Human Rights Watch. “If that mirror is too awful to look at, the answer is to change the conduct, not to shatter the mirror.”An Australian national living in Israel has said he is subject to an 8,000-year travel ban unless he pays an outstanding £1.8m in child support payments. Noam Huppert, a 44-year-old analytical chemist working for a pharmaceutical company, is not allowed to leave Israel until 31 December 9999 owing to a 2013 “stay of exit” order handed down after a family court case brought by his ex-wife, according to news.com.au. The court ruled Huppert must pay 5,000 shekels (£1,200) a month for each of his two children until they turn 18. Huppert told the Guardian that while he had been making the support payments as ordered, he would have to pay the entire sum in advance to lift the stay-of-exit order. The year 9999 was arbitrarily set, he said, because it was the highest possible date allowed by the court’s online system. Huppert’s relationship with his ex-spouse, an Israeli national, deteriorated and she moved back to Israel from Australia in 2011, when their children were aged three months and five years. He followed in 2012, and says he has not been able to leave for any reason – including work – since the 2013 court ruling. “If I didn’t want to help raise my children I wouldn’t have followed them to Israel to be near them, I could have stayed in Australia. For rich men or Israeli men this wouldn’t be a problem. But I am being persecuted simply because I have Australian nationality,” he said. “My daughter is now 11. Realistically I am stuck here until she turns 18.” Israeli family law has frequently been criticised for discriminating against women. In 2018, the finance ministry found that 43% of divorced fathers refused to pay any child support to their ex-spouse. Last summer single mothers relying on the state for funds because the fathers of their children did not pay were hit by funding cuts because of budget disputes. A 2017 supreme court ruling, however, decided that fathers should no longer be solely responsible for alimony, in particular in cases where their ex-wives earned more than they did. “Truth be told, the core of family law in Israel – the laws of marriage and divorce – are characterised by a lack of equality between men and women,” Judge Noam Solberg said at the time. “Despite this, there is no justification for unequal division of child support payments.” In its travel advice for Israel, the US state department includes a warning to citizens that Israel’s civil and religious courts “actively exercise their authority to bar certain individuals, including non-residents, from leaving the country until debts or other legal claims against them are resolved”.My friend John Toye, who has died aged 79, was director of the Institute of Development Studies at the University of Sussex (1987-97) and of the Centre for Study of African Economies at Oxford (2000–03). However, “development economist” does not properly describe him: he was also a historian, political scientist and sociologist. When I first met him in the early 1980s, I was looking for someone who could help me understand the World Bank’s attempt, during those years of global depression, to impose free-market policies on developing countries. My proposal of partnership luckily was accepted, and eventually emerged as Aid and Power (1991), written by John and myself, and Jane Harrigan, and provided the basis for a 40-year friendship. The 1980s were a turning-point for John, which strongly influenced much of his later work. In his book Dilemmas of Development (1987), he characterised the approach of influential free-market advocates of the time as “first turn liberty against equality and fraternity, then overthrow liberty itself”: a sombre prophecy which exactly describes not only the behaviour of many rightwing regimes in the 1980s and 90s but also the governments of modern-day India, Nigeria and Brazil, and most notoriously the behaviour of the Trump administration in the US. John was born in Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, the son of Jack, a teacher, and Adele (nee Francis), a social worker. He went to Christ’s college, Finchley, in north London, then read history at Cambridge, achieving a starred first in his final year. He was a Treasury civil servant between 1965 and 1968, and from then on a development specialist, at Cambridge (1972-80), Swansea (1982-87) and then Sussex. His last published work, The Counterrevolution in Development Economics, a chapter in the book The Political Economy of Development Economics: A Historical Perspective (2018), edited by Michele Alacevich and Mauro Boianovsky. This is a backward look to the themes explored in Dilemmas of Development and describes the damage that economists of the last three decades have done to the concept of development economics. In our judgment George Akerlof’s 1970 idea of market failure can and has been used by many economists, of whom Akerlof and Nicholas Stern are outstanding examples, to explain why public policies still need to be more interventionist in developing than in industrialised countries. John was not only an outstanding development expert, but also a brilliantly kind, generous and versatile person. His support for me extended from identifying flaws in my economic models to showing me how to improvise a bedtime story for my children when they were little. He is survived by his wife, Janet (nee Reason), whom he married in 1967, and their children, Eleanor and Richard.On the day five teenage girls from a Detroit suburb recorded a song called Please Mr Postman in August 1961, 18-year-old Wanda Young was the only one old enough to have graduated from high school. Only after the session was over were they given a name: the Marvelettes. The man who named the group was Berry Gordy Jr, then in the process of establishing his Motown label and still short of hit records. So striking was the song, originally roughed out by one of the girls and completed by Motown’s cadre of young staff writers and arrangers, that it was released before the month was out. Within weeks it had become a million-seller and the first of the fledgling label’s records to hit No 1 on the US pop charts. The 16-year-old Gladys Horton had contributed the lead vocal to that initial hit, but it was Young, who has died aged 78, who would take over for many of their subsequent successes, starting with Don’t Mess With Bill, before the hits dried up towards the end of the 1960s and the group gradually disintegrated. Young’s life was thereafter defined mostly by tragedy. Her marriage in 1963 to Bobby Rogers, a member of the Miracles, a fellow Motown group, fell apart after she had witnessed the murder of her sister. Her brother was injured in another shooting incident. She had suffered years of mental problems and addictions by the time the youngest of her children, a daughter, was shot and killed in 2015. She was born in Inkster, then a semi-rural black suburb built for workers in Detroit’s car factories. Her first ambition was to become a nurse. Of the five embryonic Marvelettes who gathered for their first recording session, Young had been the last to join, replacing Georgia Dobbins, who had come up with the initial idea for the hit song but left before the recording, citing parental disapproval. The group struggled to follow up that initial breakthrough and there would be two early departures, Juanita Cowart, who detested touring, and Georgeanna Tillman, who suffered health problems. In 1964 they were offered the choice of two songs by Motown’s in-house writing teams. The one they rejected was the winsome Where Did Our Love Go?, which would start the Supremes’ climb to superstardom. The song the Marvelettes preferred, the more obviously danceable Too Many Fish in the Sea, gave them only a medium-sized hit. Their fortunes revived in 1966 when Smokey Robinson, the lead singer and chief songwriter of the Miracles, took a particular liking to Young’s voice and wrote the slinky, finger-snapping Don’t Mess With Bill with her delivery in mind. A Top 10 hit, it was followed with almost equal success by The Hunter Gets Captured by the Game and My Baby Must Be a Magician, which would mark the Marvelettes’ final visit to the Top 20. Perhaps Young’s finest performance came in 1967 on When You’re Young and in Love, a Van McCoy song originally recorded by Ruby and the Romantics. Given a sweepingly romantic arrangement to which Young’s ardent tones added a charming poignancy, the Marvelettes’ version failed to become a big hit but lodged itself firmly in the hearts of soul fans, particularly in the UK. Not as receptive as the Supremes to attempts to polish their act for a wider audience, the group had drifted apart when Robinson offered to produce a solo album for Young in 1970. Lacking faith in the appeal of her name, the label decided to revive the collective identity and released it as The Return of the Marvelettes, despite no other members of the group having taken part in the recording. It was not a success. Young already had an 18-month-old daughter, Meta, when she married Rogers in 1963. They had two children together, a son and a daughter, Robert and Bobbae. During one of her husband’s absences on tour, she went back to Inkster to visit her sister. The two women left the house to go shopping, her sister having put on a distinctive wig left at her house by a friend. While out, they were spotted from across the street by a spurned boyfriend of the wig’s owner. Mistaking the sister’s identity, he pulled a gun and shot her in the head. She died in Young’s arms. Thereafter Young fell into despair, addiction and mental illness. Her marriage ended in 1975, with Rogers granted custody of their children. In 1982 she had a fourth child, a daughter called Miracle, who was brought up by an aunt and was murdered in a double shooting in Inkster in 2015. In 1989 Young was among a group of former Motown acts invited by the British producer Ian Levine to take part in recordings for his new Motorcity label. In the words of one witness who had known her during the good times, she arrived at the studio in Detroit looking “a decrepit mess”. Overnight she was groomed, coached and encouraged by Kim Weston – another Motown hitmaker – until she was capable of giving a performance alongside Horton, whose own post-Marvelettes life had included bringing up a disabled child. But while Horton was keen to revive her career and fought lengthy legal battles to be allowed to use the group’s name, which had fallen into the hands of an entrepreneur, Young quickly returned to obscurity. Young is survived by Meta, Robert and Bobbae, seven grandchildren, a great-grandson, four sisters and four brothers. • Wanda LaFaye Young, singer, born 9 August 1943; died 15 December 2021I know we are almost there when we spot the lone yellow house on the left hand side of the rural and isolated Whanganui River Road, near the central North Island. The quiet thoroughfare winds its way alongside native bush and through valleys that have been carved out by the longest navigable river in Aotearoa. Even as a kid, I knew the little yellow house meant we were just a few bends away from reaching my favourite place in the world, Koriniti Marae. Marae are sacred communal meeting grounds for the indigenous Māori peoples of Aotearoa – they provide for everything from sleeping and eating to learning. They are the basis of traditional Māori community life, and typically feature one or more wharenui, or meeting houses, usually painted white and deep red and sometimes carved with Māori art. While many marae are no longer the bustling communities they were pre-colonisation, they continue to serve as pillars of Māori cultural identity today. If you blinked, you would probably miss the turn off to my marae just across from Auntie Lois’s cottage on the hill. Whenever the world gets too loud, I come here. As you drive down the hill, there is a clearing of land revealing Koriniti Marae, a small picturesque settlement that sits on the banks of the river. It has three wharenui, a large hall and kitchen, a church, a Māori language learning nest for children and a few houses that are still occupied. Ever since I was a baby, my grandmother Wahi would bring me on the one-hour journey here from the city. This place remains raw, still and serene, made all the more grounding by the sound of the powerful river that flows around the base of the marae. New Zealand boasts the most beautiful native birds, and I am kept company here by a flock of pīwaiwaka (fantails), which dance around me every step that I take. An old friend once told me the birds were doing that because we were loosening up the earth as we walked, making it easier for them to find bugs to eat. But this is a magical place, and I knew they were guardians welcoming me home. For my people of the tribes of Whanganui, the river is our ancestor. She is formidable and her current is strong, so we wouldn’t swim down here as children. From the water, huge mountains rise sharply up and stretch into the sky. They are covered in thick dark green trees that roll back into the distance. I am comforted by the familiar shape of these jagged ranges – the backdrop of the marae – that has looked the same for longer than I know. But change isn’t always bad. Last Christmas, the rocks by the river moved so much that they blocked part of the river from the current, making it calm enough to swim in. I remember how it felt diving in for the first time in years. My mind immediately went to my grandmother Wahi, who had sadly died a month earlier. Her body rests at the urupā or marae cemetery across from Auntie Lois’s house. I feel her presence when I am in the water and I know I can connect with her under here. A big gasp of breath on my way up and the earthy smell of silt and freshwater covers me. A bittersweet moment as I return to the now. We spend our days basking in the place our ancestors once walked. This is home. And even when there is no one here, I am not alone. What’s your favourite wild place? If you would like to contribute to the series tell us about it in 200 words and send it to newzealand@theguardian.comChris Silverwood has refused to entertain debate about his position as England’s multi-format head coach, insisting his sole focus after his side’s humiliating thrashing in the third Test in Melbourne is on avoiding an Ashes whitewash. “Worrying about myself is at the bottom of the list, to be honest,” Silverwood said. “What we have to do is look forward to the next two Tests, stay positive if we can and make sure we are there, we compete and we take something from this tour. I do feel like I am capable of leading this team to winning things and that’s what I’m going to stay focused on and that’s all I can do.” England’s previous head coach, Trevor Bayliss, stood down in 2019 with this series in mind, describing the away Ashes as “our holy grail” for which “you are better off making changes well in advance and giving those guys time to bed themselves in”. After Silverwood’s appointment that October the England director of cricket, Ashley Giles, said he particularly impressed in his interview with “some detailed thoughts on what it will take to win the Ashes in Australia”. England have lost the first three Tests by nine wickets, 275 runs and an innings and 14 runs respectively. “There are some positives,” Silverwood said after England had been skittled for 68, their lowest total in Australia since 1904, to confirm the hosts’ victory in the series. “We had the problem [of positive Covid tests in the camp on Monday] but they went out and competed. The bowlers showed a lot of spirit, guts and determination. I thought the attitude and effort the guys showed yesterday was excellent so there is a lot of fight and spirit in that dressing room. Try to harness that. “I think at this moment in time the sole focus is how do I get the best out of these players to make sure we compete for the next two Tests? I don’t want to be going back having lost 5-0. I want to win games over here.” Silverwood acknowledged there are structural issues, potentially including an unhealthy focus on white-ball cricket, which have held England back. “There’s certainly things that we have got to look at and we will look at, at the end of this tour,” he said. “But I just don’t think those conversations are for right now. I think we’ve got to deal with what’s in front of us because we’ve got two Test matches coming up . Then I think the debrief will happen.” Australia’s superiority has been so emphatic that the position of Joe Root as England captain has also been thrown into doubt, despite him ending 2021 with 1,708 Test runs, enough for third on the all-time list. “I think he is a fine young man and a great human being,” Silverwood said. “The year he has had with the bat shows that he is a class act. But again I don’t think it’s time to be discussing things like that. What we really have to be concentrating on is doing what we came here to do, which is to compete. We have two Test matches left so we have to put our best foot forward and that has to be the focus.”It’s not the fact that an exotic animal had hitched a lift and arrived in the UK that surprised me but the cargo that it used to get here (Forklift driver finds deadly saw-scaled viper in Salford brickyard, 22 December). What on earth are we doing importing bricks from Pakistan, 4,000 miles away? The environmental costs of shipping must be horrendous. Gareth Hopcyn Stockport, Greater Manchester • A friend of mine who taught domestic science in the 1960s (Letters, 23 December) once showed me a GCE O-level paper that required the examinee to imagine she was a housewife going out for the day and leaving prepared food for her husband and children. My friend assured me that my suggestion of fish and chips for lunch and sandwiches for tea would have resulted in a fail. Margaret O’Connor Otley, West Yorkshire • The humorist SJ Perelman would, no doubt, have endorsed Susie Dent’s campaign for orphaned negatives (From respair to cacklefart – the joy of reclaiming long-lost positive words, 26 December), having observed when he relocated to America from the UK: “New York may be uncouth, but in London you can have too much couth.” Martin Shankleman London • My father didn’t need to indicate to guests that it was time to go (Letters, 27 December). When the clock struck 10pm, our boxer dog would go over to his favourite chair (the dog’s, not Dad’s). Then he’d firmly push the knee of its occupant, until they took the hint to stand up. And that was time to get their coats for them, and bye-bye. Mary Pickard Ossett, West Yorkshire • Here’s an idea. Why don’t hunt members just go out for a nice ride in the countryside on Boxing Day, leaving their dogs at home (Boxing Day hunts to go ahead despite Covid and calls for ban, 26 December)? Ann Newell Thame, Oxfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I had a look at the 1967 edition of Wisden on Tuesday morning, after hearing the news of England’s Ashes defeat. Its report of the 1965-66 England tour of Australia shows that the team arrived in Australia in late October and played 10 warm-up matches, including five four-day state games, before the first Test started on 10 December. The team was not an outstanding one, but it was competitive in the series, which was drawn one-all. By contrast, the current England team was scheduled to play just two warm-up matches against scratch teams, both of which were rained off. I am sure there are other systemic causes of England’s poor performance, but the idea that we can fly a team a diagonal of the Earth away from their own fields and expect them to acclimatise within a few days to become competitive with a home team is surely fanciful. Richard Williams Hove, East Sussex • On hearing the overnight news from the Melbourne Test, I felt sure I already knew 11 of the “15 words associated with horror” in your Wordsearch in the print edition (G2, 28 December). Andrew Holder South Wonston, Hampshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.However moved I am by Aditya Chakrabortty’s article about Giovanni Rose, a prize-winning young black poet (The teenager’s poem that reveals the cruel reality of life in modern Britain, 23 December), I can only feel a limited sense of optimism for his future. I fear that he will continue to feel the effects of institutional racism throughout his life. If this were not so, then why have the injustices suffered by members of the Windrush generation still not been properly addressed? Over 50 years ago, another young black teenager wrote a poem. She was spirited and rebellious. Little wonder. As a pupil in a school for “educationally subnormal” pupils, she was feeling the full weight of a racist judgment that had already blighted her life. I was her teacher whom she accused of treating her harshly “just because I’m black”. To make amends for her outburst, she wrote a poem for me in her jotter. I will regret for ever that I failed to keep this amazing, moving and well-written cry for help. I resigned shortly afterwards in search of a “better career”, leaving her behind in a totally unsuitable environment. How I wish that she could have had the inclusive support of a school like Giovanni’s. But supportive schools are not enough. I would love to meet her now to talk about how our lives have gone. We are not that far apart in age. However, I fear that her life will not have passed as easily as mine. I could not have written a poem like that. But I was white and privileged. She was a member of the Windrush generation and already damned. Joan Lewis St-Etienne-de-Gourgas, France • Thank you, Aditya Chakrabortty, for your heartfelt article on Giovanni Rose, who won a Foyle Young Poets of the Year award. I am a retired headteacher who spent my whole career in inner-city schools in the north-east. I have seen first-hand the reality of life for a huge proportion of the population. Everything is stacked against young people who grow up in poverty, and Covid has increased the divide between the haves and have-nots to a shocking degree. I am still in contact with many of the families I worked with and continue to marvel at their resilience, wisdom, humour and love in the direst of circumstances. “Great” Britain we are not. Judy Cowgill Blaydon, Tyne and Wear • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your informative obituary of Archbishop Desmond Tutu (26 December) missed an important dimension – his warnings on the need to save the planet. In March 2004, he delivered a lecture entitled God’s Word and World Politics at the United Nations as part of Kofi Annan’s public lecture series on cutting-edge topics in the humanities, natural sciences, social sciences and the arts. The archbishop said: “Ecological concerns are a deeply religious, spiritual matter. To pollute the environment, to be responsible for a disastrous warming, is not just wrong and should be a criminal offence; it is certainly morally wrong. It is a sin.” Prof Abiodun Williams Tufts University • The humanity of Desmond Tutu was a candle of hope in a darkening world. His moral reach was global. His warnings about the future of humankind on the planet remain as true today as when he summarised his thoughts in a Guardian article (This fatal complacency, 5 May 2007). The focus then was on climate disruption; 14 years later, we have added the weight of a 1.5 billion population increase, the actions of failing states and tyrannical governments, and selfish international failure to help our neighbours during this present coronavirus pandemic. Bob Pike Saint-Cyr-sur-Loire, France • Your obituary focused, understandably, on Archbishop Desmond Tutu’s contribution to peace and reconciliation in South Africa. In the last 15 years of his life, however, he also made a huge contribution to the process of peace elsewhere in the world through his adopted philosophy of Ubuntu, whereby we live through our shared humanity with others. In the UK, the work of the Tutu Foundation supported the bringing together of young people, especially Black young people in deprived areas, to confront some of the difficulties arising from the over-policing of minority communities through, for example, the disproportionate use of stop and search. It is too early to say what the long-term effects of this work might be, but early signs are encouraging in replacing fear and distrust with openness and engagement as equals. Prof Gary Craig York • I was disappointed that your obituary of Desmond Tutu made no reference to his support for Palestine, and his powerful statement in 2014 when he made a direct comparison between the Israeli government’s treatment of Palestinians in the occupied territories and the apartheid regime in South Africa against which he had fought so hard. Archbishop Tutu was a remarkable and principled man and an inspiration to many. His fight against apartheid and racism was not just confined to one country; he challenged it wherever it occurred. Ann Kramer Hastings, East Sussex • Among all the stories of Desmond Tutu, my favourite is of two friends who visited Cape Town some years ago and attended a service in the cathedral. On leaving, they were greeted by him and asked where they came from. “Worcester,” came the reply. “Ah yes, its lovely cathedral…” “Well, actually, we are Methodists.” Whereupon he placed his arms round their shoulders and pronounced, “I forgive you, my children”, before giving vent to that well-known chuckle. Elizabeth Dunnett Malvern, Worcestershire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A police officer took selfies at a murder scene where a teenager had been stabbed to death, and sent “appalling” racist, homophobic and offensive images via WhatsApp, the Guardian has learned. PC Ryan Connolly from the Merseyside force committed a litany of disciplinary offences over a six-year period while a serving officer, a tribunal has decided. While on duty, he also took photos on his mobile phone of people in mental health crisis, in hospitals, who had been sectioned under police powers. His case echoes that of the two Metropolitan police officers who used their mobile phones to take pictures at the scene where two sisters lay murdered. The pair were convicted in court and sacked in a case that rocked policing. Details of Connolly’s wrongdoing have been confirmed by Merseyside police after inquiries by the Guardian. The Merseyside force said Connolly’s actions had undermined public confidence in policing, and were an “insult” to the majority of officers who served the public with distinction. The discipline tribunal found Connolly guilty of gross misconduct. He had resigned before the November hearing, and after the tribunal he was formally sacked by Merseyside police. Merseyside police said their anti-corruption unit had caught Connolly and his “offensive behaviour”. Connolly had also had an association with a known criminal without informing his bosses. Connolly joined the force in January 2003 and had served under the police identification number 2133. According to papers lodged with the tribunal, his offending against police rules began in 2014. Connolly was accused of a litany of offences, mainly involving his personal Samsung mobile phones. The discipline panel found that Connolly took photos, or had images on his phone he should not have had, and that he frequently shared them. Its findings included: Connolly had photos and graphics that were grossly racist, and one depicting Muslim people. He also had an image of a Ku Klux Klan member. In 2016 and again in 2017, while on duty, he took photos on his mobile of men detained by police under mental health powers, who were in hospital, and shared it via WhatsApp. While on duty he took and sent a photo of men in hospital on at least two occasions. He took photos of people who had been arrested. In October 2015 he took a photo, while on duty, of someone who had slashed their wrists, and shared it via WhatsApp. He took a photo of a fellow officer’s rear and shared it via WhatsApp. In 2016 he sent a graphic homophobic message. He took photos in 2018 of himself at a murder scene where he had been assigned to guard the cordon after a teenager had been stabbed to death. He took photos of crime victims, including someone missing from home, and shared details about a woman who went to police for help alleging she had suffered domestic violence. Other images mocked disabled people. He was cleared of trying to acquire cannabis while a serving officer. When interviewed by detectives from professional standards, Connolly made no comment. Before the discipline hearing, he provided a written statement, saying he did not know why offensive images were on his phone. Merseyside police’s deputy chief constable, Ian Critchley, said: “Connolly had taken photographs of vulnerable people on his personal phone whilst on duty … This breached the duty of confidence; lacked honesty and integrity and through his discreditable conduct he has undermined public confidence. “Between 2015 and 2018 Connolly stored images on his personal phone that were racist, homophobic and severely offensive and on some occasions had shared those images. “Connolly maintained contact with a known criminal and did not disclose the relationship… as a result, by socialising and associating with the criminal, brought the service into disrepute.” Critchley added: “An investigation by our anti-corruption unit uncovered the fact that Connolly had been using his own phone to take photographs of vulnerable people whilst on duty and that the phone also contained appalling homophobic, racist and offensive images.” He added: “The behaviour of this officer is deplorable and serves to undermine the public’s confidence and trust in the police. “Our officers carry out exceptionally brave selfless acts every single day, protecting the most vulnerable people in our communities, yet here we see the despicable acts of a very selfish individual who has no place in our police service.” Police said the pictures from the murder scene only showed Connolly and did not show the teenage murder victim. Merseyside police say they will enhance their vetting procedures following the case. Connolly, in a written statement to the tribunal, said he could not recall the offensive images, after they were shown to him during interview by detectives, or how they came to be on his phone. He added: “I do have the insight to know that the images should not have been in my possession. “This has been a learning experience for me to be more mindful of the WhatsApp groups that I am in and being more aware [of the] material that is sent to me.” Connolly’s phones were seized in February 2020 by detectives from Merseyside’s anti-corruption unit. He resigned before the discipline tribunal in November, which ruled he would have been sacked if still a serving officer. He is barred for life from rejoining the service.“It was the best of times, it was the worst of times.” So opens Charles Dickens’ A Tale of Two Cities. Set in London and Paris during the late 1700s and the lead-up to the French Revolution, the novel was a warning about what happens when wealth funnels upwards while the masses stagnate. Nowhere do the best and worst of times collide with more geopolitical force than in Africa. African writers swept the board for literature awards from the Nobel to the Booker, while seven out of eight children in the continent’s sub-Saharan region are unable to read by the age of 10. This year the continent was home to the slowest internet speeds on the planet, as African judges granted the world’s first patent given to a robot inventor. About 50 million Africans are expected to fall into extreme poverty in 2021, when the continent’s richest billionaires have seen their wealth increase by a fifth. Globalisation has polarised societies, an effect that has been supercharged during the pandemic. This pattern is not unusual in other nations, but to apply it to Africa suggests that it possesses a unity beyond the mere geographic. African nations have huddled together in the face of climate and Covid storms – with good reason. Instead of rewarding African scientists for identifying the threat of Omicron, the west imposed travel bans on the continent. The suspicion is that had the Sars-CoV-2 virus been found in Africa, it would have been cut off. The pandemic has made visible a world being shaped to Africa’s disadvantage. Low vaccination rates are a reason for the emergence of dangerous coronavirus variants, so why let just 8% of 1.3 billion Africans be fully vaccinated? The industrialised world won’t issue Africa a vaccine patent waiver, and foreign aid is just 2% of the continent’s GDP. So African nations can’t manufacture their own cheap medicines and lack the foreign exchange to cushion distribution costs. Climate cost Despite having played a negligible role in creating the climate crisis, African countries already find themselves paying a heavy price for it. The EU plans to introduce greenhouse gas taxes on imports that will pull a carbon curtain across the Mediterranean. Carlos Lopes of the University of Cape Town says African train projects built by Chinese companies are not using the low-carbon technology rolled out at home. The performance of Africa has been described as the worst economic tragedy of the 20th century. Commonplace explanations don’t bear much scrutiny. Statistics can show that the closer a country is to the equator, the poorer it is. Yet no one would argue that slow growth caused a country to get closer to the equator. Africa has been destabilised by conflict, but that has, says Prof Lopes, not stopped Thailand developing an export base. One controversial argument is that too few, not too many, colonisers were the problem. The theory goes that higher levels of European settlement led to more productive institutions. However, the historian Morten Jerven, in his book The Wealth and Poverty of African States, says that real wages stagnated in the settler economies of South Africa, Zimbabwe and Kenya, whereas in the peasant economies of Uganda and Ghana, real wages rose. Africa was not colonised because it was poor. European powers occupied and divided up the continent in the 19th century because it was rich. Africa was once a breadbasket; how did it earn a reputation for being a basket case? One reason is an extractive economic model that promotes African development via foreign direct investment, export-led growth and financial liberalisation. This web, according to Tunisian economist Fadhel Kaboub, drains nearly $2tn annually from the developing world. Today, African economies export low-value-added goods relative to their imports. Instead of growing their own food to feed their people, countries import foodstuffs. While some nations export crude hydrocarbons, many more import refined petrochemicals such as gasoline. The right to bring in these essentials is handed over to a politically connected business “rentier” class that has a vested interest in the status quo. There is a demand for jobs, a hunger for education and a desperate need for health in Africa. Yet leaders are caught in a dilemma: if they create money to spend on social cohesion, they risk increasing food, energy and capital goods imports, and increasing their trade deficit. That puts downward pressure on the national currency. A weak exchange rate means that imports of basic necessities will be more expensive. History is littered with examples of violent revolutions preceded by price spikes. An alternative strategy Economic orthodoxy has no answer. Its textbooks would have African governments instructing central banks to borrow US dollars to prop up the local currency and prioritising foreign creditors with austerity. Africa’s stunted development demonstrates that poor states continue to be impoverished by being integrated into the world system through a relationship of unequal economic exchange with wealthy states. An alternative African strategy would see governments spending on public services and on increasing food and renewable energy sovereignty, while cracking down on corruption. This provides a way out of the current development trap. In their book Africa’s Last Colonial Currency, Fanny Pigeaud and Ndongo Samba Sylla suggest that, instead of importing food and burning through foreign reserves, African states should produce food at home, as land, work and knowhow are abundant. “If they financed the development of their agriculture, they wouldn’t reduce their foreign exchange reserves; on the contrary, they would save money.” State-owned enterprises and a competitive domestic private sector would help Africa evade activities demanded by the global north. As African countries become increasingly digital, data will be power in economic governance – and local entities must be its custodian, not transnational corporations. Trade agreements between countries of similar income levels are more beneficial for them compared with the World Trade Organization’s framework. The African Continental Free Trade Area, created by 54 of the 55 AU nations, is a good start. African economies would benefit by producing green industrial goods that rich countries take for granted, but whose mass production has not reached the continent. It would be in Europe’s interest to help – as more Africans would be able to find jobs at home, pressure to migrate would ease. Africa is caught between history and geography. Understanding how and why it got to where it is today will help the continent move forward in the future.Care services in the community could be rationed amid the spread of Omicron, which is causing staff absences in England’s public services to rocket. Choices will need to be made about what services can and cannot be covered, according to Patricia Marquis, the England director of the Royal College of Nursing. “Services are already really stretched and it won’t take a lot – either further staff absences or increasing numbers of patients needing to be seen because the hospitals are full – to really push the services over the edge,” she said. Marquis predicts that as services begin to reopen after Christmas, it will become clearer how much more pressure they are facing. Community nursing is a particular area of concern and those services could end up being rationed, Marquis said. “Everyone automatically thinks about hospitals, but staff shortages aren’t just affecting hospitals. Limiting the number of community services that are available will possibly need to be considered.” Stephen T Chandler, president of the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services, also warned that social care provided in people’s homes could be badly hit by the Omicron wave. “In some places, people are having to wait longer to be discharged from hospital or may be waiting longer for people to come out and assess them. In some instances, it will result in some services being unavailable in the short term and that’s what we mean by rationing,” he said. A day care facility in Oxfordshire has already had to temporarily close due to staff shortages, he said. Homecare is likely to be badly affected, as it is harder to redeploy staff. “The best-case scenario would be a stranger would come into your home who is not familiar with your care and the worst case is the number of visits having to be reduced,” he said. Chandler said care provided in the community plays a crucial role in protecting the NHS as it can reduce the number of people visiting hospital. “This is why it is so critical that you don’t have anything happening that would risk that,” he said. Meanwhile, Dr Chaand Nagpaul, chair of the council of the British Medical Association, warned that GPs are being hit by staff shortages and said the government’s focus solely on hospitalisation data when making decisions about further Covid restrictions was shortsighted. Nagpaul said: “To me the elephant in the room is the alarming levels of NHS staff shortages, and hospital data do not include general practice, which is being impacted significantly.” The BMA has been told that large numbers of appointments are being cancelled as a result. “We’re also seeing cancellation of clinics for blood tests, for example where nurses are off sick. Reception staff are also going off sick, which means phones are going unanswered.” When people can’t get GP appointments, A&amp;E visits usually increase, so there is a knock-on effect on hospitals. “The government’s focus purely on hospital absence and Omicron hospitalisation is missing the larger picture of the impact on general practice, which is for patients that first point of contact.” Public transport also continues to experience pressure due to Covid-related staff shortages. The Rail Delivery Group, the British rail industry membership body, said that on Monday 6.8% of trains were cancelled, up from an average of 5.4% in the seven days to Friday 24 December. The annual average of cancellations is 2.9%. A spokesperson said: “Our staff are working in difficult circumstances and, like everyone else, they are susceptible to the virus.” Waste collection services also continue to be disrupted in some areas of the country, with Basingstoke and Deane borough council having had to announce on Christmas Eve that some collections may not take place owing to Covid-related staffing issues. Bin collections for Cambridge and South Cambridgeshire between Christmas and the new year also had to be revised, with some collection dates delayed by five days. Green bin collections in the area were suspended from 13 December due to the number of absent drivers and loaders, particularly due to Covid-19 or self-isolation, the Greater Cambridge Shared Waste Service said, with rounds not due to return to normal before 24 January.Galvin, under an inspired ride by Davy Russell, got up in the final stride to win the Grade One Savills Chase at Leopardstown on Tuesday and will now head straight to the Cheltenham Gold Cup in March, when he is likely to start at around 5-1 to give Gordon Elliott, his trainer, a second success in chasing’s championship event. Galvin seemed more likely to finish third when A Plus Tard and Kemboy, the winners in 2020 and 2018 respectively, showed more speed after jumping the second-last, and Elliott’s seven-year-old still had a couple of lengths to find at the final fence. Russell got a great leap from his partner there, however, and was then able to draw on the stamina which saw Galvin home in front in the National Hunt Chase at Cheltenham in March, closing all the way up the run-in and eventually getting a short-head in front on the line. “I didn’t know where the line was, I was driving with my head down and the further away the line was, the better chance I had,” Russell told RTE television afterwards. “He really motored from the back of the last. He jumped fantastic and he’s game as a pebble.” The win was Russell’s first in a Grade One race since returning to race-riding in August after nearly a year on the sidelines with serious injuries to his neck and back, sustained in a fall at Limerick in October 2020, and Elliott’s first in a Grade One chase since November 2020. “I had a tear in my eye after the race, I’m not afraid to say it,” Elliott, who was banned for six months in March after being photographed posing on a dead horse on his gallops, said afterwards. “We’ve had a rough year and it’s brilliant for the horse to do this. We started out having a bit of fun around Perth with him and he hasn’t let us down the whole way. That’s 12 races he’s won now, he’s the horse of a lifetime. He stays like hell and he’ll go straight to the Gold Cup now. “Davy Russell is a great friend of mine, we’ve been friends since riding in point-to-points at 16 or 17 years of age. I’m very lucky to have Davy and Jack [Kennedy] at the moment, that meant a lot to Davy as well, as he’s very close to Ronnie [Bartlett, Galvin’s owner]. We don’t let him ride for anyone else at the moment, he’s too good to be giving to anyone else.” Bookmakers reacted to Galvin’s win by cutting him to a top price of 7-1 (from as big as 33-1 on Tuesday morning) for the Gold Cup in March, while A Plus Tard, the runner-up behind Minella Indo in last season’s Gold Cup, is out to 4-1 (from 5-2). Minella Indo is a 10-1 chance while Tornado Flyer, Sunday’s King George VI Chase winner at Kempton, is one of several contenders on offer at around 16-1. Klassical Dream made the most of a flying start to win the Grade One Christmas Hurdle over three miles, as Paul Townend stole half a dozen lengths from his field in the opening moments before holding the strong finish of Flooring Porter by two lengths. The winner, who landed the Supreme Novice Hurdle over two miles at Cheltenham in 2019, was cut to around 5-2 (from 9-2) for the Stayers’ Hurdle at the Festival in March while Flooring Porter, a front-running winner of that race last season, is a 7-1 chance. “It wasn’t part of the plan,” Willie Mullins, Klassical Dream’s trainer, said. “We were expecting pace in the race but obviously it wasn’t there. Paul said the horse took the initiative, jumped out the gate and went. The horse took over and did everything.” Mullins completed a double when Galopin Des Champs ran away with the card’s Beginners’ Chase, finishing 22 lengths clear of the runner-up. The winner, a 6-1 shot for the Brown Advisory Novice Chase at the Cheltenham Festival before jumping a fence in public, is now 9-4 favourite, with Bravemansgame, who took the Grade One Kauto Star Novice Chase at Kempton on Sunday, next in the list at 4-1.Greta Thunberg has criticised Joe Biden for not leading the fight against the climate crisis. In an interview with the Washington Post, the 18-year old Swedish environmental activist rejected the idea that the US president is a leader on climate issues. “It’s strange that people think of Joe Biden as a leader for the climate when you see what his administration is doing,” she said. “The US is actually expanding fossil fuel infrastructure. “Why is the US doing that? It should not fall on us activists and teenagers who just want to go to school to raise this awareness and to inform people that we are actually facing an emergency.” Asked what she wants politicians like Biden to do, Thunberg said: “First of all, we have to understand what is the emergency. “We are trying to find a solution to a crisis that we don’t understand … it’s all about the narrative. It’s all about, what are we actually trying to solve? Is it this emergency, or is it this emergency?” In November, Thunberg called the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow “a failure”, arguing it “turned into a PR event” in which “leaders are not doing anything” except “actively creating loopholes and shaping frameworks” in order to keep profiting from a “destructive system”. Speaking to the Post, Thunberg said that a Cop26 final agreement “which is very much an achievement” will not amount to anything unless it increases ambitions which leaders then fulfill. One of the positives of Cop26, she said, was that it revealed that “under current circumstances, within current systems, we won’t be able to solve the climate crisis unless there is massive pressure from the outside”. Thunberg said global summits like Cop26 presented a “big opportunity” for public mobilization to highlight the climate crisis. In Glasgow, Biden vowed that the US would “lead by example” in the fight to avoid global heating beyond 1.5C. He made new promises to cut down on methane, a potent greenhouse gas, and to end deforestation, drawing widespread praise. Nonetheless, when more than 40 countries announced a promise to end coal mining, the US was absent from the list. In a recent report, the UN environment program and other researchers found that global production of oil and gas is on track to rise over the next 20 years at a rate that will result in double the fossil fuel production in 2030 consistent with a 1.5C rise. The report found that the US projects increases in oil and gas production by 17% and 12% respectively by 2030. The Biden administration has approved at least 3,091 new drilling permits on public lands at a rate of 223 permits a month, at a faster rate than the Trump administration. In November, the US held the largest-ever auction of oil and gas drilling leases in Gulf of Mexico history, offering up more than 80m acres of seabed. Thunberg told the Post: “What’s holding us back is that we lack the political will. “Our goal is to find a solution that allows us to continue life [as it is] today,” she said. “… but the uncomfortable truth is that we have left it too late for that. Or the world leaders have left it too late for that. “We need to fundamentally change our societies now. If we would have started 30 years ago, it would have been smoother. But now it’s a different situation.”Australian football was supposed to be beyond this. The 2021-22 season was supposed to be when everything returned to some semblance of normality. Yet, just when the A-Leagues thought they were out, Omicron pulled them back in. Thanks to a wave of positive tests, enforced isolations, and match postponements, Australian football has settled into the now-familiar comfort of crisis. Across the past week: three FFA Cup games, four ALM games, and one ALW fixture have fallen prey to Covid. Though the game was eventually abandoned, that the Newcastle Jets were initially set to host Western Sydney Wanderers behind closed doors on Boxing Day carried an air of macabre nostalgia. The Jets defeated Melbourne City in front of empty stands at McDonald Jones Stadium before the season was suspended at the birth of the pandemic in early 2020. Given the parallels, calls for another hiatus, or a return to centralised hubs, are inevitable. In such a rapidly shifting environment, it would appear to make sense to call for a time-out, even just for a week or so, to provide clarity. Leading into the Christmas weekend at least, the possibility of hubs or a suspension to the season was not being considered by the Australian Professional Leagues. Eager to deliver both a full ALM and ALW season in their first campaign in charge, the major priority of the APL, beyond minimising any further spread of Covid amongst players and staff, remains the completion of as many games – and the rescheduling of postponed fixtures – as quickly as possible to both ensure that clubs do not experience a fixture pile-up come the end of the season, and provide more flexibility for the leagues in the event that circumstances worsen or improve. This quest to fit games in at short notice is aided by new broadcast partner Viacom CBS proving a more adaptable partner than Fox Sports. In 2020-21, the looming conclusion of the existing broadcast deal meant that City’s coronation as ALM champions had to take place before the end of June, even with the outbreak of the Delta variant. In contrast, positioning itself as “The Home of Australian Football”, Viacom ostensibly has little choice but to do what it can to support APL, lest its brand new investment becomes a lemon less than a year in. APL chief executive Danny Townsend told the Sydney Morning Herald there was no inclination to extend the length of the season beyond its scheduled end date of May, but the existence of this five-year broadcast deal, as well as a new multi-year collective bargaining agreement with Professional Footballers Australia, would remove two significant barriers to the leagues seeking to make adjustments should the postponements begin to pile up. Steadfast as the APL’s intention may appear, the fragile nature of pressing on with a national sporting competition in defiance of a highly communicable virus was laid bare on Sunday when an unnamed member of Melbourne City’s fully vaccinated ALW squad, who lives in a house with a number of her teammates, returned two positive rapid antigen tests the day of her side’s win over Melbourne Victory. City were made to scramble to determine if any other asymptomatic players might also test positive, and figure out a way to prepare for the fixture in a manner that would allow for at least some form of risk minimisation. Beyond the reality of teammate to teammate transmission, ALW presents its own unique challenges to administrators. Unlike their fully professional male counterparts, the majority of ALW players have jobs outside football, increasing their chances of contracting Covid. The first ALW player reported during this present wave, a Newcastle Jets player, tested positive after being exposed at her non-football place of employment. The A-Leagues are hardly alone in having their best-laid plans plunged into chaos. Positive cases and postponements have swept the English Premier League in recent weeks and in the face of a deluge of absences, the NFL, perhaps operating on the Trumpian assumption that fewer tests equals less Covid, has altered its regimens to drop mandatory testing for fully vaccinated and asymptomatic players and coaches. By contrast, the APL is understood to be investigating means of increasing testing. But a vaccination or booster mandate is not yet on the table, with the APL content that with almost every player in the competition already jabbed such a policy isn’t needed. Such a stance is made easier by government policies and private companies, such as airlines, doing some of the heavy lifting. For example, Western United coach John Aloisi confirmed one of his players was unavailable for selection due to his unvaccinated status. Inevitably, the APL will be driven by its own internal metrics and priorities when it comes to formulating plans for how its newly independent properties respond to the latest challenge. But how long any plans will last is a great unknown. Anyone who claims to know exactly what needs to happen in the coming weeks, given that just over a month ago none of us had even heard of Omicron, is doing little more than erecting a petard for themselves.Antonio Conte bemoaned Tottenham’s fatigue and foggy thinking as his side failed to make proper inroads to fourth-placed Arsenal after being forced to settle for a draw against 10-man Southampton. Spurs hoped to build on Harry Kane’s first-half equaliser from the penalty spot but had two goals disallowed by the officials, the first for a marginal offside and the second for a supposed foul. Kane replied for Spurs on 41 minutes after the Southampton captain James Ward-Prowse’s third goal in three matches gave the hosts a deserved lead. Kane had the ball in the net seven minutes after the break but the VAR deemed the England captain offside and, later, Fraser Forster avoided the ignominy of an embarrassing own goal after the Tottenham half-time substitute, Matt Doherty, was penalised for a foul in the buildup. Spurs are now five points behind their north London rivals, albeit with two games in hand. “It was an opportunity but we missed it,” Conte said. “When you have that situation you have to try to exploit it to get three points. We knew very well. The situation at one point of the game was positive for us but I think the second half we felt the fatigue and our mind wasn’t clear to make the best decisions. “I tried also with substitutions to change something [by bringing on] Lucas Moura and [Bryan] Gil. I decided to change [Sergio] Reguilón because he was on a yellow card and I think it was much better in this way. We didn’t find a solution. We scored but they decided to disallow the goal.” Conte made three changes from his team’s victory against Crystal Palace on Boxing Day, with Dele Alli, Harry Winks and Ben Davies replacing Moura, Japhet Tanganga and Oliver Skipp. The Italian also confirmed that winger Steven Bergwijn was absent altogether with a calf injury sustained against Palace. “To play after 44 hours is not easy for every team and I think I have seen a bit of fatigue in my players. For this reason we make sometimes not a good decision in the last pass [and] the finishing. We can do much better.”Revisit the week of the Rassie Erasmus rant and it is still striking that even if South Africa’s director of rugby had chosen to bite his lip rather than document his hour-long diatribe now synonymous with the Springboks’ series win, it would still go down as one of the most bizarre periods in rugby union’s turbulent year. The video emerged on the Thursday, by which stage Erasmus had already called out Mako Vunipola on Twitter for man-handling Cheslin Kolbe and held an extraordinary press conference in which he denied he was behind an account by the name of Jaco Johan, which flagged a number of perceived injustices and with which he was regularly engaging and agreeing. For context, Erasmus felt that the British &amp; Irish Lions had influenced the officials in the first Test – which they won 22-17 – by making it known that they were unimpressed with the appointment of the South African Marius Jonker as TMO. Even before that the trash-talking had started – Warren Gatland felt Faf de Klerk should have been given a red card in South Africa A’s victory over the tourists so Erasmus countered by picking at the low-hanging fruit: Owen Farrell’s tackle technique. Throw in Erasmus’s insistence on acting as South Africa’s water carrier and Gatland’s willingness to question it and it’s fair to say the mix was already combustible. It was in the week of the second Test that Erasmus grew desperate. During the build-up to the first Test he and South Africa’s head coach, Jacques Nienaber, had largely kept their counsel, but following defeat they seemingly reached the conclusion that it hadn’t worked and so they had to go on the offensive. If Erasmus’ press conference was as entertaining as it was extraordinary – “No, I’m actually not Jaco Johan, I’m Johan Erasmus … He’s a very big supporter, a really funny guy and I quite enjoy the things that he does” – he crossed the line from mischief to malice with the video. Erasmus highlighted 26 incidents in which he believed the referee, Nic Berry, and his team of assistants were at fault and suggested it was not just out of incompetence, referencing how he felt the Lions captain, Alun Wyn Jones, and his counterpart, Siya Kolisi – South Africa’s first ever black captain – were afforded different treatment. He lamented the officials’ refusal to give him feedback on demand and he even dared World Rugby to ban him for his decision to speak out. “If this means we are going to get a fine, I will step away from the management team,” he said. To dissect a referee’s performance like that – and for it to enter into the public domain – was egregious and it was to World Rugby’s shame that his punishment was not meted out for a further four months. The governing body’s lengthy verdict detailed the human toll Erasmus’ behaviour had on Berry, and brought with it some equally extraordinary revelations. Chiefly that Erasmus was found guilty of threatening Berry with the video’s publication and that in among the chaos of the week in question, the Australian referee took the time to answer each and every point Erasmus had by email, only to receive a one-world reply: thank you. Erasmus’ subsequent behaviour on social media has wavered between unashamed and unhinged – it also took a further week after the verdict of his hearing for him to finally apologise – but he is clearly emboldened, because to many South African supporters it is he who has been wronged. Erasmus, in his followers’ eyes, is unimpeachable, crusading against myriad injustices, a truth-teller bold enough to hold the powers-that-be to account. That, however, is to miss the point. Erasmus’ claims may have merit but considering his methods in airing them, the only suitable course of action for World Rugby to take was to promptly throw the book at him. And by that measure, it failed. World Rugby is a governing body that prioritises procedure over public perception and the short-term result was that Erasmus remained in position for the second and third Tests, and the first half of the former ended up being just as long as his video tirade, so paralysed by fear were the officials. It did not single-handedly ruin a series which arguably should not have been taking place at all – the Rugby Football Union, for one, has since privately acknowledged it should, in hindsight, have been a “home” series for the Lions as had been explored but ultimately rejected – but it hardly helped. And while Erasmus’ behaviour that week brought some much-needed colour to a drab series, it also denied it any oxygen to breathe. Because there can be little doubt that Erasmus’ actions were borne out of a willingness to do anything in his power to avoid defeat and that kind of desperation, that fear of failure, seeped into players on both sides. Yes, South Africa have an effective style, so too the Lions under Gatland, and neither is particularly pleasing on the eye. But given the amount of work and upheaval that went into getting the series on, the greatest disappointment was that there is little memorable about it beyond Rassie’s rant. Erasmus will not care less about that, but that is to rugby’s great shame and, at the very least, it should be a warning as to why a week like that cannot be allowed to happen again.The UK has seen another record rise of daily Covid cases, with 138,831 reported in England, Scotland and Wales alone – but a leading scientist said the Omicron variant was “not the same disease we were seeing a year ago”. According to official figures from the UK government’s coronavirus dashboard, a record 117,093 cases – infections that are picked up through testing – were reported for England on Tuesday, up from a previous high of 113,628 on Christmas Day. In Wales 12,378 cases were reported on Tuesday, also a record high. The Scottish government later reported 9,360 cases in the past 24 hours, making the total of 138,831 cases higher than at any other point in the pandemic for the entire UK, despite data missing for Northern Ireland. It came as Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at the University of Oxford, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that Omicron “appears to be less severe and many people spend a relatively short time in hospital”, and high Covid death rates in the UK are “now history”. There were also calls from some scientists for the period of self-isolation to be cut. Paul Hunter, a professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia, said people with Covid should eventually be allowed to “go about their normal lives” as they would with a common cold. “If the self-isolation rules are what’s making the pain associated with Covid, then we need to do that perhaps sooner rather than later,” he told BBC Breakfast. “Maybe not quite just yet.” Prof Tim Spector, who runs King’s College London’s Zoe Covid study, said reducing the period of isolation would “protect the economy”. Currently, people in England who have tested positive for Covid can cut their self-isolation from 10 days to seven if they have negative lateral flow tests on days six and day seven. In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, it remains 10 days. Data from NHS England released on Tuesday revealed that the number of patients in hospital had risen by more than 1,000 in a day, with 9,546 beds occupied by people with Covid on Tuesday, compared with 8,474 the day before – although some trusts, thought to have about 220 Covid patients in total based on recent submissions, did not report their figures for Monday. Tuesday’s hospital figure is a 38% increase on that reported on 21 December and the highest since 3 March, although far below the peak last winter of more than 34,000 people in hospital with Covid. Dr Simon Clarke, an associate professor of cellular microbiology at the University of Reading, cautioned the latest daily case figures do not take into account changes in testing behaviour over the festive period, or delays in processing tests. Clarke added that while some people in hospital with Covid will have been admitted for a different reason, the situation should not be dismissed as insignificant. “These are vulnerable people whose condition is serious enough to require them to be in hospital over Christmas,” he said. “There is no condition I know of that cannot be made worse by Covid-19.” However, some scientists have struck a more upbeat note. Bell said that although hospital admissions had increased in recent weeks as Omicron spreads through the population, fewer patients were needing high-flow oxygen and the average length of stay was down to three days. “The horrific scenes that we saw a year ago of intensive care units being full, lots of people dying prematurely, that is now history, in my view, and I think we should be reassured that that’s likely to continue,” he said. The figures came a day after Downing Street confirmed that no new coronavirus restrictions would be introduced in England before the new year. In the rest of the UK, a raft of measures are in place, including the closure of nightclubs in Wales, and limiting socialising in Scotland to groups of up to three households. The decision has been criticised by some scientists, with one expert describing it as “the greatest divergence between scientific advice and legislation” since the start of the pandemic. While the latest data suggests the risk of being admitted to hospital is up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared with those infected with Delta, the sheer numbers of people with the new variant has caused serious concern in terms of the number of people requiring hospital care and widespread impact on staffing. According to the Office for National Statistics, an estimated 1 in 35 people had Covid in the week ending 19 December, a figure that was even higher in London, at 1 in 20. Experts have cautioned that it is not yet clear how the virus has moved through the population over Christmas, and what will happen once the rate of infection begins to rise in older people. The disparity in Covid rules and guidance across the four nations of the UK has also led to other concerns, including that partygoers might travel across the border from Wales to England to celebrate new year. Nick Newman, chair of the Cardiff Licensees Forum, said he expected many people to leave Wales for England. “It’s 40 minutes from Newport to Bristol and it’s easy to get from north Wales into Manchester or Liverpool. English businesses are going to benefit.” Meanwhile, those in England attempting to follow government advice to take a lateral flow test before mixing with others faced difficulties on Tuesday. Pharmacies in England have reported running out of test kits before Christmas, with deliveries of supplies delayed by the Christmas and Boxing Day holidays – and some pharmacies remained shut on Monday and Tuesday due to the bank holidays. Availability of walk-in lateral flow or PCR tests in England was also disrupted on Tuesday morning, while people attempting to order lateral flow tests online in England also faced obstacles.This Christmas, kids can step away from the grownups’ moronathon of unreality shows, reruns and mirthless laughter. Worzel Gummidge: Twitchers (BBC One) is a show for kids without a hint of tinsel, which defibrillates our seasonally stultified hearts and plumbs the philosophical depths. When I was a boy, it seemed inconceivable that Jon Pertwee, a Time Lord with a cape, a velvet jacket and an enviably blow-dried bouffant, could within a few weeks in the late 70s regenerate into a carrot-crunching rustic with straw hair and the look of a man who had mistaken cowpats for powder puffs. And yet it came to pass. This year’s Worzel is stranger yet. Mackenzie Crook, who writes, directs and stars as the titular tatterdemalion, has chosen to hide under rubber one of the most recognisable and scarecrowy phizogs in Equity’s talent roster the better to play a man of straw and sticks. Only Charlie Cooper (Kurtan from This Country) would have been serious competition for the role. Maybe, and this is just a theory, Crook’s idea is to conceal his delectable bone structure to make us focus for once on his expressive eyes. Brown and soulful, Mackenzie’s swivel in their latex holes as he mumble-grumbles natural lore to captivated kids. Nonetheless, one thing that weirds me out is his beard: it is as if the special effects team had tried for sea lion’s whiskers, but settled for jellyfish’s undercarriage. We first see Worzel revelling in a rainstorm, asking God if that is the best he can do. There is, as the outdoorsman Alfred Wainwright realised, no such thing as the wrong weather, just the wrong clothes. And, as Worzel – a natural stoic – suggests, the wrong attitude. In this episode, Worzel explains that choughs are birds that belong to the crow family, after one of the charming siblings in his entourage – which also includes a variety of scarecrow pals – spots some choughs at a nearby farm. The red-legged interlopers have been blown inland by an idiot wind and the pressing matter now is how Worzel can add to the list of crows he has scared by terrifying these birds back to their natural habitat. It is a conundrum made more complicated by the fact that he needs to charm them to his own field before scaring them out of it. How do you charm a chattering of choughs? By first luring a squirm of worms to your field so that hungry choughs will be drawn to follow. But then how do scarecrows charm worms? Through the medium of nocturnal dance, Worzel explains. Well, obviously. The following morning, the worms are in position and, as day follows night, choughs have followed them. So, too, have adults – specifically, gangs of lens‑dangling birdwatchers and a crew from the local TV station. Nonetheless, Worzel and co begin the real business of crow scaring. One problem, though. Worzel’s dancing is insufficiently scary. So, he enlists his scarecrow chums, who emerge from hedgerows in various masks. What is the collective noun for mask-wearing scarecrows? An uncanniness. With psychological acuity singular in someone with straw for brains, Worzel realises that to scare choughs you must instil a sense of foreboding. So, he, the kids and the scarecrows simulate a storm by whooping, hollering and shaking metal sheets. Soon the choughs are heading off to Cornwall. This lovely episode reinforces the lesson that supposed lower life forms such as children and non-humans are the real grownups. Adults are so rancorous, dull-witted and perverted by the competitive spirit engendered by late capitalism that they are scarcely capable of thinking outside the box. When the TV news reporter invites one of the birdwatchers to appreciate the beauty of an eagle on the wing, he replies that he has already ticked it off in his book. For us adults, nature is to be pinned and mounted, not to be savoured. That is no way to live. Worzel Gummidge, rightly understood, invites spirit-crushed grownups to change. Detectorists, Mortimer and Whitehouse: Gone Fishing and now a paradoxical scarecrow have expressed in their very rustic longueurs our yearning to be more than homo economicus. We yearn to do what we mostly don’t: to run our fingers through grass and sit in trees; to look on nature without covetous eye; to re-enchant the world rather than exploit it to death. Dare we change our lives? Now would be a good time to start.More than 130 years after a time capsule was deposited in the pedestal of a statue of the Confederate general Robert E Lee, and after one false start, conservators in Virginia were finally able to open the long sought-after box on Tuesday. The 36lb copper container, deposited in 1887, was removed on Monday after it was found sitting in water in the remains of the pedestal. In footage of the opening streamed live online from a state laboratory, Katherine Ridgway, Virginia’s archeological conservator, said she was “a little nervous”. But although some of the contents of the time capsule were damp, Ridgway said they were “in pretty good shape, considering”, adding that officials had feared water could have turned the artefacts to “soup”. First, officials found a button, a calling card, handwritten letters, damp copies of the political magazine Harper’s Weekly from 1865, Confederate banknotes and what experts believed to be a fragment from a shell from the battle of Fredericksburg. Then, after sawing an additional section of the box in order to access items that had probably expanded and stuck together, they found a “very wet” Bible with an 1883 silver coin stuck to it, a Richmond directory, a guide to Richmond from 1881 and a Masonic symbol and flag, both carved in wood and wrapped in an envelope. There was also an envelope labelled “badges of army northern Virginia”, several Minie balls (civil war bullets), a yellowed 1887 almanac, a book called “the minutiae of soldier life” containing a bookmark, a newspaper dated 2 January 1883, reports of the chamber of commerce for Richmond from 1886 and 1887 and several rubber bands. The box did not appear to hold a rare and historically significant photo of Abraham Lincoln, taken after the 16th president was assassinated at the end of the civil war in 1865, that had been hoped for. Conservators did find a printed image from Harper’s Weekly showing a figure grieving over Lincoln’s grave. It was the second time in a month that experts opened a time capsule from the Lee pedestal. A box was discovered two weeks ago, generating excitement, but hours of examination suggested it was not the “official” capsule long known about, and was perhaps placed by someone involved with the construction. The discovery of the second capsule completes a long search for the elusive item. Virginia’s governor, Ralph Northam, ordered the enormous equestrian statue of Lee removed in 2020, amid global protests against institutional racism which were sparked by the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. The statue was not removed until September, after a court cleared the way. News accounts from the late 1800s detailed the placement of the official time capsule in the foundation of the pedestal, and imaging tests appeared to confirm its existence. But a lengthy search during the September statue removal came up empty. Earlier this month, Northam ordered the pedestal removed as well, and crews again started to search. Northam’s office said the box discovered second underwent analysis on Monday. Its dimensions matched the size listed in the historical record and X-rays showed it appeared to include expected items. Records maintained by the Library of Virginia suggest Richmond residents, organisations and businesses contributed about 60 objects to the capsule, including Confederate memorabilia. One line from a newspaper article also listed among the contents “picture of Lincoln lying in his coffin”, stoking years of speculation which ended on Tuesday. The Associated Press contributed to this reportAn unusual source of ancient human DNA could help scientists unpick details of our ancestors’ lives and answer longstanding questions. The source? Nit glue. Scientists studying mummified remains from South America that date back 1,500-2,000 years say they have recovered ancient human DNA from the sticky cement produced by head lice to anchor their eggs to hair. While a number of groups have looked at the potential of parasites to help explore our past, the researchers say the new discovery is the first time nit glue has been found to be a source of ancient human DNA. The revelation is a boon given the difficulties typically involved in extracting DNA, and the damaged state it is often found in. “By genetically characterising a human host using just a handful of nits, we prevent the destructive sampling of bones and teeth that deteriorate or destroy unique ancient specimens. This also prevents conflicts with indigenous related people as the mummies or skeleton are left intact, only a few hairs containing nits are sufficient,” said Dr Alejandra Perotti of the University of Reading, who led the research. What is more, the team found the nit glue yielded the same proportion of human DNA as found in a tooth, and twice that found in the petrous bone of the skull. “The other thing that we also find is that within the cements, within that glue of the nits, DNA seems to be preserved or protected better from chemical damages, [compared to DNA found in the tooth or bone],” said Dr Mikkel Pedersen, of the University of Copenhagen, another author of the research. The study, published in the journal Molecular Biology and Evolution, reveals how a team of researchers from the UK, Denmark and Argentina analysed the remains of eight South American mummies as a proof of concept for the approach. The team were able to extract not only ancient human nuclear DNA but also mitochondrial DNA of the lice themselves from the nit cement of two of the mummies, with analysis of both revealing the same story: the mummified individuals were part of a population that migrated from north-west Amazonia to the Andes of central-west Argentina 2,000 years ago or earlier. This confirmed previous theories based on evidence from archeological sites. “Here we have the direct evidence right from the humans themselves. So that’s the last nail in the coffin,” said Pedersen. The genetic analysis also shed light on the sex of the mummified individuals, while the position of the nits on the hair revealed that at least some of them experienced very low temperatures at the time that they died. While the approach has limitations – the parasites are unlikely to be found in skeletal remains, for example – the authors said museum collections around the world held rich historical archives of parasites. Pedersen said the work could help shed light on longstanding mysteries. “We know quite a lot about Europe and east Asia currently from ancient genetics, but America still seems to be quite a blank spot on the genomic landscape,” he said. “This is one of the places we really want to try to see if we can get some genetic information about what’s going on in the past, who was there, and also filling in that blank spot.”Newcastle’s game at Everton on Thursday has been called off because of injuries and Covid-19 cases within the Magpies’ squad. Eddie Howe, the Newcastle manager, said on Monday that the club were “dangerously close” to being unable to field a team for the fixture at Goodison Park following their 1-1 draw with Manchester United. Newcastle were able to name only eight substitutes, including two goalkeepers, and then lost Callum Wilson, Ryan Fraser and Allan Saint-Maximin to injuries during the match. Furthermore, Javier Manquillo received his fifth booking of the season to earn a suspension. In a statement on Tuesday evening the Premier League said: “Everton’s match against Newcastle at Goodison Park, due to be played on Thursday 30 December, has regrettably been postponed. “The board accepted Newcastle’s postponement application as the club does not have the required number of players available for the match (13 outfield players and one goalkeeper), due to Covid-19 cases and injuries. “The board was able to make its decision in advance of the fixture to give clarity to the affected clubs and their fans. We apologise for the inconvenience and disruption caused to supporters’ festive plans.” This is the latest Premier League match to be postponed this week after Arsenal v Wolves and Leeds v Aston Villa, which were due to be played on 28 December.Why is the UK facing a national energy crisis? The UK’s energy crisis deepened last week after gas market prices surpassed the record highs set in October to reach a new all-time high of £4.50 per therm, about nine times higher than this time last year. The latest gas price spike was ignited by concerns over Russia’s gas exports to western Europe, but further hikes are still possible this winter if supplies are disrupted or a cold snap boosts demand for gas heating. The new record has fuelled concerns that household energy bills will continue to rise and that households will be forced to shoulder the cost of more energy suppliers going bust which is already nearing £2bn. Rising energy costs are also likely to spell trouble for factories and businesses, and contribute to cost inflation across the UK economy. Energy bosses have met the government for emergency talks and have described the latest hikes as a “national crisis” and an “enormous crisis for 2022”. How long will energy bills keep rising? Energy bills are expected to keep rising at least until 2023, according to energy bosses. There is no sign that energy market prices will begin to fall and the cost of failed energy suppliers – which is paid through energy bills – is expected to continue to rise. Household bills reached a record high in October after the price cap, set by the industry regulator, Ofgem, reached an average of £1,277 a year for a dual fuel bill. The price cap is expected to rise by 50% when Ofgem recalculates its level in April, and will probably climb above the £2,000 mark by the end of the year. The bill hike is likely to plunge millions of households into fuel poverty and cause struggling small businesses to go bust. For large energy users, such as manufacturers, the record gas prices could lead to reduced working hours or lay-offs to help manage their costs. What can the government do about it? The government can’t do much about surging global energy markets, but senior energy industry leaders have set out a string of options to help contain the crisis. Energy bosses have suggested that the Treasury could cut bills by 5% by waiving the VAT rate on gas and electricity, or moving the policy levies paid for through bills into general taxation. The Labour party has argued that the higher VAT revenues already paid this winter through energy bills could more than offset the impact of these proposals on the government’s coffers. But the Treasury has disputed this. Others, including Ecotricity founder Dale Vince, have argued that the Treasury could raise the funds needed to subsidise energy bills through a windfall tax on North Sea gas producers which are due to make record profits from the gas crisis. Finally, government officials are reportedly considering making loans of up to £20bn available to energy companies to cover the cost of rising market prices which could be paid back over years, according to the Daily Telegraph. The scheme would help companies weather the crisis without passing on bill hikes in the short term. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, met energy bosses for emergency talks on Monday but failed to reach a resolution. What can I do to keep my bills down? Before the crisis hit the answer to this would always have been to shop around and make sure that you were on the best tariff, but now it’s wise to stay put – this is because most of the deals being advertised are expensive ones. The price cap means that if you are on a standard variable tariff you will be better off than if you move. Instead you have to focus on consumption, and see if there are ways you can cut how much you use. Some of the best ways to do this cost money, but will be worth the investment if prices stay high. Insulating your home is important, as that means you won’t be wasting money on heating: fill cracks around doors and windows and between floorboards, buy draught excluders for any chimneys and for doors, make sure your loft, if you have one, is insulated. The Energy Saving Trust says insulating a loft will typically cost £300 for a semi-detached house and shave £165 a year off bills. When you replace products, check the energy ratings and buy the best you can afford – or, if it’s a tumble dryer, ditch it and use a clothes airer. There are things you can do for free – for example, switching off lights when you leave a room, putting on another jumper and turning down the heating, bleeding radiators and more. Limiting time in the shower to four minutes each could save a typical household £45 a year, according to the Energy Saving Trust. Installing solar panels or an air source heat pump will be a bigger job and involve more initial outlay but should cut your bills. What help can I get with my bills? There are several places to source help with your bills. The government offers several schemes: the warm home discount for people on low incomes offers a £140 discount on electricity bills, the winter fuel payment is available to people born on or before 26 September 1955 and automatically gives you up to £300 a year, and cold weather payments are available to people on benefits when the average temperature drops below zero. Suppliers have hardship schemes for those in debt – ask yours, and also check the British Gas Energy Trust as its scheme is open to all. You can find out about local grant schemes at simpleenergyadvice.org.uk/grants. If you are not on a low income but have been told to work from home this year, make sure you have claimed tax relief for doing so as this will help towards your bills. It’s not an option if your employer has been giving you cash towards costs, but otherwise it is worth £62.40 to a basic rate taxpayer and £124.80 to a higher rate taxpayer. It takes minutes to claim, and you can get the full year’s rebate if you have done just one day at home since April.It’s the time-doesn’t-exist season in a time-doesn’t-exist year, so to do us all a favour, a few reminders: If you are reading this in an email, it is because you’ve signed up for Five Great Reads: a weekday, summer round-up of written interest, service and joy from Guardian Australia. If you are reading this outside your inbox, and would like it in an email tomorrow, you can plonk your address in the box right here: If you are writing this, it is because you are Alyx Gorman, lifestyle editor and weirdo who loves working when most people are on holidays (it’s just so nice and quiet). Alas, on the Covid front things are not quiet today as New South Wales scales back its contact tracing to ease a groaning system. But there is some cause for hope, with a leading UK immunologist calling Omicron “not the same disease we were seeing a year ago”, and saying the virus “appears to be less severe”. You can follow the day’s Covid-19 news on our live blog. Also in the UK, a marauding squirrel – Stripe – has come to a sticky end after biting at least a dozen people. Back in Australia, much of the country is bracing for a New Year’s Eve heatwave, with dangerous fire conditions in South Australia and parts of Victoria. Now, on to the reads. 1. Big cats in the bush Australians have been fascinated by fabulous feline fantasies of wild tigers and Lithgow lions for two centuries. In the only story about conspiracies that won’t make you sad today, Donna Lu finds out why. Notable quote: “It re-enchants the bush, it makes it mysterious, magical,” says folklorist and historian David Waldron. Is the truth out there? Yes. Is it that there are big cats in the bush? Yes, but they’re probably not panthers. As you’ll also learn in this story, feral cats can be absolute units. How big? You’ll have to read to find out. 2. The best Australian films this year Our critic Luke Buckmaster names his top 10 releases. Just tell me what the best one is … I will not. But I will tell you about number eight, The Witch of Kings Cross, which Buckmaster says has “educationally hallucinogenic vibes” and calls “an Australian history lesson thrown into a cauldron”. 3. Tiny foods for tiny parties We present to you 22 recipes, from canapés and finger foods to fancy spreads, that will make a small New Year’s Eve gathering feel like a big celebration. This is more of a list than a read … Yes, but it’s delicious! How long will it take me? To cook? Writer Rafqa Touma has helpfully grouped the dishes in order of effort. Some are a snack. 4. England licks their wounds After yesterday’s “awful” Ashes defeat, Jonathan Liew asks: will England ever be good at Test cricket again? Read it if … You want to see things from the other team’s perspective. Notable quote: “So as the victorious Australians celebrated wildly on the MCG outfield, it was possible to wonder whether they were overdoing things a touch. Was there any real satisfaction to be taken in dispatching an opponent this easily? Did it not all feel a little hollow? A little comfortable? A little embarrassing?” 5. Odie licks his owner’s heart For years, Ranjana Srivastava resisted her children’s pleas for a dog. Until the day she caved. One year on, the puppy has shown the family new ways to give and receive love. Puppy dog eyes moment: “I underestimated the added dimension of love and responsibility that a dog would teach … On a hot day, my daughter cut short her outing to check if Odie had enough water. When Odie was sick, her teenage brother made fresh broth and patiently fed it to him.” Don’t read it if … You’d rather not get your kids a dog.Valentina Orellana-Peralta, 14, came to Los Angeles from her native Chile earlier this year. She dreamed of becoming an American citizen and an engineer, and looked forward to seeing LeBron James play basketball in person. But her life was cut short two days before Christmas, when a Los Angeles police officer opened fire at a man inside a department store, and in the process fatally shot the young girl. Orellana-Peralta’s shellshocked parents, and their attorneys, including civil rights lawyer Benjamin Crump, gathered outside the LAPD headquarters in downtown Los Angeles on Tuesday morning to share stories of their “sweet angel” who died before she could open her Christmas gifts. “It is like my whole heart has been ripped out of my body,” said Juan Pablo Orellana Larenas, Valentina’s father, who spoke in Spanish, with his lawyers translating. He arrived from Chile over the weekend after his daughter was killed. He held in his hand a skateboard, still in its plastic wrapping, that arrived for Valentina on Christmas Eve, the day after she died. He said he would deliver the board and other Christmas gifts to her grave. When he spoke to his daughter the day before she was killed, she told her father how excited she was to pass her physics and math exams and how she hoped the two of them could go to a Lakers game in the new year when he arrived to LA. The parents’ cries for justice, in front of a dozens of cameras outside LAPD, came one day after the department released body-camera footage and surveillance video of the incident last Thursday in which an officer shot and killed Valentina in a Burlington Coat Factory store in North Hollywood while firing at another person. Valentina had been shopping for a Christmas dress with her mother when the officer fatally shot her. Police said the officer’s bullet bounced off the floor and into the store dressing room, and the LA coroner ruled the death a homicide, saying the girl was hit in the chest. Valentina died on the scene. The man shot by the officer was Daniel Elena Lopez, who had assaulted several customers with a bike lock, and was also pronounced dead at the store. The officer is on paid leave, according to LAPD, who have not identified him. The police video showed that Elena Lopez, 24, was standing away from the officer, at the opposite end of a store aisle, and appeared to be turning away when the officer fired three bullets in rapid succession. The distraught parents, who could barely get through their remarks at a packed press conference, said that Valentina came to LA with her mother roughly six months ago and had excelled at her high school, High Tech Los Angeles in Van Nuys, despite English being her second language. She was interested in building robots and dreamed of going to college and having a career in engineering or technology “to make the world a better place”, said Crump, the attorney who has represented the family of George Floyd and other high-profile victims of police violence. “Her most important dream was to become an American citizen. They came to America from Chile to get away from violence and to have a better life.” The girl’s aunt told the LA Times earlier this week that she grew up in Macul, a working-class neighborhood in Santiago, the capital of Chile. At the news conference, Valentina’s mother, Soledad Peralta, described a horrifying scene at the Burlington store. They were Christmas shopping, and Valentina was trying on dresses when they heard a commotion and screams in the store. Valentina locked the door of the dressing room, her mother said in a statement translated by her lawyers: “Valentina and I hugged each other … and started praying, praying for peace, praying for safety, praying for everybody.” The gunshot that hit Valentina felt like an “explosion” that knocked them both to the floor. She didn’t initially realize her daughter had been shot, and Valentina quickly went limp, she said. “She died in my arms and there was nothing I could do … She didn’t wake up,” she said. “As I lay screaming for help, the police did not come to help me or my daughter. But I kept screaming. When the police finally came, they took me out of the dressing room, and left my daughter laying there. I wanted them to help her. But they just left her laying there alone.” LAPD declined to answer questions on Tuesday about whether officers or paramedics provided any medical aid to Valentina. “She was full of joy and she had big dreams for her future. She had a lot of life to live,” Soledad Peralta said. “Valentina meant the world to us, to our family, to her friends and to her schoolmates. And now our sweet angel has left forever. Please give us strength, Valentina, to make justice for you.” Juan Pablo Orellana Larenas said when he spoke to his daughter on the phone the day before she died, the two said they would celebrate her achievements in school when he arrived to LA: “She wanted to be here in the United States because this is the land of opportunity.” The father said he hadn’t slept since he learned a police officer killed his daughter last week. The parents were surrounded by supporters and activists protesting LAPD, some calling for the officer to face charges, and others calling for LAPD to be defunded. Crump and the other attorneys said they were urging the department to be transparent and to preserve records, and said their investigation was ongoing. The videos released on Monday fueled further national outrage. Despite police’s initial claims that officers had been responding to an “assault with a deadly weapon” and a “possible shooting in progress”, Elena Lopez did not have a gun, and the video shows his hands were visible the moment he was shot. An officer’s body camera footage showed that as soon as the officer made it to the store aisle where Elena Lopez was standing and saw the man for the first time, he immediately fired, without appearing to issue any commands. LAPD killings have sharply increased this year – the department has fatally shot 18 people in 2021, compared with seven in 2020, according to the LA Times. The California attorney general is investigating the killing, and LAPD said its investigation into the Burlington killings was ongoing and have declined to answer questions.For the second time in three days Manchester City could savour the result in a Leicester game. A title race that threatened to go down to the tape could now have a runaway favourite. Liverpool’s defeat, only their second in the league since March, means they might be 12 points behind Pep Guardiola’s team by the time they play again. And yet, as the euphoric scenes at the final whistle showed, the real winners were Leicester. In a year when they belatedly lifted the FA Cup for the first time, this will not be their most famous victory. Yet the lap of honour illustrated that 2021 concluded with an extraordinary triumph. A side short of players and time to prepare, fresh from a hammering and minus a specialist centre-back on the pitch nonetheless produced a colossal collective effort. Liverpool were nullified by a mass of bodies in the box and, if it took a remarkable goalkeeping performance to deny them, perhaps that was fitting, too. FA Cup glory came courtesy of Kasper Schmeichel’s saves and so did Leicester’s finest result of this season. A team without a point against sides in the top six emerged with three. A side who had sieved six goals two days earlier and whose only Premier League clean sheets were against Wolves and Newcastle became the first defence since Real Madrid in April to stop Liverpool from scoring. They prevailed in adversity. “It’s an absolutely heroic performance,” said Brendan Rodgers. “It’s an amazing result for us against one of the best teams in the world. To play Manchester City and Liverpool within 48 hours...” He had called the schedule “ridiculous”. Perhaps Leicester went from the ridiculous to the sublime, from losing 6-3 to City to beating his former club and his Anfield successor, Jürgen Klopp. On this occasion, the Northern Irishman was the managerial alchemist. He sent Ademola Lookman on and two minutes later the former Everton winger condemned Liverpool to defeat. Yet it followed the second of two turning points, of the sort of chances Liverpool’s front three habitually take. Sadio Mané ought to have ended his nine-game drought. When Diogo Jota provided a slide-rule pass, he angled his run from outside to in, but blazed a shot over the bar. Perhaps an earlier miss was still more surprising. Mohamed Salah had not failed to convert a Premier League penalty since 2017. Then Schmeichel joined a select band with Huddersfield’s Jonas Lössl to deny him. He eschewed studying Salah’s past spot-kicks, went with his gut feeling and guessed right. It was one of three chances in swift succession: the Leicester captain parried the penalty back to the Egyptian, who looped a header against the bar and then could not connect cleanly with his third attempt. Arguably it was not even Schmeichel’s best save from Salah: he had less time to react to a rising close-range effort but he brilliantly tipped it over the bar. His reflexes were apparent, too, when he prevented Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain’s cross from going in and when it would have been easy to be distracted by the jumping Jordan Henderson. When he repelled a late shot from Virgil van Dijk at his near post, a clean sheet was assured. It was aided by a defence anchored by a midfielder. With three full-backs sidelined and Leicester’s three main centre-backs injured, Rodgers delivered a vote of no confidence in Jannik Vestergaard by benching the Danish defender. But he was vindicated, albeit after an early alarm. Wilfred Ndidi’s lone mistake came after a quarter of an hour, stretching and stretching until he fouled Salah for the third penalty Leicester conceded in as many days. Alongside him Daniel Amartey was outstanding, a bastion of reliability. “The two centre-halves were amazing,” Rodgers said. In front of them his diamond midfield congested the centre of the pitch. If that entailed ceding the flanks to Liverpool, they missed the dynamism of the suspended Andy Robertson as his deputy, Kostas Tsimikas, failed to supply the final ball. With Mané again below par, they looked lopsided, reliant on the right-sided trio of Trent Alexander-Arnold, the influential Henderson and Salah. The 20-year-old Luke Thomas impressed against Salah. “Outstanding,” his manager added. And while Liverpool amassed 67 touches in the Leicester box, they lacked rhythm and met a wall of blue shirts. “We had to be resilient and defend for our lives at times,” said Rodgers. Meanwhile Leicester had a counter-attacking threat, much of it revolving around Jamie Vardy. Van Dijk and Joël Matip each had to intervene to stop the veteran from scoring. When Vardy supplied James Maddison, Alexander-Arnold hacked the midfielder’s shot off the line. There was no such rescue act for Liverpool when Leicester opened them up again. Lookman collected the ball on the halfway line, exchanging passes with Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall and racing forward to beat Alisson. A product of Leicester’s academy got his first Premier League assist to alter the title race. A team who seemed ripe for another thrashing instead triumphed against the odds. “We knew that the headlines were probably already written,” Rodgers said. “But you write your own story in football.” And this was an improbable tale.KLOPP NOT HAPPY: That’s it from me, congratulations to Leicester. They rode their luck, but the work ethic was phenomenal and scored a goal filled with quality. The last word is from Jon Rogers, via email. “My favourite Jason McAteer story was when he was allegedly asked by a mate whether he wanted his pizza cut into six or eight slices - and he opted for six as he wasn’t hungry enough to eat eight! And I don’t care whether or not it’s true.” Goodnight. Here’s Brendan Rodgers: Today was going to be a huge mental test, and there’s probably not a team that is more physical in the league than Liverpool. I am lost for words, it was such a heroic performance. I said after Manchester City that we had played well. It’s been a challenge with all the players missing. But the beauty of the game is that you write your own story in football. It’s one of those periods. We’ll have Wilf [Ndidi] going off to the African Cup of Nations as well. In 15 years of Opta stats, no team has had more touches in the opposition box than Liverpool’s 67 tonight, and not scored. Kasper Schmeichel speaks! He put in a man of the match performance today. A very important win. It’s a credit to our mentality. We don’t give up. We keep going. The last penalty I saved at the King Power, they scored the rebound. We didn’t have a bit of luck against City but we had it today. It’s a thoroughly enjoyable win. Liverpool fail to score for the first time in 35 matches. Eight and a half months. Leicester up to ninth after just their third clean sheet of the season. They are still very much in the race for Europe. A huge result at the top of the Premier League. Liverpool’s defeat means Manchester City go six points clear. Brendan Rodgers gets one over his old side, and Leicester’s players are understandably delighted. 90+4 min: Pinball in the Leicester box. Schmeichel palms a cross away. Dewsbury-Hall slices a clearance. Liverpool come roaring back and earn a corner. Here’s comes Alisson! West Brom, eat your heart out. Alexander-Arnold swings his delivery to the back post and Firmino and Matip get in each other’s way! Disaster for Liverpool. 90+2 min: Interesting to know whether Leicester would swap this potential win for a win last week at Anfield? The league always seems to be a priority, but a League Cup semi-final is also pretty special. 90 min: Liverpool throwing everything at Leicester now. Keita has a shot blocked. Jota breaks to the byline but Castagne gets across. Two Liverpool corners are headed away. Five minutes added on for injury-time. 89 min: Castagne gets a forearm to the head in a aerial dual with Van Dijk. A brief stoppage in play for Leicester to catch their breath. 87 min: Another Liverpool corner, and Mané heads wide, taking the ball off the forehead of Jota, who was better placed behind him. 85 min: Salah slaloms around three players but is finally tackled by Castagne, just as the Egyptian was winding up for a shot. Leicester are defending corners well at the moment and they do the same here, Thomas heading away. 83 min: The cameras pan to the stands, where one particular Leicester fan is clapping so passionately, he looks like he might burst a blood vessel. That’s that passion Milner was talking about pre-match. 81 min: Jota heads wide from a corner. It’s a half chance. Jota is only 5ft10in but times his leaps so well. Should do better here. 79 min: A miserable free kick from Alexander-Arnold, who floats one to the edge of the box for Salah to volley horribly high and wide. Why on earth isn’t AA swinging one into the mixer towards Van Dijk? No team has conceded more set-pieces in the Premier League this season than Leicester. 77 min: “That three horse race we all hoped for is rapidly becoming a single horse canter,” emails Phillip Haran. “Title by Easter?” Pep Guardiola will certainly be rubbing his hands together at this score. If things stay this way, Manchester City will be six points clear at the top. 75 min: Vardy does indeed come back on, a little gingerly. 74 min: An odd off-the-ball incident involving Matip and Vardy leaves the latter in a heap on the half-way line. It looks from the replays as though Vardy was trying to dart behind Matip on his blindside and the German-born Cameroonian caught him in the face with a flailing arm. Matip certainly has to be careful as he’s the only player on a yellow card but Andre Marriner deems the challenge to be accidental. Vardy does look a little dazed though, as he goes off the pitch for treatment. Remember, Leicester have made all three subs so Rodgers will be keen to get his striker back on. 72 min: An email from Richard Preston: “I seem to remember him being in a Head &amp; Shoulders advert in the late 90s that had the slogan along the lines of: “When Jason plays, people watch.” Well remembered. It was actually ‘Wash &amp; Go’ but spot on with the slogan. And what about: “Jason knows you can have it all.” To be fair to our Birkenhead boy, his hair does look magnificent. 70 min: Liverpool make their final change, and it’s an attacking one: Firmino for Henderson. 69 min: Leicester doing well to keep possession. They do not want to regress to that low block again and invite those crosses in from Alexander-Arnold and Tsimikas. 67 min: Maddison tracks back to prevent Tsimikas getting to the byline, but injures himself in the process. That’s a real shame, he’s been in such scintillating form of late, including an absolute ripsnorter of a goal at Anfield last week. Albrighton comes on in his place. 65 min: If Lookman has been game-changing since coming on, Tielemans has been dismal, and has given the ball away at least three times. A word for Dewsbury-Hall, by the way, he’s been excellent all night, both with and without the ball. Doing a real stint on the left in front of Thomas to negate both Salah and Alexander-Arnold. 63 min: Leicester have something to hold onto now. Liverpool make their second change: Milner on for Fabinho. 60 min: You have to say that was poor defending from Van Dijk! The Dutchman let Lookman shoot rather than actively try to tackle him. Lookman scores with his first contribution! Again, Dewsbury-Hall finds some space on the left, feeds Lookman, who bursts past Matip with pace and plants a powerful low shot past the block of Van Dijk and the save of Alisson. The ball nestles inside the near post and the King Power erupts! A fantastic goal! 56 min: Both sides make changes. Leicester swap Tielemans for Choudhury and Lookman for Inheanacho. Liverpool bring Oxlade-Chamberlain off for Keita. 54 min: Ooooooooo. What a miss from Mané! A golden chance as he is released by Jota, the Senegalese cuts inside Castagne, bears down on goal and simply passes the ball a yard over the bar. It seemed easier to miss, he had all the time in the world! Klopp reels on the sidelines, hands on head. 52 min: But then, Leicester break. And like a Kit Kat fresh out of the freezer, they break very well. Iheanacho and Dewsbury-Hall combine beautifully down the left, the latter playing a near-inch perfect low cross to Vardy at the back post. But Tsimikas just gets a toe to it. Without that, Vardy was in! 50 min: Increasingly desperate stuff from Leicester, especially their composure on the ball when they do win it back. “Leicester look so jittery - there is no way they’ll keep a clean sheet,” emails Andy O’Shaughnessy. On the evidence this half, you’d have to agree. 48 min: And we settle into a familiar pattern of Liverpool possession and half-chances. Jota briefly threatened to score after nicking the ball from Amartey in Leicester’s box, but sheer weight of defensive numbers stopped any further danger. Peeeeep! And we’re off again for the second half. An email from Andy Flintoff (“not that one”). Jason McAteer was more than a bit part player for Liverpool - he was a regular for two and a half seasons before breaking his leg, and only left in 1999 because Houllier didn’t fancy him. Anyway, on the game - Leicester’s midfield is too narrow, meaning that there’s always space for one or the other Liverpool fullbacks to move in to. If Rodgers doesn’t change this, then the pattern of the first half will be repeated, unless his plan all along is to get the LFC fullbacks to go forward and try to exploit the space behind them on the break with Maddison (who is drifting too far left with Iheanacho moving in that direction too).” Think you’re right Andy, I’ve done Jason a disservice. Not sure I would describe him as a legend though, as he is often described. Yep, Leicester’s shape is a sort of narrow low-block, and they certainly rode their luck in the first half. But Klopp will be scared of the pace of Iheanacho and Vardy. I would expect Lookman to come on at some point, too. See you in 15 mins or so. Liverpool have had the better of it, but after Schmeichel’s penalty save, Leicester have steadily grown into this game. It’s a good’un. 45+2 min: A very nasty fall for Iheanacho, who falls squarely on his back after an aerial dual with Matip. Eeeesh, he fell a full six feet there. Looks to be OK, thank goodness. 45 min: Jota flashes a volley well wide from around the penalty box. He should perhaps have done a little better. I would not be surprised to see Firmino in his place in the second half. 42 min: Strange end to this half, which is in danger of becoming scrappy. 39 min: “Liverpool is in the house and Leicester have a McAteer on their bench?” emails Peter Oh. “Top gamesmanship there!” Jason McAteer was a strange one at Liverpool. He always pops up as one of the club ‘legends’ these days, despite only playing a bit part role for four seasons with the club. He was born in Birkenhead, though. 37 min: Leicester go close again. Ndidi is too strong for Salah, and his clearance fortuitously releases Vardy down the right. The 34-year-old slips Maddison in with a cute pass to the byline and the midfielder slashes an effort across goal. He had time to take a touch, but Alexander Arnold is there to clear things up at the back stick. Leicester’s best period of the game. 35 min: First real chance for Leicester! A wonderful one-two with Maddison sees Vardy worm into the penalty box. The striker gets his low shot off, but Matip is across to deflect it wide. Crucial block! 34 min: News coming through that Everton v Newcastle has been postponed as a result of Covid. Reportedly it is Newcastle, who played Manchester United last night, that asked the Premier League for it to be called off. 32 min: Outstanding from Schmeichel! Leicester are really under the cosh here. A defensive mix-up between Ndidi and Thomas allows Salah to get one of this snap shots away, and Schmeichel throws up his right hand to tip it over the bar. Salah was at an acute angle but that was flying into the top corner from close range! 30 min: Amartey is the latest to give the ball away cheaply. Mané gets free on the left, finds Jota, who is hurtling into the box at full speed, but Ndidi makes an inch-perfect tackle to save the day for Leicester. 28 min: Jota hasn’t been in the game, but gets his first opportunity, finding space from a Henderson flick on. Schmeichel comes out well to smother it, before the flag goes up for offside. Replays show Jota may well have been on! 26 min: Thomas has his pocket picked by Henderson, who seems to be the furthest forward of Liverpool’s midfield three this evening. Henderson wins a dangerous free-kick just right of Leicester’s areas, but Tsimikas’s deep cross is headed away, and another wild long-range effort from Henderson comes to nothing. 23 min: Schmeichel saves! Oxlade-Chamberlain drops a lofted cross awkwardly over Leicester’s centre backs towards the near post. Henderson steals in and although he doesn’t touch the cross, the ball nearly creeps inside the post, with Schmeichel just aware enough to tip the ball onto the post and away. 22 min: Leicester haven’t had a sniff so far. But that Liverpool defence, particularly on the right with Alexander-Arnold and Matip, is susceptible to a counter-attack. 20 min: Soumare takes a ball to the face, and there is a break in play. 17 min: The home crowd, previously quiet and nervy, roar into life. Leicester escape. It remains 0-0. It was a poor penalty in all honesty. Salah passed it just left of centre, and Schmeichel read it easily to parry the ball away. 15 min: Schmeichel’s save bounces into the ground, an inch too high for Salah to direct the rebound into the net. Instead he heads against the bar, and Leicester scramble away the second rebound. Just the third time Salah has missed a penalty for Liverpool! 14 min: A needless challenge by Ndidi on Salah. Leicester switch off from a throw in, and Salah is all too happy to go over the Nigerian’s outstretched leg on the six yard box. Salah will take the spot kick. 13 min: Twice now Alexander-Arnold has released Tsimikas with sumptuous cross-field balls. The man has a velvet right boot. 10 min: Dewsbury-Hall, then Soumare loses the ball just outside the Leicester penalty box, victims of Liverpool’s press. The reds are tightening their grip on this game, even if there hasn’t been a clear-cut chance of note … yet. 8 min: Henderson volleys over from 25 yards. Three yards over the bar but it was fizzing. 7 min: Yellow card for Matip, who chops down Iheanacho to halt a threatening Leicester counter-attack. Fabinho also left his mark on Choudhury but escapes punishment. 6 min: Castagne is playing nice and high. I think it’s fair to say that the Mark Albrighton experiment at right back has died a death. Maddison threatens to shoot on the edge of the Liverpool box but is forced backwards and Soumare skews his effort high and wide. We have a game on our hands, folks! 4 min: Alexander-Arnold rakes one of his Beckham-esque diagonals out to Tsimikas, who bombs forward a la Robertson, and picks out a wonderful cross to Salah at the back post. The Egyptian knocks it down to Jota on the six yard box, who has his shot well blocked by Amartey. Great defending. 2 min: A slow start, with Fabinho and Henderson taking turns as right wingers, winning a series of throw-ins. Leicester’s left back, Thomas, is sticking to Salah like glue. Peeeeeep! And we’re off in the east Midlands. The teams are out: Leicester in their royal blue, Liverpool in their scarlet. All take the knee. There is no room for racism or discrimination of any kind. Klopp speaks! Thiago was in training one day but next day felt a little here and there so we had to leave him at home. On Leicester: You can see tonight that they are a really strong side. Looks like it’s a diamond. Maddison is someone we are watching, don’t let him shoot! Don’t let him pass! But he’s not the only one, Vardy and Iheanacho are also playing some incredible stuff together.” Just two clean sheets for Leicester this season, and no team in the Premier League has conceded more goals from set-pieces. With the return of VVD, I’m quite surprised to see Verstergaard on the bench. Rodgers has been talking pre-match. On why Youri Tielemans has been left out. The [amount of] games. You really need that energy in midfield.” On the red-hot form of James Maddison. I think his consistency is right up there. He’s been really effective these last few months. But importantly, his defensive work has really elevated his game. Supporting Leicester must be fun, you know. There are relatively low expectations but there isn’t a game that they go into thinking they can’t win. For all the talk of Leicester’s injuries, that’s not a bad XI. A strange one to start Amartey and Ndidi at centre-back when you’ve got Vestergaard on the bench, but Brendan Rodgers is a football genius. It’s a strong Liverpool lineup, with VVD nestling back into CB alongside Matip. And the Oxlade-Chamberlain renaissance continues, he’s keeping the bums of Keita, Milner and Jones firmly on the bench. Delighted to say that Chelsea manager Emma Hayes will be a pundit tonight for Amazon, which is the TV broadcaster here in the UK. Far and away the most interesting TV talker we’ve got. Oh, and Jon Champion with Ally McCoist in the gantry. A lovely little bonus. Leicester: Schmeichel, Castagne, Amartey, Ndidi, Thomas, Choudhury, Soumare, Dewsbury-Hall, Maddison, Vardy, Iheanacho. Subs: Tielemans, Albrighton, Ward, Perez, Vestergaard, Lookman, Daley-Campbell, Nelson, McAteer. Liverpool: Alisson, Alexander-Arnold, Matip, van Dijk, Tsimikas, Henderson, Fabinho, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Salah, Jota, Mane. Subs: Konate, Milner, Keita, Firmino, Gomez, Jones, Kelleher, Beck, Williams. Referee: Andre Marriner (West Midlands) Wherever your hot take on the DRAMA that is fixture scheduling – shock news as manager takes stance that would directly benefit his own team! – it is fair to say that despite Jürgen Klopp recent warbles Liverpool arrive at the King Power tonight in considerably better shape than their hosts, Leicester City. The Reds have not kicked a ball since their 3-3 draw with the Foxes last week in the Carabao Cup, and welcome back the quartet of Virgil van Dijk, Fabinho, Curtis Jones and Thiago Alcantara back for tonight’s game. Having given it a right good go at Manchester City on Saturday, paying homage to the crazy Boxing Days of yesteryear with their own 6-3 scoreline, Leicester are missing nine first-team players through injury, including four of his first-choice defence – Jonny Evans, Caglar Soyuncu, James Justin and Ricardo Pereira – the latter suffering a broken leg as a result of Liverpool’s Tyler Morton’s horror tackle last week. Morton was given just a yellow card and neither he or Klopp mentioned the challenge after the game. If tonight is half as exciting as last week, we’ll have a decent game. If James Milner, normally a picture of serenity (#heavyshloersession) can get THIS PASSIONATE, you can peel yourself away from games with the in-laws to join me for the 8pm kick-off.Pep Guardiola has said the resurgent Kevin De Bruyne is “unique in the world” and admitted the league champions have had to survive during his absences this season. The Belgian sparkled in Sunday’s 6-3 hammering of Leicester at the Etihad Stadium, scoring an impressive opening goal. De Bruyne’s campaign has been stop-start because of the ankle injury he suffered at Euro 2020, which hampered his pre-season, and contracting Covid in November. Sunday’s victory was City’s ninth in a row in the Premier League with De Bruyne starting only four of them. Guardiola, whose champions go into the game against Brentford on Wednesday as the league leaders, believes the 30-year-old is nearing his best. “He’s getting better. I don’t think [he has far to go],” said the Manchester City manager. “He played exceptionally well [against Leicester]. We’ve had six years together with Kevin. What we’ve done when he was fit … he has something unique in the world. We know it. Kevin is an exceptional player. “He struggled at the beginning of the season and is now much, much better. The Leeds game [when De Bruyne scored twice in a 7-0 win] was really good and against Leicester he was really good all game. He is a fighter and a guy who creates goals and assists. He has been injured in some seasons for a long time and we survived.” Guardiola often complains about the congested schedule but as City have been eliminated from the Carabao Cup, after winning the trophy the last four years, there is a chance for respite in January with only one match a week. “After the Arsenal game we have long weeks,” he said. “Right now we have games on the 29th [Brentford] and 1st [Arsenal] – two away fixtures against absolutely tough opponents. The Premier League is like this. That is why it is the most satisfying competition if you are able to win it. You play against all the big teams in different circumstances and you have to solve it. It will be no exception in the next two games.” Due to the busy festive itinerary Guardiola is not yet sure what changes he can make for Brentford. “I don’t know,” he said. “With this situation, you [can] arrive and go, ‘Oh, this player cannot play’ or someone is injured. The day before the game we’ll travel to London and on the day we are going to see. We’ll pay attention to the quality Brentford have and take a decision.” Guardiola will soon lose Riyad Mahrez as the Algeria captain will join his nation ahead of the Africa Cup of Nations in Cameroon, which starts on 9 January. “It’s early January when he has to travel there,” said the manager, who confirmed that Kyle Walker and John Stones missed the Leicester victory because of injury.Thomas Tuchel has said he will not stop standing up for his Chelsea players after conceding he has “zero per cent” understanding as to why the Premier League is set to muddle through a chaotic winter with only three substitutes and suggested “everybody is refusing” to consider a return to five permitted changes. Before Chelsea host Brighton on Wednesday, Tuchel questioned that logic and said players require protection from the league. The Chelsea manager reiterated he has no problem with the congested schedule but said he is baffled at the reluctance to reintroduce five substitutes, which were permitted at the height of the pandemic. “I absolutely cannot understand, zero per cent, why we are the only league who plays through winter and we are the only league with three substitutes in a period of heavy, heavy Covid threat and situations,” Tuchel said. “It makes absolutely no sense. It is the [current] situation and that is worrying. The schedule is not the problem. We love the schedule. Five changes were invented [permitted] in the UK when corona first started. Now we are in the middle of it, I get the feeling that everybody is refusing it or refusing to think about it. “For me, it is only logical to do this because Covid affects everybody and you simply need more possibilities to protect the players and share the minutes. This is my opinion and I will not stop standing up for it.” Tuchel revealed on Boxing Day that three of his squad who are fully vaccinated, as well as unvaccinated players, have contracted Covid. The German said Ruben Loftus-Cheek is injured but among the players who have tested positive. Romelu Lukaku and Callum Hudson-Odoi exceeded the game-time recommended by medical staff and physios in victory at Aston Villa but N’Golo Kanté was withdrawn after a recurrence of a knee injury, prompting Tuchel to give the example of being one positive test away from a midfield crisis. “If you just speak about central midfield, Let’s assume that maybe N’Golo is out, maybe Ruben is still out; so one [positive] test in central midfield is enough for everything to collapse again because then Kova [Mateo Kovačić] will again play 90 minutes from where? Out of nothing,” the manager said. “You risk injuries – that is what we are doing at the moment. I cannot say more and I cannot see how we are out of Covid threat at the moment.” Brighton travel to Stamford Bridge with a spring in their step following a first league win in 12 matches against Brentford and Tuchel admitted he is a fan of Graham Potter’s side. “I like them a lot,” he said. “I think it is a great club and a great coach. It is a great approach, how they play the game. When you switch on the TV and watch them, you clearly see an idea of how they want to play. They are a tough side to beat. “I know they [have] struggled a bit with the results but I think they deserve in general a bit more than they have.. They create much more than they have actually on points.”Mark Zuckerberg has added 110 acres to his controversial 1,500-acre estate in Kauai, Hawaii, dropping $17m for the purchase. The 110 acres of land that the Facebook founder and his wife recently bought includes the Ka Loko reservoir, a century-old reservoir whose dam broke in 2006 and released 400m gallons of water that killed seven people on Kauai’s north shore. According to the couple’s spokesperson Ben Labolt, the reservoir is considered high-risk and has not been repaired. The Zuckerbergs are committed to fulfilling the legal requirements surrounding the reservoir, Labolt told Business Insider. “Mark and Priscilla continue to make their home at Ko’olau Ranch,” Labolt said. He added that they had “worked closely with a number of community partners to operate a working ranch, promote conservation, produce sustainable agriculture and protect wildlife and look forward to expanding their efforts to include this additional property”. Zuckerberg’s recent purchase comes after two previous acquisitions - a $100m 750-acre purchase made in late 2014 and a $53m 600-acre purchase made in March that includes a public beach and working cattle ranch. Zuckerberg’s massive estate has met with criticism and controversy in the past. In 2016, Zuckerberg angered neighbors when he constructed a 6ft stone wall around his property that blocked easy access to Pila’a Beach, in an attempt to decrease highway and road noise. Then in early 2017, Zuckerberg’s lawyers filed lawsuits against hundreds of local Hawaiians who may own an interest in small pockets within his estate’s boundaries. The “quiet title” suits are used to clarify the often complicated history of land ownership in the state and can often force owners to auction off their lands. In certain cases, defendants are even required to pay the legal fees of the plaintiff – in this case, the world’s fifth richest man. “This is the face of neocolonialism,” said Kapua Sproat, a law professor at the University of Hawaii to the Guardian in 2017. “Even though a forced sale may not physically displace people, it’s the last nail in the coffin of separating us from the land.” “For us, as native Hawaiians, the land is an ancestor. It’s a grandparent … You just don’t sell your grandmother,” Sproat added. Zuckerberg eventually dropped the suit, saying that he and his wife wanted to “make this right, talk with the community, and find a better approach”. The pockets of land were eventually sold at an auction. Along with his Hawaii estate, Zuckerberg owns a total of roughly 1,400 acres and 10 houses in Palo Alto, San Francisco and Lake Tahoe, amounting to a $320m real estate portfolio.The judge in Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial on Tuesday told lawyers that deliberations could be held this weekend, warning that the surge in Covid-19 cases could derail the trial if a juror fell ill before a verdict were reached. “We now face a high and escalating risk that jurors and trial participants may need to quarantine,” Judge Alison Nathan said, “thus disrupting trial, putting at risk our ability to complete this trial.” Jurors have deliberated about 32 hours over the course of five days without reaching a verdict. The surge in cases stoked by the Omicron virus variant is being felt across the US. One expert told the New York Times on Monday: “All 50 states are in the soup at the same time. It’s like every state is being hit by a viral hurricane.” New York has been hit particularly hard. In court in downtown Manhattan, Nathan told attorneys: “We are seeing an astronomical spike in the number of Covid-positive cases in New York City over the last one to two weeks due to the Omicron variant. “We are very simply at a different place regarding the pandemic than we were only one week ago.” Nathan’s comments about Omicron’s looming threat were meant to give context to statements she made to jurors on Monday afternoon. Then, Nathan told the men and women of the jury they should be prepared to stay until at least 6pm each day, until they reach a verdict. On Tuesday morning, she told attorneys: “In light of the variant, my concern about interruption of trial, given increasing daily risk of exposure, to either a juror or trial participant, requiring quarantine, it is time to have the jurors make plans to continue deliberating until a verdict is reached.” On Tuesday afternoon, jurors did not want to stay late. They sent a note to Nathan shortly before 5pm ET, saying: “Our deliberations are moving along, and we are making progress. We are at a good point and would like to end today at 5pm and [start] tomorrow morning at 9am.” Before Nathan called in the jury to dismiss them for the day, she told lawyers on Maxwell’s case that if there is no verdict on Wednesday, she will tell jurors to prepare for deliberating the rest of the week, and “through the weekend” if need be. In explaining her rationale to lawyers, Nathan said: “Put simply, I conclude that proceeding this way is the best chance to give the jury as much time they need and to avoid a mistrial as a result of the Omicron variant.” When Nathan did call in jurors, she told them: “I am going to ask that deliberations continue going forward on the [extended] schedule every day this week, until a verdict is reached.” Nathan did not mention the possibility of weekend deliberations to jurors. During jury selection, Nathan said she would not exclude prospective panelists based on vaccination status. One juror ultimately selected to serve said in court she was not currently enrolled in graduate school “because of the vaccination status requirement”. The trial commenced in earnest on 29 November. Maxwell, who turned 60 on Christmas Day, faces six counts relating to alleged involvement in her ex-boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of girls, some as young as 14. She has pleaded not guilty. Epstein, a financier and convicted sex offender with high-profile associates including Prince Andrew, Bill Clinton and Donald Trump, was arrested in July 2019 for sex trafficking minor teens. He killed himself in a New York City federal jail about a month after his arrest, while awaiting trial. Jurors started deliberating late on 20 December. They did not attend court on 23 or 24 December, due to the Christmas holiday. They have asked to see testimony from Maxwell’s accusers and several witnesses who appeared to corroborate their accounts. On Monday, jurors requested to see a transcript of testimony from Matt, the ex-boyfriend of Jane, the first Maxwell accuser to testify. Jurors also asked to see a transcript of testimony by a former Palm Beach police officer, Gregory Parkinson, who in October 2005 led a search of Epstein’s property in the Florida resort. In testimony, Parkinson talked jurors through a video of the search and responded to questions about still images that appeared on screen. After Parkinson noted the presence of a “portable, collapsible massage table”, a detective brought a massage table into the courtroom. Parkinson got down from the witness stand and, with gloved hands, examined the table. Prosecutors asked him to describe what he saw. “The table itself in an open position,” Parkinson said. Jurors also requested to see the transcript of testimony from David Rodgers, one of Epstein’s pilots. Deliberations resume Wednesday morning. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.html.Jürgen Klopp said Liverpool have given Manchester City the chance to run away with the title as he rued a “really bad” performance in their 1-0 defeat at Leicester. The substitute Ademola Lookman sealed victory as a depleted Leicester side, missing six injured defenders, became the first team in 35 games to keep a clean sheet against Liverpool, leaving Klopp struggling to explain what went wrong. Liverpool could be 12 points behind Pep Guardiola’s side when they kick off on Sunday and, as Klopp noted, either they or Chelsea will then drop points in their meeting at Stamford Bridge. “It’s a big gap,” Klopp said. “To top that, Chelsea and us play against each other. It was not our plan to give City the chance to run away. If we play like tonight we do not think about catching up with City, but if we play our football we can see what that means. I don’t have a proper explanation for tonight. To find it is my main concern, not City.” Klopp admitted Leicester merited their win, adding: “We played a really bad game, so it was well deserved. It was a very strange game. We were just not good enough. Tonight I didn’t like a lot in our game so we have to do better. We should have defended better. We do that usually, so why we didn’t do it today is hard to explain. There were so many performances below normal level, there’s no explanation.” Klopp defended Mohamed Salah, who missed a penalty for just the second time in the Premier League when Kasper Schmeichel saved his first-half spot-kick, saying: “Not a little bit of blame for Mo. He scores usually from these situations. Mo is part of the team and the team is usually better in a game. Tonight we weren’t and we lost.” Defender Virgil van Dijk was critical of Liverpool’s attacking efforts. “I think we were poor in the last third,” he said. “We should look at our performance and improve. We all wanted to do better. That’s a fact. We weren’t good enough and they deserved the win.”