Three victims of the serial killer Stephen Port might still be alive today were it not for a shoddy police investigation that was the result of “ineptitude, poor systems and underfunding”, the producer of a new drama about the crimes has said. Jeff Pope is senior producer of Four Lives, a dramatisation for BBC One of the murders of four young gay men: Anthony Walgate, 23; Gabriel Kovari, 22; Daniel Whitworth, 21; and Jack Taylor, 21. It stars Stephen Merchant as Port and Sheridan Smith as Sarah Sak, the mother of Walgate, who campaigned to prove her son had been drugged, raped and murdered. The initial police finding was that the death was unexplained but not suspicious. Pope said that when they started on the project he thought the failure to investigate Walgate’s death properly was going to be a story of “rampant homophobia” in the police. “But it’s actually more worrying than that,” he told the Radio Times. “The shoddy investigation was due to ineptitude, poor systems, underfunding.” Pope said that with cases such as the abduction and murder of Sarah Everard by the serving Met police officer Wayne Couzens, “it has become common to describe the police as ‘dysfunctional’ or ‘not fit for purpose’. So, in that sense, Four Lives is the story of the day. In this case, the dysfunctionality led to deaths. If they’d investigated Anthony Walgate’s killing properly, the other three men would still be alive.” Pope has been involved, as writer or producer, in some of the most watched and well-received real crime dramas of recent years, including about the serial killers Fred and Rose West. Pope said he was most shocked to discover that the reason the first Stephen Port murder was not investigated as suspicious, instead recorded as unexplained, was that it saved money. “Because a suspicious death costs more, as it involves searching laptops and forensic tests.” All four families of the victims gave consent or cooperation to the production. It was ready for transmission a year ago but has been delayed because of inquests into the deaths. Those inquests concluded this month when a jury found that police failings probably contributed to three of the four deaths. Pope and the writer Neil McKay are also working on a dramatisation of Jimmy Savile’s crimes, starring Steve Coogan. They said a future project, could be the Manchester Arena bombings of 2017.Four of the last five winners of the Welsh Grand National are back for another crack at the race on Monday, including Native River, the 2018 Cheltenham Gold Cup winner, who will attempt to repeat his memorable success under top weight of 11st 12lb five years ago. Colin Tizzard’s chaser would be a hugely popular winner but he needs something close to a career-best performance to win off 166 just a few days before his 12th birthday and others make more appeal. Secret Reprieve has not been out since winning this race last season but should go well again from a 6lb higher mark, while the Irish challenger The Big Dog also has obvious claims on his winning form at Punchestown in February. The strongest recent form on offer, though, could well be the London National at Sandown earlier this month, where Highland Hunter edged out Deise Aba (2.50) by a nose. Philip Hobbs’s eight-year-old, who is 4lb better off this time, looks a more reliable proposition this season after returning form figures of PP1P last term and is definitely worth an interest on Monday at around 14-1. Chepstow 1.05 When You’re Ready built on the promise of his chasing debut to win with something to spare over course and distance last time out and a 7lb rise in the weights is unlikely to stop his progress. Kempton Park 1.20 Edwardstone has a 5lb penalty for his win in the Grade One Henry VIII Novice Chase at Sandown last time but appears to have significantly more than that in hand of his three opponents here. Chepstow 1.40 A suitably strong field for this Grade One juvenile hurdle, with Skycutter, a front-running winner in a good time at Musselburgh earlier this month, perhaps the value bet at around 6-1 to extend his unbeaten record to three races. Kempton Park 1.55 Coded Message has been dropped a couple of pounds since a close fourth at Ascot and could make the most of it in a competitive contest. Chepstow 2.10 Geordie Des Champs was back to form at Uttoxeter in November and can double up off a 4lb higher mark. Kempton Park 2.30 Recent Grade One winner Greaneteen is a tough opponent for Shishkin on his much-anticipated seasonal debut but Nicky Henderson’s hugely exciting seven-year-old should be up to the test. Kempton Park 3.10 Kauto The King has had a month off since running below form at Newbury and is a fair price at around 12-1 on his win at Wincanton in November.Rising energy prices will hand Rishi Sunak a “windfall” of £3.1bn since October’s budget, a Labour analysis has claimed, which the party has urged the chancellor to spend on cutting household bills. Labour said the receipts would cover the projected £2.4bn cost of removing VAT from gas and electricity bills over the winter months . The figures come from House of Commons library research, commissioned by Labour, which projects £3.1bn extra in VAT receipts in 2021-22, making a total of £135bn. Labour’s figures were reached using the Office for Budget Responsibility’s (OBR) projections that 42.2% of VAT receipts will come from November to March. This suggests that, with £78bn raised to October 2021, a little under £57bn may be expected over the rest of the year. This would bring total VAT receipts to about £135bn. At the budget in October, the OBR forecast £131.9bn for 2021-22. However, the Treasury said those increases would not come close to meeting pre-pandemic forecasts. A government spokesperson said: “There has been no VAT windfall. VAT receipts this year are forecast to be below the pre-Covid level, with the OBR forecasting nearly £2bn less will be received this year compared with directly before the pandemic.” But the shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, said the additional cash compared with pre-budget forecasts meant the chancellor could give some relief on energy bills. “Right now people are being hit by a cost of living crisis which has seen energy bills soar, food costs increase and the weekly budget stretched. That’s why Labour is calling on the government to immediately remove VAT on household heating bills over the winter months.” Reeves said further action was needed to protect households from escalating bills after the next review of the energy price cap, which some experts have predicted could rise by as much as 40% when Ofgem sets it again in February. The energy regulator is also expected to enact a series of changes after the collapse of so many small providers. The cap for the average household is £1,277 a year, but the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change estimated it could rise to almost £1,800. “We need a sustainable and ambitious approach to energy, which is why Labour would also ramp up ambition with our plan to retrofit 19m homes, making our energy supply chain more secure without hitting household savings,” Reeves said. “On top of the biggest tax burden in 70 years, Conservative complacency is making the cost of living crisis worse and storing up long-term problems, with working people paying the price.” A Treasury spokesperson said it had concluded that high energy prices would reduce VAT revenues due to the 5% VAT rate on the supply of domestic fuel and power. Higher prices overall meant if people spent more on energy, where VAT was lower, they would spend less on goods and services that on average had a much higher VAT rate, thereby reducing VAT revenue overall. “We are supporting vulnerable households with the cost of energy through initiatives such as the warm home discount, which is being increased to £150 and extended to cover an extra 750,000 households, winter fuel payments, and cold weather payments,” the spokesperson said.That’s it for today’s Covid blog and thanks for following along. Please join us as we launch our new coronavirus live news feed here. Or follow all our top stories here. Children aged between five and 11 are now eligible for vaccinations in Queensland. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk urged parents to book children, to get them vaccinated before school goes back, and to talk to their GPs about any concerns. The jabs will be available from state health clinics, GPs and pharmacists. Queensland has recorded 784 new cases. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said they are not seeing “massive impacts” on hospitals, but urged people to get their booster shots. Qld chief health officer John Gerrard said patients are “on the young side”, and that Omicron is the dominant strain at about 75% of cases. There are also some changes to vaccinations for children, more on that in a minute. Tasmania has recorded 35 new Covid-19 cases, a slight drop on the 44 reported on Boxing Day. The new daily infections announced on Monday take the number of active cases in the state to 194, with 116 patients managing their care at home, the health department says. One case is in hospital, however authorities say they were admitted for an alternative medical condition. The spike in cases comes as new arrivals for the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race continue to dock in the state capital. Tasmania opened its borders to states and territories considered of risk on December 15, when the island state had zero Covid cases. The Chinese city of Xi’an, where 13 million residents are currently in lockdown and confined to their homes, announced tightened restrictions on Sunday as the country recorded its biggest Covid-19 infection numbers in 21 months. On Sunday the country reported 206 new Covid infections - the highest daily number since March 2020, according to the national health commission. “In the coming days, a number of cases are still likely to be detected,” Xi’an official He Wenquan warned, Agence France-Presse reported. The northern metropolis - about 900 km (560 miles) from the Olympics venues - reported 155 new Covid patients on Sunday, bringing the total to nearly 500 over the past few weeks. About 29,000 people have been placed in hotel quarantine, he said. Xi’an residents have already been tested several times, authorities said, and a “total” disinfection was to begin Sunday evening. Restrictions on movement have also been tightened. Each household can only send one member out to buy basic necessities once every three days - down from two days under previous rules. All businesses except supermarkets, convenience stores and medical facilities have been ordered to close. Now I’m handing you over to the marvellous Samantha Lock, but I’ll pop back in occasionally with some Covid updates. Samantha Lock here and back with you on the blog as we go through all the latest coronavirus developments from around the world. I’ll be bringing you the news from over here in sunny Sydney so let’s start with a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding in Australia. The nation’s most populous state of NSW recorded three deaths and 6,324 new cases while Victoria recorded three deaths and 1999 new cases. Around Australia there have been lengthy delays getting PCR tests, and now moves are afoot to switch to rapid antigen testing in some cases. The Age reports that Covid contacts in Victoria could use rapid tests to clear themselves from isolation. In South Australia, the government has scrapped a requirement for PCR tests for interstate arrivals in favour of rapid tests on arrival. Things move fast! Looks like the cricket players have tested negative and are now heading to the ground. To stay up to speed, head to our live Ashes blog: Some more details on the Ashes delay – AAP is reporting that a member of England’s family group tested positive to Covid: England players remained back at their hotel just an hour before play on day two of the Boxing Day Test to have rapid tests. It means the start of play will almost certainly be delayed, with Australia set to resume on 1-61 in reply to the tourists 185. There’ll be more to come on this: Amid the dire news of increasing Covid infections, vaccination rates offer some solace (although a third dose may be needed to ensure “fully vaccinated” status in the future). 92% of Victorians aged 12 and over are fully vaccinated. In New South Wales it’s 93.5% of people aged 16 and over. Also three deaths in New South Wales, and 6,324 new cases: There were three deaths and 1999 new cases in Victoria: On the relentless march of the Omicron variant around the world... Kosovo has had its first cases. The Balkan state has had relatively low rates with 22 people testing positive for Covid in the past days. But nine of them had Omicron, Reuters reports, and the health officials there say its arrival is expected to worsen the situation. Updated figures show more than 1000 flights were grounded in the United States on Sunday. Reuters reports 1001 trips were cancelled, topping the 997 flights scrapped on Christmas Day and about 700 on Christmas Eve. Thousands more were delayed. Crews have been forced into quarantine as Covid surges in the US, and poor weather didn’t help. Here are some more details on the revelation that hundreds of people spent Christmas Day falsely believing they had the all clear. A Sydney hospital told more than 400 people they had a negative test result, when they were in fact positive. Eek. Read all about it here, and we’ll see how they reconcile those figures later this morning: Thanks so much, Nadeem. Tory Shepherd here in Australia, where Covid case numbers are also on the rise. I’ll bring you the latest figures as they come in. Worryingly, there is expected to be a post-Christmas spike in numbers. New South Wales reported 6,394 new infections on Sunday, which led to health minister Brad Hazzard saying “we’re all going to get Omicron”. (Not everyone was entirely chuffed with that prediction). Nationally there were almost 10,000 cases recorded, including in previously “Covid-free” states. Western Australia, which has had the toughest border restrictions, is tracing the contacts of a French backpacker who tested positive for the Delta variant. Victoria reported 1,608 cases, Queensland 714, South Australia 774, the Australian Capital Territory 71, Tasmania 44, and the Northern Territory 12. I’ll update you as soon as the new numbers are available. The US is now reporting 184,802 new cases per day - the country’s highest seven-day average since January, reports CNN and Johns Hopkins university. The Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, started isolating at home today after his daughter tested positive for Covid. His office said that he is awaiting the results of a PCR test after his 14-year-old daughter, who has been vaccinated, contracted the virus, reports Reuters. Iran has banned the entry of travellers from Britain, France, Denmark and Norway for 15 days as part of coronavirus curbs, Reuters reports. State television said on Sunday a similar ban imposed in late November on travellers from South Africa and seven neighbouring countries was also extended for 15 days. Algeria implemented new vaccine passport requirements today for crossing the border and entrance to public venues including sports facilities, cinemas, bathhouses and museums. Under a quarter of the population have had one vaccine dose amid vaccine hesitancy. Kosovo’s health ministry said it had registered its first nine cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant in the Balkan country. Coronavirus vaccination teams could go door-to-door in the UK to reach those yet to have their jabs, reports have suggested, in a bid to stave off further restrictions, PA Media reports. The Mail on Sunday reported a trial which had been carried out in Ipswich, Suffolk, could be expanded across the whole country as the government attempted to hold out against introducing new restrictions in England. The Palestinian health ministry said on Sunday it had identified the first case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 in the Gaza Strip. Reuters reports that the carrier is a Gaza resident who was infected within the coastal territory, ministry official Majdi Dhair told a news conference. New coronavirus restrictions are being introduced in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland as the country’s leaders try to combat rising Covid cases. Although Boris Johnson is still considering similar measures in England, the devolved governments have gone ahead with new rules. The Robert Koch Institute (RKI) has registered 10,100 new Covid cases in Germany and 88 deaths within the past 24 hours. The RKI gave the value of new infections per 100,000 inhabitants as 220.7 as of Sunday morning. The previous day was 242.9, while a week ago the nationwide incidence was 315.4. In Australia, St Vincent’s hospital in Sydney has launched an emergency response after falsely telling 400 people they tested negative for Covid when they were, in fact, positive. The hospital has released a statement saying it is believed the mistake was down to “human error”. Kosovo’s health ministry said it had registered its first nine cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant in the Balkan country. The ministry said that out of the nine, two people came from the US, two from the UK, one from France, and the four other cases were people who had not travelled outside the country, Reuters reports. Labour has claimed ministers in the UK are risking the emergence of other Covid variants like Omicron by thwarting a bid by poorer countries to manufacture their own vaccines. The British government has “actively blocked countries in Africa and across the developing world from making their own vaccines” by opposing a waiver on intellectual property rights for Covid vaccines, the party says. Rich countries are divided over the proposal for a temporary waiver, first floated last year by India and South Africa. While the US, Australia and New Zealand have backed the idea, the UK, European Union and Switzerland are opposed. The amount of high street traffic in the UK on Boxing Day may have been affected by new coronavirus restrictions which came into force on Sunday in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, including wearing masks in all shops and limiting group sizes to six indoors. Footfall in Northern Ireland was 73% below the 2019 level, 63% lower in Wales and almost 50% lower in Scotland, PA reports. France has reported 27,697 new coronavirus cases, Reuters reports. Yesterday the country recorded a record high of 104,611 Covid-19 infections on Saturday, breaking the 100,000 threshold for the first time since the pandemic began. Arsenal football club in England have announced their next game against Wolves in the Premier League on Tuesday has been postponed due to “a number of the Wolves squad testing positive for Covid-19”. The club said: “This game will be rescheduled in due course and any tickets and/or hospitality packages purchased for this fixture will be valid for the rescheduled date.” The use of the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine in vulnerable people may be resulting in a lower death toll in the UK compared to Europe, according to the former chief of the country’s vaccine taskforce. Clive Dix said the durable cellular immunity response produced by the AZ jab can potentially “last for life”. The Oxford/AstraZeneca jab was approved last December and vaccines were initially rolled out among the older and the most vulnerable in society. Dix told The Daily Telegraph: “If you look across Europe, with the rise in cases, there’s also a corresponding lagged rise in deaths, but not in the UK, and we have to understand that.” He added: “I personally believe that’s because most of our vulnerable people were given the AstraZeneca vaccine.” An Israeli hospital will begin administering a fourth Covid-19 vaccine jab to 150 staff on Monday in a trial aimed at gauging whether a second booster is necessary nationwide. Sheba Medical Center near Tel Aviv said its trial would shed light on the efficacy of a fourth dose and help decision-makers set health policy in Israel and abroad. Israel has reported 1,118 confirmed cases of the Omicron variant, with the number of people infected by it doubling every two days. A health ministry panel of experts has recommended offering a fourth dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine to Israelis aged 60 and over who received a booster shot at least four months ago. But final approval by the ministry’s director-general is still pending amid public debate as to whether sufficient scientific information is available to justify a new booster drive, Reuters reports. A White House official, who asked not to be named, said despite the chaos at some airports that “we’re in a better place than last Christmas” and noted that “only a small percentage of flights are affected”. “But any cancellations can be a pain and delay reunions with family and friends, so the Transportation Department and the FAA are monitoring this closely,” the official said, referring to the Federal Aviation Administration. Commercial airlines cancelled more than 720 flights within, into or out of the US on Sunday, according to a tally on flight-tracking website FlightAware.com. United Airlines called off 98 flights on Sunday, a spokesperson said, adding that it remained a small portion of the average 4,000 daily flights, Reuters reports. Iran has banned the entry of travellers from Britain, France, Denmark and Norway for 15 days as part of coronavirus curbs, Reuters reports. State television said on Sunday a similar ban imposed in late November on travellers from South Africa and seven neighbouring countries was also extended for 15 days. Health authorities also indefinitely halted land travel to neighbouring Turkey, a popular tourist destination, the broadcaster said. Iran, the pandemic’s epicentre in the Middle East, has reported just 14 confirmed Omicron cases so far but media reports said detection kits were not widely available and officials have warned of a possible rapid spread within weeks. The UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, is expected to examine crucial hospital data on Monday before any new announcement on Covid measures but has no plans to recall his cabinet, with ministers still deeply sceptical of further legal curbs. Sources said the prime minister would “take stock” after being encouraged by improving data on Friday, a sign that No 10 is leaning away from stricter curbs in England, but Downing Street sources said he would act quickly if there were new causes for concern. Instead, Johnson will receive only his regular data briefing over the bank holiday with England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty – expected to be knighted in the new year honours – and the chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance. New York’s acting state health commissioner, Dr Mary Bassett, said the “striking increase” in hospitalisations of children with Covid-19 that the state has recorded in the last three weeks showed urgent action was needed. All children older than five should be fully vaccinated, she said, while those under five should be shielded by ensuring those around them have protection through vaccination, boosters, mask-wearing, avoiding crowds and testing, Reuters reports. “The risks of Covid-19 for children are real,” Bassett said in a statement. The state’s health department said the increases were concentrated in New York City and surrounding areas where Omicron is spreading rapidly. A scaled-back Boxing Day trail-hunting programme will go ahead in parts of the UK this year despite the worsening Covid situation and growing calls to ban the practice on public land, the Countryside Alliance has said. The majority of Boxing Day hunts are due to go ahead on 27 December because this year’s holiday falls on a Sunday, traditionally a day of rest for the hunting community. Restrictions designed to slow the spread of the virus in Scotland and Wales have forced many packs to cancel public gatherings connected to their meets. France reported 95,609 total coronavirus deaths in hospital, an increase of 96. It also reported that 3,299 people are in intensive care units with coronavirus, up by 17, Reuters reports. British consumers have largely stayed away from the traditional Boxing Day sales amid concern over the Omicron Covid variant, with visits to high streets, shopping centres and retail parks down more than 45% on pre-pandemic levels, according to industry figures. Fears over the virus, as well as several key retailers including John Lewis, Marks &amp; Spencer and Next deciding to keep their stores closed, and the traditional bumper shopping day falling on a Sunday this year, all put a dampener on sales. By lunchtime on Sunday, numbers were only up just over a quarter on last year, when UK high streets were in lockdown, according to the latest data from shopping tracking group Springboard. Italy reported 81 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday compared with 144 the day before, the health ministry said. The daily tally of new cases fell sharply as testing was reduced over the Christmas weekend. Following three successive days of record cases, the health ministry said just 24,883 new infections were registered in the last 24 hours, down from a previous 54,762. Only 217,052 tests for Covid-19 were carried out over the past day, compared with 969,752 announced on Saturday, the health ministry said. Italy has registered 136,611 deaths linked to Covid-19 and has reported 5.65 million cases to date, Reuters reports. Here are more details on the earlier story about US airlines calling off hundreds of flights for a third day in a row on Sunday, as surging Covid-19 infections forced tens of thousands of Christmas weekend travellers to change their plans. Commercial airlines canceled 656 flights within, into or out of the US on Sunday, slightly down from nearly 1,000 from Christmas Day and nearly 700 on Christmas Eve, according to the flight-tracking website FlightAware.com. The UK Health Security Agency has tweeted a reminder that it will not be publishing new Covid figures today. The next update will be coming tomorrow. The US is now reporting 184,802 new cases per day - the country’s highest seven-day average since January, reports CNN and Johns Hopkins university. The Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, started isolating at home today after his daughter tested positive for Covid. His office said that he is awaiting the results of a PCR test after his 14-year-old daughter, who has been vaccinated, contracted the virus, reports Reuters. Algeria implemented new vaccine passport requirements today for crossing the border and entrance to public venues including sports facilities, cinemas, bathhouses and museums. Under a quarter of the population have had one vaccine dose amid vaccine hesitancy. Coronavirus vaccination teams could go door-to-door in the UK to reach those yet to have their jabs, reports have suggested, in a bid to stave off further restrictions, PA Media reports. The Mail on Sunday reported a trial which had been carried out in Ipswich, Suffolk, could be expanded across the whole country as the government attempted to hold out against introducing new restrictions in England. The Palestinian health ministry said on Sunday it had identified the first case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 in the Gaza Strip. Reuters reports that the carrier is a Gaza resident who was infected within the coastal territory, ministry official Majdi Dhair told a news conference. New coronavirus restrictions are being introduced in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland as the country’s leaders try to combat rising Covid cases. Although Boris Johnson is still considering similar measures in England, the devolved governments have gone ahead with new rules. The Robert Koch Institute (RKI) has registered 10,100 new Covid cases in Germany and 88 deaths within the past 24 hours. The RKI gave the value of new infections per 100,000 inhabitants as 220.7 as of Sunday morning. The previous day was 242.9, while a week ago the nationwide incidence was 315.4. In Australia, St Vincent’s hospital in Sydney has launched an emergency response after falsely telling 400 people they tested negative for Covid when they were, in fact, positive. The hospital has released a statement saying it is believed the mistake was down to “human error”. The US is now reporting 184,802 new cases per day - the country’s highest seven-day average since January, reports CNN and Johns Hopkins university. What are the new Covid rules in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland? Jessica Elgot explains: Hundreds of US flights have been cancelled for the third consecutive day amid surging Covid infections. Reuters reports that flight-tracking website FlightAware.com recorded 656 cancelled flights either into or out of the US today. It comes after nearly 1,000 were cancelled on Christmas day and nearly 700 on Christmas eve. The Christmas holidays are usually a peak time for air travel in the US, but the arrival of Omicron has led to flights being cancelled as pilots and crew are forced to quarantine. The Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, started isolating at home today after his daughter tested positive for Covid. His office said that he is awaiting the results of a PCR test after his 14-year-old daughter, who has been vaccinated, contracted the virus, reports Reuters. Bennett left his weekly cabinet meeting and went home after hearing about his daughter’s positive test. Before the session started, he and other cabinet members took rapid antigen tests and received negative results. It comes as Israel is seeing a rise in infections caused by the Omicron variant. So far, Israel has reported 1,118 confirmed cases of Omicron and the number of infections is doubling every two days. Algeria implemented new vaccine passport requirements today for crossing the border and entrance to public venues including sports facilities, cinemas, bathhouses and museums. Under a quarter of the population have had one vaccine dose amid vaccine hesitancy. It is hoped that the new requirement will boost vaccination rates. The new restrictions were announced last night and came into effect today, leaving no preparation time for businesses. According to official figures, 6,230 people have died from Covid, including seven in the past week, and there have been 217,000 cases, reports the Associated Press. But the true figures are estimated to be much higher. Last month the health minister, Abderrahmane Benbouzid, warned that if vaccine hesitancy continued, over 13 million vaccines risked going out of date before they were used. Hi, I’m looking after the blog for the next hour or so. Please get in touch with any tips or suggestions: miranda.bryant@guardian.co.uk Santa hats and Christmas jumpers added festive colour to the usual PPE for the “jingle jabs” NHS campaign in east London on Christmas Day. At one of at least eight vaccination centres open in England, volunteers decorated Redbridge town hall with Christmas-themed pictures and festive messages as they dealt with a fast-moving queue for booster jabs. “We’ve tried to jazz it up a little bit, tried to decorate some of the bays. There’s only a limited amount we can do from a clinical point of view, but we’ve tried. Those with their Christmas hats have got them on while trying to observe full PPE,” said Imran Khan, a senior clinical pharmacist at the centre. Khan said the campaign to get people vaccinated at centres open from Christmas Eve to Boxing Day was useful in a diverse area such as Ilford and especially for workers who did not have the luxury of working from home. Sadique Shikder, 46, said his job as a bartender meant he was usually too busy to get to a vaccination centre. Similarly, 54-year-old Azmat Hussain, said he would normally be travelling as a salesperson in the financial sector. “We usually do a dinner today and it’s my mum’s birthday as well but because of Covid we’ve had to scale back so I’ll go back and watch TV,” said Hussain. Omani authorities will require foreign travellers aged 18 or older to have received at least two Covid-19 vaccine doses to enter the sultanate, the state news agency reported on Sunday. The sultanate also cancelled a previous decision that suspended entry from South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Eswatini and Mozambique. France recorded more than 100,000 virus infections in a single day for the first time since the pandemic struck, and Covid-19 hospitalisations have doubled over the past month as the fast-spreading Omicron variant complicates the government’s efforts to stave off a new lockdown. More than one person in 100 in the Paris region has tested positive in the past week, according to the regional health service. Most new infections are linked to the Omicron variant, which government experts predict will be dominant in France in the coming days. Meanwhile a surge in Delta variant infections in recent months is pushing up hospital admissions. More than 1,000 people in France with the virus died over the past week, bringing the overall death toll to more than 122,000. The government is holding emergency meetings on Monday to discuss next steps. Some scientists and teachers have urged delaying the post-holiday return to school, or re-imposing a curfew. But the education minister says schools should open as usual on 3 January, and other government officials are working to avoid measures that would hammer the economic recovery. Instead the government is hoping that stepped-up vaccinations will be enough. The government is pushing a draft law that would require people to be vaccinated to enter all restaurants and many public venues, instead of the current health pass system which allows people to produce a negative test or proof of recovery if they’re not vaccinated. Coronavirus vaccination teams could go door-to-door in the UK to reach those yet to have their jabs, reports have suggested, in a bid to stave off further restrictions, PA Media reports. The Mail on Sunday reported a trial which had been carried out in Ipswich, Suffolk, could be expanded across the whole country as the government attempted to hold out against introducing new restrictions in England. New Covid measures came into force in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland on Boxing Day but politicians in England are unlikely to discuss further measures until Monday, with suggestions a voluntary reduction in social contacts before Christmas could convince Boris Johnson to rely on guidance rather than new rules. Downing Street believes that reaching those who have not yet had their vaccinations is a key way of staving off new restrictions. A month-long campaign was launched at the end of November in the Westgate area of Ipswich, which had a low vaccine uptake rate. Public health teams went door-to-door addressing worries and offering transport to vaccination centres. A bus also toured the area to offer jabs without appointments. In Great Yarmouth, in Norfolk, community vaccinators have made doorstep calls in areas where vaccination rates are low. The Commons Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, is expected to speak to government officials on Boxing Day over the prospect of a recall of parliament to approve any pre-new year measures in England. It is understood a Covid O meeting is yet to be scheduled as ministers await further data, but No 10 did not rule out the possibility one could take place on Monday. The number of people getting their first jab of the Covid-19 vaccine rose by around 46% in the week up to 21 December, the government said. In total, 221,564 first doses were administered in England in the week of 15-21 December, a 46% increase from the previous week, and 279,112 second doses were administered, a 39% jump, the Department of Health and Social Care said. The largest increase was seen among young people, with an 85% increase in first doses for those aged 18 and 24 and a 71% increase in first doses for those aged 25 to 30. In the week up to 21 December, more over-60s had had a first dose than during any seven-day period since early June. More details from Reuters on the identification of the first case of the Omicron variant on the Gaza Strip. The Palestinian health ministry said the carrier is a Gaza resident who was infected within the coastal territory. A ministry official, Majdi Dhair, said this meant the variant, first identified in southern Africa and Hong Kong last month, existed in Gaza and was now spreading among the population. The discovery poses a new challenge to the enclave’s under-developed health system. “We are ahead of difficult days. It is expected that the Omicron variant will spread fast,” he told reporters. Gaza, with a population of 2.2 million people, has registered 189,837 COVID-19 infections and 1,691 deaths. Dhair urged Gazans to get vaccinated, putting the percentage of those who had already received shots at around 40 percent. In the Israeli-occupied West Bank, three cases of Omicron variant had been detected among Palestinians on Dec. 16 and the number had since risen to 23 among the 3.1 million population, Palestinian health authorities said. Is Omicron the start of another bleak new year or the beginning of the end for the pandemic in the UK? The Observer’s science editor Robin McKie reports How close does this year’s outbreak parallel that of last winter? At first glance, the two years look similar, with case numbers rocketing in only a few weeks in the UK. However, hospitalisations and deaths from Covid-19 remain very low so far this year, with latest research suggesting that the new variant appears to trigger fewer cases of severe illness than its viral predecessors. Scientists have generally treated these results studies as good news but have also counselled caution. Daily Covid-19 case numbers are still rising – they reached a record 122,000 on Friday – and it was estimated that 1.7m people had Covid-19 in the UK last week. Are there noticeable differences in the ages of those affected by Omicron? Crucially, most of the new cases have occurred in young adults, which has led some researchers to warn that if Omicron starts to affect older – more vulnerable – people in greater numbers, hospitalisations could still jump. On the other hand, a huge number of people – especially the elderly – have now been give vaccines and boosters and will have gained considerable protection against Omicron. It remains to be seen how these different factors affect figures. At present, data is still being gathered and it is too early to be sure. At the same time, policy decisions to protect public health still have to be taken. The problem is highlighted by infectious disease epidemiologist Professor Mark Woolhouse of Edinburgh University. “There is inevitably a lag between infection and hospitalisation,” he told the journal Nature last week. “But in the meantime, policy decisions have to be made, and that is not straightforward.” Is the virus likely to lose its power to cause severe illness? Many scientists believe evidence is now suggesting that this idea may be correct. Recent studies in Scotland, England and South Africa all point in this direction. “My gut feeling is that this variant is the first step in a process by which the virus adapts to the human population to produce more benign symptoms,” says Dr Julian Tang, Professor of Respiratory Sciences at Leicester University. “In a sense, it is to the virus’s advantage if it affects people in a way that that they don’t get too sick – because then they can walk around and mingle in society and spread the virus even more.” So will Covid-19 end up behaving like flu? Some health officials have predicted that Covid-19 could end up behaving like influenza, which requires a new vaccine to deal with new strains that appear every year. However, Professor Martin Hibberd, of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, argues that coronaviruses – like those that already cause common colds – do not behave this way: “They do not appear as new strains every year. The reason we get colds in winter is because our immunity to coronaviruses does not last very long. And this virus seems to be more similar to those that cause common colds. In other words, we may still need to think about giving vaccines to protect against Covid-19 every year because immunity will always slip.” That does not mean we face “doom and gloom” for the next five years, adds Tang. “I think the virus will evolve itself out of the pandemic strain very soon and become milder, more transmissible to the point where you may only need to think about vaccinating the more vulnerable members of the population.” The Palestinian health ministry said on Sunday it had identified the first case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 in the Gaza Strip. Reuters reports that the carrier is a Gaza resident who was infected within the coastal territory, ministry official Majdi Dhair told a news conference. Gaza, with a population of 2.2 million people, has registered 189,837 Covid-19 cases and 1,691 deaths. In the UK, cabinet ministers vying to succeed Boris Johnson have been warned by Tory colleagues that they will damage their chances unless they stridently oppose further Covid measures in England, as MPs called for New Year’s Eve restrictions to be ruled out. With ministers expected to meet as soon as Monday to discuss whether additional measures are needed to protect hospital capacity, several Conservatives said that they would be watching those emerging as leading contenders to replace Johnson should he step aside before the next election. The news comes after it emerged government scientific advisers had modelled the impact of implementing so-called “step 2” restrictions from Tuesday. Such measures would see an end to indoor gatherings, limited outdoor gatherings, and bars and restaurants only able to serve outdoors. The modelling suggested that restrictions could reduce deaths by 18% if kept in place until mid-January or 39% if retained until the end of March. Delaying the measures until New Year’s Day would reduce their impact, though the scientists said their models did not have “sufficient precision” to detect differences in a small delay. “When an epidemic is rapidly growing, the earlier interventions take place, the larger their effect,” they said. The UK recorded 122,186 new Covid cases on Friday, the highest yet, while the Office for National Statistics estimated that 1.7 million Britons had the virus in the week ending 19 December, also a record. The Liberal Democrats have called for a clear plan to keep schools in England open in January. The Sunday Times has reported that the prime minister told Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, that he is “absolutely determined” that pupils will return to school after the Christmas holidays and that both believe education is the “No 1 priority” with school closures “not being considered”. However, the Liberal Democrat education spokesperson Munira Wilson said it was not clear what mitigation measures had been put in place to keep Covid cases down in classrooms. “Our children have been failed again and again throughout this pandemic by Boris Johnson’s government,” she said. “Of course schools should stay open but he needs to explain how and with what help for teachers and parents. “He needs to explain how and with what help for teachers and parents. From air purifiers to rolling out the vaccine to teenagers, this government has dragged its feet. Ministers must set out a clear plan to reassure families that schools will be kept open, instead of making yet more empty promises.” Schools were closed in England last January, some after reopening for just one day following the Christmas holidays. Most children had already been off school from March until September. Restrictions on hospitality in Scotland have been reimposed as the government looks to stem the spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus. With the increased transmissibility of the new strain, the Scottish government has imposed limits on the number of people who can attend events. Only 100 are allowed to attend a standing indoor event and 200 at a seated event. Outdoor events have been limited to 500, meaning large-scale Hogmanay celebrations have been scrapped. Despite the restrictions, football games in the Scottish Premiership will go ahead on Boxing Day, with the winter break brought forward to limit the impact of restrictions on teams. Indoor non-professional contact sports have also been stopped. The restrictions will be reviewed in three weeks, and will be paired with further changes coming into effect from Monday at 5am, including the closure of nightclubs. Indoor hospitality and leisure settings will also have to return to one-metre social distancing and table service where appropriate under the new measures. Some detail on the new restrictions in Wales, via PA Media. Groups of no more than six people will be allowed to meet in pubs, cinemas and restaurants in Wales from Boxing Day as new restrictions come into force. Under a series of new measures announced by first minister Mark Drakeford last week, the two-metre social distancing rules are returning in public places and workplaces. Licensed premises will have to offer table service only, face masks will have to be worn and contact tracing details collected. Outdoor events will be limited to 50 people, with 30 indoors - but numbers able to attend events such as weddings, civil partnerships, funerals and wakes will be determined by the size of the venue. The rules, which come into force from 6am, are a revised version of alert level two. The regulations bring back protections in hospitality businesses, including licensed premises, and in cinemas and theatres. Nightclubs will also close. The Night Time Industries Association described the measures as a “devastating blow” to the industry and urged the UK Government to reintroduce the furlough scheme. Drakeford said £120m would be available for nightclubs, retail, hospitality, leisure and tourism businesses affected by the measures. “We are facing a very serious situation in Wales. A wave of infections caused by the new, fast-moving and very infectious Omicron variant is headed our way,” he said. “We will do everything we can to protect people’s health and livelihoods in Wales - this means taking early action to try and control its spread.” There will be no restrictions on household mixing, but guidance will be issued about limiting the number of visitors, taking a lateral flow test before the visit, and meeting outdoors, if possible. There will be a separate offence for large gatherings - more than 30 people indoors or 50 people outdoors - in private homes and gardens. Drakeford did not rule out introducing further restrictions in the new year, but said he hoped these measures would flatten the infection rate. More on the situation in China, courtesy of Reuters, after the country reported its highest daily rise in local Covid-19 cases in 21 months as infections more than doubled in the northwestern city of Xian, China’s latest Covid hot spot. The city of 13 million, which entered its fourth day of lockdown, detected 155 domestically transmitted cases with confirmed symptoms for Saturday, up from 75 a day earlier, official data showed on Sunday. That drove the national daily count to 158, the highest since China managed to contain a nationwide outbreak in early 2020. Xian, with 485 local symptomatic cases reported for the 9-25 December period, has imposed heavy-handed measures to rein in the outbreak, in line with Beijing’s policy that any flare-up should be contained as soon as possible. Residents may not leave town without approval from employers or local authorities and multiple rounds of mass testing were conducted to identify cases. The city has announced no infections caused by the Omicron variant, although Chinese authorities have reported a handful of Omicron infections among international travellers and in southern China. Including imported cases, mainland China confirmed 206 new cases on 25 December , up from 140 a day earlier. No new deaths were reported, leaving the cumulative death toll at 4,636. Mainland China had 101,077 confirmed cases as of 25 December. Russia has reported 23, 721 new coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours, down slightly on the 24,946 cases it reported the day before. The country had also reported 968 Covid-linked deaths in the last day. New coronavirus restrictions are being introduced in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland as the country’s leaders try to combat rising Covid cases. Although Boris Johnson is still considering similar measures in England, the devolved governments have gone ahead with new rules. Wales From 6am on Boxing Day, a maximum of six people will be allowed to meet in pubs, cinemas and restaurants. A total of 30 people will be allowed at indoor events while 50 people will be allowed at outdoor events. Two-metre social distancing is being required in public premises and offices, and nightclubs will close. Scotland Large events will have one-metre physical distancing and will be limited to 100 people standing indoors, 200 people sitting indoors and 500 people outdoors from 5am on Boxing Day. Up to three households can meet with a one metre distancing between groups at indoor and outdoor venues like bars, restaurants, theatres, cinemas and gyms. Table service is also needed at places where alcohol is served. The restrictions will be reviewed in three weeks, and will be paired with further changes coming into effect from Monday at 5am, including the closure of nightclubs. Northern Ireland Restrictions begin on Boxing Day and December 27, with indoor standing events no longer permitted and nightclubs closing. Full story here: To summarise the latest developments: Covid is continuing to spread in Australia, with 9,605 cases detected across the country. New South Wales recorded a record 6,394 cases, as the NSW health minister urged residents to reconsider whether they need to call an ambulance or go to hospital due to staff furloughs, warning everyone in the state was likely to be infected with Omicron. In South Australia, restrictions have been tightened to stem the spread of Omicron after a record daily number of cases. Testing centre delays were still hitting Australian states and territories, with some reaching capacity before opening on Boxing Day. Also in Australia, a Sydney hospital has been forced to issue an apology after falsely telling 400 people they had tested negative to the virus yesterday evening, when they were positive. France recorded a record high of 104,611 Covid-19 infections on Saturday, breaking the 100,000 threshold for the first time since the pandemic began. Italy reported a third successive record tally of Covid-19 cases on Christmas Day, Reuters reports. New cases reached 54,762 compared to 50,599 a day earlier, the health ministry said. Record cases are being reported in Ireland and in China, where authorities are imposing strict lockdowns to contain the outbreaks. Local transmission is rising in China and its Xi’an province is now allowing only one member of a household to leave their home for necessities every two days. China recorded 206 cases, the highest daily rise in 21 months. More than 5,400 flight cancellations have thrown the Christmas travel schedule into chaos. Omicron has meant airlines could not staff flights. A quarter of cancelled flights were in the United States. New Covid measures in England could be in place until late March under measures examined by the UK government’s scientific advisers, including a ban on socialising with another household indoors and a return to the rule of six outdoors, in line with the Step 2 restrictions in place in England earlier this year India’s prime minister Narendra Modi has announced vaccinations for children under 15 and booster jabs for healthcare and frontline workers. The Omicron variant has become the dominant strain in Portugal, making up almost two-thirds of cases since Wednesday. Schools, bars and clubs are closed until 10 January. There were queues at vaccination centres in England, kept open in some areas to allow walk-in appointments as the government encourages booster shots to counter the surge caused by the Omicron variant. The Nigerian president’s top media aide Garba Shehu said on Saturday that he has tested positive for coronavirus and was in isolation. Germany recorded 10,100 new Covid cases and 88 deaths, as the reference rate continues to decrease. SydPath medical director professor Anthony Dodds has addressed the media on the 400 false negatives at St Vincent’s Hospital in Sydney. He said no sailors or crew linked to the Sydney to Hobart yacht race were believed to have been impacted. Owing to the very large volume of tests we’ve been contending with, last night we incorrectly messaged 400 patients who had been swabbed at our centres from 22 December and 23 December, advising them they had tested negative to Covid. These people in fact had tested positive to Covid. As soon as we became aware of this issue this morning SydPath immediately commenced a process to contact these individuals. An emergency response team is now investigating the cause of this mistake which we believe is due to human error. We sincerely apologise for the mistake that has been made. In Europe, the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) has registered 10,100 new Covid cases in Germany and 88 deaths within the past 24 hours. The seven-day incidence continues to decrease. The RKI gave the value of new infections per 100,000 inhabitants as 220.7 as of Sunday morning. The previous day was 242.9, while a week ago the nationwide incidence was 315.4. It brings total deaths during the pandemic to 110,364. To recap Australia’s daily Covid numbers. There have been 9,618 total cases recorded across the country: Victoria has recorded 1,608 new cases. NSW has reported a record 6,394 Covid cases. St Vincent’s hospital has revealed 400 people were incorrectly told they tested negative yesterday evening. It hasn’t been confirmed whether this brings the official case count to 6,794, which would push the national case count to 10,018. The ACT has recorded 71 new local cases. Tasmania has recorded 44 new cases. South Australia has recorded 774 new Covid cases, prompting the return of some restrictions in the state. There have been 714 Covid cases detected in Queensland. Western Australia has recorded one local case who wasn’t infectious while in the community. The Northern Territory has reported 12 new local cases. Western Australia has recorded one new Covid case. The case attended the Perth Mess Hall event, and was also staying at a hostel linked to a previous case. They tested positive while in quarantine and aren’t considered to have been contagious in the community. It brings the total number of local cases linked to the current outbreak to eight. In addition, there was one other case reported overnight – an overseas traveller in hotel quarantine. Today’s new case came from 3,387 tests. Case numbers have not yet been released for Western Australia, but if there were 400 further cases that weren’t included in the official daily count in NSW because of the St Vincent’s hospital bungle, then Australia would have recorded more than 10,000 Covid-19 cases in a single day. NSW would have accounted for the bulk of the cases - almost 7,000. In Sydney, St Vincent’s hospital has launched an emergency response after falsely telling 400 people they tested negative for Covid when they were, in fact, positive. The hospital has released a statement saying it is believed the mistake was down to “human error”. The affected people are being contacted. What is unclear is whether this impacts today’s case numbers in NSW - which were already at a record 6,394. Here is the full update from the NT’s Michael Gunner. No cases have been found in Nhulunbuy, where positive wastewater was detected: The Northern Territory has recorded 12 new cases of Covid-19 since our last update. Four new cases are linked to the current cluster. This brings the total case count for the cluster to 144. Two new cases are household contacts of previous cases in the Tennant Creek area. They were not infectious in the community. Two new cases are in the Katherine area and are likely to be linked to previous Katherine area cases. They are in isolation and contact tracing is underway. Two new cases were locally acquired in household contacts of a traveller from interstate. Six new cases are in interstate arrivals. They are all in isolation at home or at the Centre for National Resilience. There are currently 18 people with Covid-19 in hospital, including one in ICU. The majority of admissions are for the purposes of infection control and assessment. 1,499 Covid-19 tests were processed across the NT yesterday....Covid-19 testing sites are open in Nhulunbuy, Katherine, Tennant Creek and Alice Springs. Testing is also available at NT Health clinics in remote communities. Back in Australia, the Northern Territory has recorded 12 new Covid cases, bringing the total number of cases linked to the current outbreak to 144. There are 18 people in hospital with Covid, including one in ICU. In a Facebook post, chief minister Michael Gunner said the “majority” of admissions were for infection control and assessment. Two cases detected in Tennant Creek are household contacts of previous cases and haven’t been infectious in the community, and two cases have been detected in Katherine, likely linked to previous cases with contact tracing underway. Two new cases were recorded in household contacts of a traveller from interstate, and six further cases were recorded in interstate arrivals. Western Australia is yet to provide a Covid update after reporting two new cases yesterday. More on the 206 new cases reported in China today from Reuters, which is the highest daily rise in local Covid cases in the past 21 months. Infections more than doubled in the northwestern city of Xian, the nation’s latest hotspot. The city of 13 million, which entered its fourth day of lockdown, detected 155 domestically transmitted cases with confirmed symptoms for Saturday, up from 75 a day earlier, official data showed on Sunday. It drove the national daily count to 158, the highest since China managed to contain a nationwide outbreak in early 2020. Xian, with 485 local symptomatic cases reported between 9 December and 25 December, has imposed heavy-handed measures to rein in the outbreak, in line with Beijing’s policy that any flare-up should be contained as soon as possible. Residents are unable to leave town without approval from employers or local authorities, and multiple rounds of mass testing have been conducted to identify cases. The city has announced no infections caused by the Omicron variant, although Chinese authorities have reported a handful of Omicron infections among international travellers and in southern China. Including imported cases, mainland China confirmed 206 new cases on Christmas Day, up from 140 a day earlier. No new deaths were reported, leaving the cumulative death toll at 4,636. To recap, Covid case numbers across Australia have been released for every state and territory excluding Western Australia and the NT. It brings total cases (so far) in Australia to 9,605. Victoria has recorded 1,608 new cases. NSW has reported a record 6,394 Covid cases. The ACT has recorded 71 new local cases. Tasmania has recorded 44 new cases. South Australia has recorded 774 new Covid cases, prompting the return of some restrictions in the state.. There have been 714 Covid cases detected in Queensland. Tennis player Denis Shapovalov, who is part of Canada’s team for January’s ATP Cup, has tested positive for Covid in Sydney. Shapovalov played at the World Tennis Championship in Abu Dhabi last week, where he defeated Rafael Nadal in the third-place play-off match. Nadal also tested positive for the virus after playing at the tournament, as did Belinda Bencic and Tunisian Ons Jabeur. Shapovalov said his symptoms were minor. The ATP prefaces the Australian Open, due to kick-off in mid-January. The Dominican Republic has identified its first case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19, the health ministry of the Caribbean country said on Saturday and Reuters reports. In a statement on Twitter, the ministry said Omicron had been identified in a person with mild symptoms who had arrived in the country from South Africa. The ministry also said it had later been informed by Chilean authorities that a person who traveled to Chile from the Dominican Republic had tested positive for Omicron. Other potential cases of Omicron are under investigation. NSW shadow minister for health Ryan Park has responded to health minister Brad Hazzard’s comments about the Omicron variant earlier today. Hazzard said it was inevitable everyone in the state would get Omicron, which was what made vaccination rates particularly crucial: It’s not good enough for the premier to say ‘we’re all going to get Omicron’. He’s the leader of the state, where’s the planning and where’s the resources and where’s the leadership? Where’s the plans for hospitals? For health workers? Are there enough resources for testing clinics to cope with demand? We’ve got many people in NSW with Covid symptoms or positive RAT tests without access to a PCR test. Many clinics are closed for the next few days. That’s not good enough. South Australia has tightened public health and social restrictions in response to the rapidly spreading Omicron variant of the virus. Gyms will return to density limits of one person per seven square metres, effective immediately. From midnight, hospitality venues will return to one person per four square metres density limits for indoor dining. Home gatherings will be reduced to 10 people. The state was due to further ease restrictions on 28 December. PCR tests will no longer be mandatory for interstate arrivals. Back in Australia, South Australia has recorded 774 new Covid cases from more than 20,000 tests - another record day of case numbers. It is up from 634 cases detected on Christmas Day as the Omicron variant continues to spread. There are 17 people currently being treated in hospital, including three in intensive care. Some 93% of eligible South Australians have received their first dose of a vaccine. China has reported 206 new Covid cases on Christmas Day, a significant jump from 140 a day earlier, its health authority said on Sunday and Reuters reports. Of the new infections, 158 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, compared with 87 cases the previous day. Most of the new local cases were in the northwestern province of Shaanxi. China also reported 29 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, up from 24 a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636. Mainland China had 101,077 confirmed cases as of 25 December. Many Covid testing clinics are closed in Queensland today for the Boxing Day public holiday, but five-day testing after arrival to the state is still mandatory, causing a backlog. Still in Australia, Queensland has reported 715 new Covid cases, bringing active cases in the state to 2,857. There are seven patients being treated in hospital, and none requiring intensive care. It comes as Omicron becomes the dominant strain in the state, accounting for about 75% of new cases. Chief health officer John Gerrard said the fall in case numbers from the previous day followed a testing lull on Christmas Day, and warned case numbers would increase in the coming days: It won’t surprise us at all if within the next couple of days if the numbers get substantially higher. We would not be too concerned at that, that would not be a surprise. If you’re just joining us, here is a summary of recent major developments. Cases are continuing to rise in Australia. New South Wales recorded a record 6,394 cases, while Victoria recorded 1,608 new Covid cases. The NSW health minister has urged residents to reconsider whether they need to call an ambulance or go to hospital due to staff furloughs, warning everyone in the state was likely to be infected with Omicron. Testing centre delays were still hitting Australian states and territories, with some reaching capacity before opening on Boxing Day. France recorded a record high of 104,611 Covid-19 infections on Saturday, breaking the 100,000 threshold for the first time since the pandemic began. Italy reported a third successive record tally of Covid-19 cases on Christmas Day, Reuters reports. New cases reached 54,762 compared to 50,599 a day earlier, the health ministry said. Record cases are being reported in Ireland and in China, where authorities are imposing strict lockdowns to contain the outbreaks. Local transmission is rising in China and its Xi’an province is now allowing only one member of a household to leave their home for necessities every two days. More than 5,400 flight cancellations have thrown the Christmas travel schedule into chaos. Omicron has meant airlines could not staff flights. A quarter of cancelled flights were in the United States. New Covid measures in England could be in place until late March under measures examined by the UK government’s scientific advisers, including a ban on socialising with another household indoors and a return to the rule of six outdoors, in line with the Step 2 restrictions in place in England earlier this year India’s prime minister Narendra Modi has announced vaccinations for children under 15 and booster jabs for healthcare and frontline workers. The Omicron variant has become the dominant strain in Portugal, making up almost two-thirds of cases since Wednesday. Schools, bars and clubs are closed until 10 January. There were queues at vaccination centres in England, kept open in some areas to allow walk-in appointments as the government encourages booster shots to counter the surge caused by the Omicron variant. The Nigerian president’s top media aide Garba Shehu said on Saturday that he has tested positive for coronavirus and was in isolation. Back in Australia, the ACT has recorded 71 new Covid cases on Boxing Day. Some 21 new exposure sites have been added to the government’s website in response to rising cases. It is half the record 142 new cases reported on Christmas Day. Meanwhile, ACT Health hasn’t updated waiting times at Covid testing clinics since 10am, when all were closed or at capacity. “We are experiencing high demand for testing. Please do not queue on the roads,” the website states. Serbian media is reporting star tennis player Novak Djokovic won’t play in the ATP Cup due to take place in Sydney in January. He will make a decision on the Australian Open before the new year. Djokovic has refused to disclose his vaccination status, which is mandatory in order to play at the Australian Open unless he receives a medical exemption. In Australia, the Queensland treasurer Cameron Dick has lashed out at the New South Wales health response to the virus. The state has been reporting daily record case numbers of Covid-19. The NSW health minister earlier today acknowledged hospital staff were being “run off their feet”. Dick: This is a state that let the virus get out of control and it caused untold damage to lives, livelihoods and to business ... and we look at the hundreds of lives that were lost. People of NSW are naturally very concerned. It comes as three-quarters of Covid patients in Queensland in the past two weeks are revealed to have been under the age of 35. Israel has ordered 100,000 units of Pfizer Inc’s antiviral Covid-19 pill Paxlovid for people aged 12 and over at risk of severe illness, Reuters reports. It is the first pill developed specifically to treat Covid-19. An Israeli official confirmed the announcement on Saturday, after Channel 12 TV said Israeli prime minister Naftali Bennett agreed the deal in a phone conversation with Pfizer CEO Albert Bourla. There was no immediate confirmation from the company. Paxlovid, the first oral and at home treatment for Covid, is nearly 90% effective in preventing hospitalisations and deaths in patients at high risk of severe illness, according to Pfizer’s clinical trial. Pfizer said recent lab data suggested it retained effectiveness against the Omicron variant of the virus. The FDA approved the antiviral pill three days ago. In South Korea, three members of K-pop sensation BTS test have tested positive for Covid-19 following their return from the US, AFP reports. The South Korean group gave their first in-person concerts since the start of the pandemic in Los Angeles, which took place from late November to early this month. They have been on holiday since then, and each of the three infected members returned to South Korea on different dates. They are all fully vaccinated, and none have had any contact with other group members after their return. Rapper RM and vocalist Jin tested positive for the virus Saturday evening, according to Big Hit Music. The announcement came a day after the agency confirmed that Suga, another member of the septet, was “administering self-care at home” following a positive test. While RM and Suga are asymptomatic, Jin has mild fever, the agency said. Among the three, RM and Suga received their positive tests while still in self-quarantine after arriving back home, while Jin was released from quarantine after testing negative and received his positive result later. Big Hit Music said in a statement the company would put its “highest priority on the health and safety of our artists”. As Christmas arrives around the world, a surge of Covid infections is keeping many families apart, overwhelming hospitals and scaling back religious ceremonies as the Omicron variant continues to spread. I’m Caitlin Cassidy here to bring you major Covid developments around the world. Pope Francis has used his Christmas address to pray for more vaccines to reach the developing world, while in England, Queen Elizabeth II has noted another year of pain after losing her husband, Prince Philip, in April, acknowledging Christmas can be hard for “those who have lost loved ones”. Cases are continuing to rise in Australia, where New South Wales earlier recorded a record 6,394 cases. The NSW health minister has urged residents to reconsider whether they need to call an ambulance or go to hospital due to staff furloughs, warning everyone in the state was likely to be infected with Omicron. France recorded a record high of 104,611 Covid-19 infections on Saturday, breaking the 100,000 threshold for the first time since the pandemic began, and Italy reported a third successive record tally of Covid-19 cases on Christmas Day. Meanwhile, some 5,400 flight cancellations have thrown the Christmas travel schedule into chaos. Omicron has meant airlines could not staff flights, with quarter of cancelled flights in the United States. Let’s dive in.Six years after Barnaby Joyce threatened to euthanise dogs belonging to Amber Heard and Johnny Depp, Heard appears to have had the last laugh, naming her new four-legged friend after Australia’s deputy prime minister. On Monday the actor posted a photograph on Twitter showing herself holding up a large scruffy white dog with the caption: “Meet the newest member of the Heard family, Barnaby Joyce!” In May 2015 Joyce, who was also agriculture minister at the time, gave Heard and her then partner, Johnny Depp, an ultimatum after they brought their two yorkshire terriers Pistol and Boo to Australia without permission: send them back to the US or have them put down. Joyce was firm on the application of the law, saying at the time that the rules could not be relaxed, even for someone who had twice been voted sexiest man alive. The two dogs were flown back to the US and Heard was subsequently charged with two counts of illegally importing dogs into Australia and one count of producing a false document. The saga seemingly concluded in April 2016 when Heard and Depp pleaded guilty to the dog-smuggling charges. Heard was placed on a $1,000 good behaviour bond and the couple recorded a strange video apology in which they laud Australia’s “treasure trove of unique plants and animals”. At the time, the footage was compared to a hostage video. The animosity between the actors and the politician endured, and Depp took the chance to describe Joyce as appearing to be “inbred with a tomato” during a talkshow appearance later that year. Heard is now the owner of Pistol and Boo, after her split from Depp in 2017.A prominent Māori leader has called for a dramatic response to what he labels Australia’s attempts to turn New Zealand into a “dumping ground” for criminals, suggesting Jacinda Ardern’s government should “turn the planes around”. The executive chairman of the National Māori Authority, Matthew Tukaki, also raised concerns about a potential increase in gun violence in Auckland, saying the city “could see gangland wars similar to those that occurred in both Sydney and Melbourne in the early 2000s if we are not careful”. Tukaki waded into the longstanding trans-Tasman row over the Australian government’s policy of deporting non-citizens who have been sentenced to at least a year in prison. “New Zealand has got to stop being the dumping ground for Australian criminals,” he said in an interview on Monday. “Quite frankly, I don’t think any Australian would accept their country becoming a penal colony.” Tukaki said the New Zealand government had raised its concerns with the deportation policy over many years, but the Australian government was “not listening”, so it was time “to play hardball”. “It seems to me the only way the Australians will listen, so we can sit down together and sort this issue out, is that those Australian government-chartered planes should not be allowed to land in New Zealand,” he said. “In other words, let’s take a page out of the John Howard playbook. ‘We will determine who comes to this country and the means by which they come’ - and don’t let them land.” In an earlier media release, Tukaki mentioned the Howard government’s refusal in 2001 to allow the MV Tampa – a Norwegian ship that had rescued 433 asylum seekers from a sinking vessel en route to Christmas Island – to land on Australian territory. “Australia should be used to that given what they did with the Tampa all those years ago,” he said in a statement. “Turn the planes around.” The long-simmering row between Australia and New Zealand stems from the use of section 501 of Australia’s Migration Act, which allows the cancellation of visas on character grounds, and which is most likely to be used against New Zealand nationals. The number of cancellations under the policy has increased nearly tenfold in under a decade, largely as a result of the Australian government tightening the law to say the minister must revoke the visa if a person has been sentenced to 12 months or more in prison. In 2020-21, 946 visas were cancelled under section 501 – including 197 for drug offences and 108 for assault. Of these 946 visas cancelled, 402 were New Zealand nationals, followed by 101 from the United Kingdom. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A spokesperson for Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, said the government routinely removed “foreign nationals from a range of countries who commit serious offences in Australia”. They said the Australian people expected the government to protect “the safety and security of our community”. “Violent foreign offenders who do serious harm in our community do not belong here and will not be allowed to stay under this government’s policies.” But Tukaki said it would improve the safety of communities in both Australia and New Zealand if the two countries set up a joint task force to work through the issue “instead of just deporting the problem away”. He said the countries had a special connection, meaning that people may have moved to Australia at a very young age. He said such people, for all intents and purposes, were Australians and not New Zealanders. “Some of these deportees come with very long and concerning rap sheets, others fairly basic minor offences. But a great many of these New Zealanders - they are made and a product of the Australian environment,” he said. “And given the rise in gun violence, given the rise of gang activity in our country, we’re talking about these people who have learned their trade in Australia. It’s an Australian problem. It’s not a New Zealand one.” In the earlier statement, reported by the New Zealand Herald and other outlets, Tukaki cited “concerns for the last several years that new gangs and chapters are getting a foothold in New Zealand because of the rising tide of returnees known as the 501s”. “The truth is these violent thugs and criminals don’t care two hoots about the community, they don’t care about culture or tikanga,” he said, referring to Māori customary practices or behaviours. He said the Australian environment had given them “connections” and “supply chains”. Australia’s Department of Home Affairs said on Monday the relationship with New Zealand was “amongst our closest and longest lasting”. The department said it had “implemented processes to reduce the impact of removals on the New Zealand community, through provision of advanced notice and improved information sharing arrangements”. “The department continues to consult closely with New Zealand authorities to manage this process.” In 2020, Ardern publicly rebuked her Australian counterpart, Scott Morrison, over the deportation policy, declaring that New Zealand would “own our people [and] we ask that Australia stops exporting theirs”. Tukaki’s suggestion to “turn the planes around” mirrors the Australian government’s language to “turn back” asylum-seeker boats – an element of Operation Sovereign Borders introduced in 2013 when Morrison was immigration minister. Australia’s then home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, triggered a political backlash in New Zealand in March by characterising the transfer of deportees across the Tasman as “taking the trash out” to “make Australia a safer place”. Dutton brushed off the criticism, telling parliament at the time that he was “proud of this government for the way in which we have kicked these people out of our country”. He said the Australian government would make no apology for its policy of “cancelling visas of dangerous criminals, of people that have committed serious offences against Australian citizens”.It is more than 13 years since Nato’s Bucharest summit, the meeting that agreed that the western alliance wanted the former Soviet states of Ukraine and Georgia to become members. But in many respects the legacy of that April 2008 meeting – the last attended by Vladimir Putin – hangs over the Ukraine crisis today. George W Bush arrived in an expansionist, post-cold war mindset pushing for Ukraine and Georgia to be given a roadmap to Nato membership. Granting them a so-called membership action plan would allow the two countries to follow a string of former eastern bloc states that had been allowed to join since 1999. Putin, however, addressed the assembled leaders at the start of the meeting, describing such a move as a “direct threat” to Russian security. “I remember him clearly saying to Angela Merkel and Bush: ‘For me Ukraine is not a real country’,” said Jamie Shea, who spent 38 years inside Nato. Putin’s language helped produce a partial retreat – and a problematic compromise. “There was furious haggling with Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy [the then French president] and the result was that Ukraine would be offered membership in the future, but there would be no membership action plan, no firm date to join Nato,” Shea said. As a result the issue was allowed to linger, with Nato and its members not fully committed to Ukraine. “I was actually present,” said Jens Stoltenberg, Nato’s secretary general, at a press appearance with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, last week. “We stand by that decision.” But the half-promise remains an open sore to Russia’s long-serving leader, obsessed by the two nations’ long, pre-1991 history as one country. “I am confident that true sovereignty of Ukraine is possible only in partnership with Russia,” Putin wrote in a historical essay released by the Kremlin in July. “For we are one people.” During this winter’s crisis Russia has massed an estimated 100,000 troops to the north, east and south of Ukraine, prompting fears among Nato allies of an invasion and a conflict “on a scale not seen since world war two”, according to Britain’s new head of the armed forces, Adm Sir Tony Radakin. But in the past week the attention-seeking Kremlin has pivoted to a series of diplomatic demands. Russia presented a draft security treaty to the US before making it public. Its provisions say the US should prevent Ukraine and Georgia and other former Soviet states from joining Nato. It also insists the US should not establish military bases or even engage in “bilateral military cooperation” with Ukraine or any other non-Nato, former Soviet state – an attempt to carve out a clearly defined Russian sphere of influence. Such an idea is clearly controversial, particularly in eastern Europe, where memories of communist domination linger. “Russia’s proposed two draft treaties on 17 December outline the establishment of a two-tier Europe – one with the right to defend itself from Russian encroachment while the other must accept Russian supremacy as a new geopolitical reality,” wrote Orysia Lutsevych, an analyst with the Chatham House thinktank, in a recent paper. Other experts argue that Nato has become overconfident. Joshua Shifrinson, an associate professor of international relations at Boston University, said the US and the west “in the grand sweep of post-cold war relationships have become less sensitive to Russian concerns”, losing sight of the idea that the Kremlin too has vital interests. He added: “Russia does not want other political groupings present near their homeland. That’s not a hard thing to understand. Imagine if China were to form an alliance with Canada. Powerful states don’t want other powers forming alliances near their borders.” Shifrinson, a historian, said that at the end of the cold war, US and German strategists had given “very clear signals” that Nato would not expand farther eastward if Germany were allowed to reunite. But this sphere of influence commitment was quickly dropped in the 1990s and early part of the 2000s as Russia struggled as an independent country and a string of eastern bloc countries joined Nato and the EU. Critics of this thinking argue that if anything, Nato’s recent support for Ukraine has been too slight. “It’s a lack of resolute action in the past that has taught Russia that it [can] upscale and descale a crisis whenever they want it,” said William Alberque, an American former Nato official and now the director of the International Institute for Strategic Studies thinktank. “Russia has all the momentum in the current crisis,” he added, as the US and Nato have agreed to hold talks with Kremlin diplomats in the new year. Ukraine has already had to endure the war of 2014, when Russia seized Crimea and helped create a crisis leading to separatists holding the eastern Donbas region, where an unresolved, low-intensity conflict has claimed the lives of an estimated 14,000. Nato allies have responded with a steady but modest level of military support since 2014. A hundred or so US military trainers are based in the west of the country, a long way from the frontline. Washington has provided $2.5bn in military aid, including Javelin anti-tank missiles, since Russia’s seizure of Crimea, part of a gradual strategy to modernise Kyiv’s forces and officially a precursor to Ukraine being given a path to Nato membership. More irritating to the Kremlin has been Kyiv’s purchase of at least six TB2 drones from Turkey, whose effectiveness against Russian-made armour was demonstrated in last year’s short Nagorno-Karabakh war when used by Azerbaijan against Armenia. Deploying the drones, Putin told his Turkish counterpart, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, in an early December phone call, was “provocative”. Nato repeatedly stresses it represents no military threat to Russia. Earlier this month, for example, the UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said it was “highly unlikely” that western troops would be sent to defend Ukraine if attacked. But Shifrinson said that even if the west believed it was treading mildly, it had to better understand how its actions were perceived. “Moscow understands that Ukraine is not being armed to the teeth or anchored in the west tomorrow, but at the same time it is asking where Ukraine will go in the future.”Lockdown restrictions have been tightened in the Chinese city of Xi’an, which is battling the largest community outbreak the country has seen since the initial months of the pandemic when China brought thousands of daily infections under control. Authorities reported 162 new community infections on Monday, up from 158 on Sunday. All but 10 of Monday’s new cases were reported in Shaanxi province, where 13 million residents of the capital Xi’an have been forced to stay in their homes for five days. The lockdown is the first time China had implemented such severe measures since 2020, as authorities continue to doggedly pursue a “zero Covid” approach to stamp out all local infections ahead of the Beijing Winter Olympics in February. Since the coronavirus first emerged in the central city of Wuhan in late 2019, China has largely kept the pandemic at bay with tight border restrictions, lengthy quarantines and targeted lockdowns. It has officially recorded only two deaths in over a year. While low by international standards, the new case number marks the highest count of local symptomatic infections since March 2020, when the daily bulletin provided by the National Health Commission started to classify asymptomatic carriers separately. On Saturday, the country recorded the highest daily rise in local cases in 21 months as infections more than doubled in Xi’an. In total there have been 635 confirmed coronavirus cases during the 9 to 26 December period. A fourth round of mandatory testing day was under way in Xi’an – home to the world-famous Terracotta Warriors - as hundreds of health workers were deployed to detect new infections in a bid to stamp out virus spread. The city, a two hour flight southwest of Beijing, also launched a disinfection campaign, with staffers spraying pathogen-killing solutions on surfaces of roads and buildings. Residents are advised not to touch plants after the disinfection. About 3,000 stations were set up to carry out testing on all residents, according to state media. More than 45,000 medical volunteers have also joined efforts to curb the spread of the virus, according to the Shaanxi provincial government. Authorities were investigating 17,527 residents who have been identified as close contacts, while 41,671 people are serving mandatory hotel quarantine. State media reported medical staff at testing centres suffered from swollen hands after conducting hundreds of tests in the cold. The main causes of the rise in numbers were more cases being detected during mandatory testing, and the spread of new clusters in more districts, Zhang Yi, Director of the Infectious Disease Prevention and Control Institute of the Shaanxi Provincial Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Sunday. Authorities have deployed one security personnel for every 10 residents in 283 allocated “closed areas” in the city, where a “door-to-door” service is provided and no residents are allowed to leave their homes. Only one person from each household in another 229 “controlled areas” is allowed to leave their homes every other day for two hours to buy daily necessities, according to regulations issued by Shaanxi authorities. Authorities imposed a snap lockdown on Xi’an’s residents on Thursday, suspending means of transport to and from the city except for emergencies requiring official approval and mostly confining residents to their homes. The rising numbers triggered some parts of the city to implement even tighter restrictions on residents on Monday. Residents at the Xi’an National Hi-tech Industries Development Zone from Monday morning were only allowed to leave their homes to undergo mandatory testing or receive medical treatment, with only one designated member of the family being allowed to buy necessities once every three days, according to local media. Chinese medical expert and former delegate to the National People’s Congress Zhang Boli told state media CNWest on Sunday he believed it was “entirely possible” that the outbreak would be under control by late January.Misty. Dank. Grim. Dusk falls just after you get up. December. I step on to the terrace for my daily minute of fresh air. Everything is hunkered down, biding its time. A single yellow leaf clings to the pear tree. Outlines of buildings are softened by grey. Despite its inviting appearance, the strip of lawn winding down to the shed is more bog than grass. Dog barks. Traffic rumbles. A robin gives the world the briefest ribbon of song. Then silence. A south London morning. TSIB-A-TSAB-A-TSOO-DIDDY-DABBLE-IDDY-WODDA-TSIPP-A-BRRRR-TSIP-TSIP-TSIP-TSIP-TSIP-TJOP-TSRRRRRRRRRRR-TS’TJUPP-TJUPP-TJUPP-TJUPP! Mate, keep it down, will you? That quivering energy, electrifying the air. Your instinct is to look for something out in the open, medium-sized, obvious. But that piercing sound often comes from deep in a bush, and its producer is almost comically tiny. It is – what else? – the wren. Jenny to its friends, “hedge king” (Zaunkönig) if you’re German. I call it Tiny Shouter. They’re year-round singers – a rare thing. And there’s nothing quite like a wren – stub tail cocked at 90 degrees, belting out its song as if determined to jump-start the universe – to enliven a drab December day. Soul recharger in avian form. At this time of year, such an encounter brings to mind the Saint Stephen’s Day custom, particularly associated with Ireland and the Isle of Man, of “Hunting the Wren” – an old ritual which, to modern sensibilities, seems unnecessarily cruel. The wren – hunted, caught and either caged or killed before being paraded through the town – might have been punished for betraying Saint Stephen’s whereabouts, he being the first Christian martyr, or it might have been a sacrifice of thanksgiving for the year past and hope for the year to come. Nobody really knows the origins. Whatever they are, nowadays a fake wren stands in for the real thing. I wait, hoping for a repeat. I am partly rewarded. TSIB-A-TSAB-A-TSOO-DIDDY-DABBLE-IDDY. A flurry of activity in the hazel. A feathered missile whirs low across the garden, perches on the fence for a second, then ducks down out of sight. I am not inclined to hunt it down. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe constellation of Perseus, the Greek hero, remains prominent at this time of year, and is well worth tracking down. The chart shows the view looking west from London at midnight on Monday, when the constellation will appear to be on its side. The star Atik marks Perseus’s ankle, and Mirfak, the brightest star in the constellation, marks either his elbow or part of his torso, depending on the artist. Perseus is one of the original 48 constellations catalogued by the second-century Greek astronomer Ptolemy. In myth, he is the hero who saves Andromeda from Cetus, the sea monster, after she was chained to the rocks in punishment. He performed his feat by revealing the severed head of the gorgon Medusa to Cetus, turning the creature to stone. In some tellings of the myth, he rode the winged horse of Pegasus as part of the adventure. In the constellation, Medusa’s head is represented by the star Algol. In Arabic, the star’s full name is ra’s al-ghul, which means the ghoul’s head. Perseus can also be seen from much of the southern hemisphere. From Sydney, Australia, for example, the constellation just peeps over the northern horizon.It was a year of fire and storms, of crumbling cliffs and falling trees, all of which put a huge strain on flora and fauna, according to an annual audit of the impact of the weather on nature in the UK. There were many losers, including rare birds and mammals displaced by blazes on uplands in the north of England and Northern Ireland, but also winners, from crickets heard singing for the first time in newly colonised places to the grey seals that enjoyed a good breeding season despite the turmoil. The National Trust said this helter-skelter picture was the new normal because of the climate emergency, and age-old patterns of nature and the very shape of the UK were undergoing quick – and permanent – change. “Climate change is making some forms of extreme weather events the new normal,” said Ben McCarthy, the head of nature conservation and restoration ecology at the conservation charity. “Heatwaves and heavy rainfall are becoming more frequent and more intense. What we’re seeing in the UK, with the impacts of wildfires and severe storms such as Arwen, is how climate change is altering our landscapes for ever.” Lowlights of 2021 included wildfires taking hold at Marsden Moor in Yorkshire and the Mourne Mountains in Northern Ireland after long dry spells. In Yorkshire the habitat of birds such as the curlew, golden plover and short-eared owl was harmed, while in Northern Ireland skylark, meadow pipit and snipe, plus the Irish hare, were badly hit. In November Storm Arwen wreaked havoc on parts of northern Britain, uprooting thousands of trees including cherished specimens, such as a champion coast redwood at Bodnant Garden in north Wales. Warmer, wetter winters are resulting in diseases such as ash dieback taking hold and causing significant loss of trees, affecting landscapes and habitats. At least 30,000 ash trees are expected to be felled this winter because of ash dieback, at a cost of £3m, up from £2m last year, the National Trust says. On the Dorset coast, 90 metres of cliff crumbled in April, again probably because of the prolonged dry spell, changing the shape of that stretch of coast. It was a poor year for butterfly numbers, and scientists are still puzzling over the mysterious deaths of seabirds off the east coast. “Extreme events are putting even more pressure on Britain’s wildlife, which is already in trouble,” said McCarthy. “We finish the year with many places changed for ever by the recent storms, demonstrating the power of nature, the changing climate and how our role in its future is even more critical. “What is absolutely clear is that we need to tackle both the climate and nature crises as they are integrally linked and we need to make urgent progress with both. Our nature is part of what makes the UK unique and we must all play our part to protect it.” It may or may not turn out to be a good year for toads on the Lizard peninsula in Cornwall, the most south-westerly point of mainland Britain. Toadspawn was spotted as early as mid-November. If they are lucky, the toadlets will be off and independent before the puddles and ponds dry out in spring, but if not they may fall victim to frost. Wildlife winners and losers in 2021 Wildflowers There were early hazel catkins in the winter and carpets of bee orchids in the summer at clifftop locations such as the Golden Cap estate in Dorset, thanks to a dry March and warm June, but further along the coast at Thorncombe Beacon, slippages of clay hit the beautiful populations of the pinkish herb common centaury. Butterflies Butterfly Conservation’s Big Butterfly Count recorded the lowest numbers since the event began 12 years ago. Some of the UK’s most loved species, including the small tortoiseshell and peacock butterflies, dropped. Numbers of the endangered large blue were down at National Trust sites in Somerset and Gloucestershire, where the species was introduced in 2019, because of the cool spring. Birds The chilly April and rain and gales in May led to a poor nesting season for many species. Barn owls abandoned nesting areas at Mount Stewart in Northern Ireland, while lapwings at Blakeney Freshes in Norfolk were put off by the cold ground conditions. In late summer guillemots and razorbills were found dead or dying along the east coast of Scotland and northern England. The reason remains unclear. Swallows, house martins and swifts arrived late in the season, probably put off by persistent northerly winds in the spring. Fungi A bumper year for grassland fungi, especially waxcaps, owing to a warm, damp autumn with little or no frost. In Herefordshire, conservationists discovered a striking alien species called devil’s fingers (also known as octopus stinkhorn) introduced to Europe accidentally from Australia or New Zealand. Seals, dormice and squirrels Grey seal colonies have had a good year, with pup numbers healthy thanks to the lack of predators and plentiful food. Dormice on the Holnicote estate in Exmoor did well, with good numbers seen during box checks in the autumn. Three red squirrel kittens were born on Brownsea Island in Dorset, one of the latest second litters the team has recorded. Interesting sights and sounds More than 100 species of spiders were recorded at Clumber park in Nottinghamshire, including the critically endangered diamond-backed spider. A small red-eyed damselfly was seen at Wenlock Edge in Shropshire, an indication that it is spreading north in response to climate change. An Italian tree cricket was heard singing at West Bexington in Dorset. This sound of the Mediterranean has been heard in Kent for several years and tree crickets now seem to be colonising other places.Television is going through a golden age but viewers are so spoilt for choice there is a danger people miss the good stuff, the actor Jamie Dornan has said. Dornan is about to be seen on film in Kenneth Branagh’s Belfast and on television in BBC One’s six-part thriller The Tourist. In an interview with the Radio Times, he said it was a golden age of television, but that came with danger. “We are so spoilt for choice,” he said. “And you’ve also got that ability now where if you’re not enjoying it, you move on to the next thing. Which I think is a bit dangerous. “You know, it’s sad. How many times do we watch stuff and say: ‘I wasn’t sure – it took me three episodes to get into it.’ But it’s still hard to get stuff made. If you’ve got to the stage of getting it made, chances are there’s something good in there, and you’ve just got to give it a chance.” Dornan was a hugely successful model before turning to acting with a smouldering appearance in Sofia Coppola’s 2006 film Marie Antoinette, which led to a piece in the New York Times headlined “The Golden Torso”. His breakthrough came as the sexy serial killer in the BBC drama series The Fall, starring alongside Gillian Anderson. He gained further stardom, as well as much derision, for his portrayal of Christian Grey in the film adaptation of the sadomasochistic romp Fifty Shades of Grey. That was followed by the critically panned Fifty Shades Darker and Fifty Shades Freed. The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw described Dornan’s performances in Fifty Shades of Grey as “strictly daytime soap”. His performance in Belfast, on the other hand, has been widely praised, with speculation that he may make it on to the best supporting actor Oscar shortlist. The film goes on general release next month but has already picked up five-star reviews from festival screenings. In The Tourist, Dornan plays a nameless British man who wakes up in the Australian outback with amnesia and who is being pursued by dangerous, shady figures from his past. At the start of the year, while Dornan was quarantining in an Australian hotel before the shoot, his father, Prof Jim Dornan, an obstetrician and gynaecologist, died from Covid. “We’ve all had some sort of testing experience, albeit some more than others,” Dornan said. “As bad as the personal impact on me has been, I’m hoping that something positive comes out of Covid in that this will, in our lifetime, probably be the one thing that worldwide we’ve all experienced together. It’s impacted us all in different ways, of course, but hopefully will have a unifying quality.”A New York man charged with assaulting a police officer during the deadly Capitol riot has asked a judge for permission to use dating websites while confined at his parents’ house. Thomas Sibick, of Buffalo, was part of a mob that Trump urged to “fight like hell” to overturn his election defeat by Joe Biden. In a court filing on Christmas Day, his lawyer said he “realises that if he were to meet someone on a social media site, he would be unable to leave his home for the purpose of going to dinner or to participate in other events. He does, however, feel the need to establish some sort of connection with someone (if possible, in light of his situation).” Five people died around events at the Capitol on 6 January, including a police officer and a rioter shot by law enforcement. Lawmakers hid or were hustled to safety as some rioters sought figures including Vice-President Mike Pence to capture or possibly kill. Sibick, 36, awaits trial. He is alleged to have taken part in an “ongoing violent assault” of the former Washington police officer Michael Fanone, “ripping off [his] radio – his lifeline for help – and his badge”. Fanone was seriously injured and has become a leading voice seeking accountability for the rioters and those who urged them on, giving emotional testimony to the House select committee investigating the attack. He announced last week that he had resigned as a police officer, to join CNN. Earlier this year, Sibick sought to escape the company of other Capitol rioters in a Washington jail, even volunteering for solitary confinement. In October, Judge Amy Berman Jackson ordered Sibick to enter home confinement under supervision of his parents. He is not allowed to attend political rallies, use social media or watch talk shows on cable news. “There will only be one chance,” Judge Jackson said then. “If you violate my conditions, it will indicate my trust was misplaced.” Nonetheless, in a filing first reported by Business Insider, Sibick sought permission to use social media to look for a job and to “interact with members of the opposite gender for the purpose of establishing a friendship”. His attorney, Stephen Brennwald, wrote: “He is not seeking to use any social media application for any prohibited purpose, such as for political engagement, news reading, or any other activity that would violate not only the letter, but the spirit, of his release conditions.” Sibick has said he now views the Capitol attack as “without question unconscionable”, a “disgrace to our nation” and “a scar Trump is ultimately responsible for”. But he is among more than 700 people charged. Earlier this month, a man who attacked officers with a fire extinguisher was sentenced to more than five years in prison, the longest sentence yet handed down. Robert Palmer, 54 and from Florida, told a judge he now recognised that Trump and others stoked the riot by “spitting out the false narrative about a stolen election and how it was ‘our duty’ to stand up to tyranny”. “Little did I realise that they were the tyrannical ones desperate to hold on to power at any cost,” Palmer said, “even by creating the chaos they knew would happen with such rhetoric”. Trump was impeached for a second time for inciting an insurrection. Ten House Republicans and seven senators turned against him but he was still acquitted. Members of the House 6 January committee have indicated that they could recommend Trump be criminally charged.NHS staff treating Covid patients should be given much more protective facewear than thin surgical masks to help them avoid getting infected during the Omicron rise, doctors say. The British Medical Association (BMA), Hospital Consultants and Specialists Association (HCSA) and Doctors’ Association UK are calling for frontline personnel to be given FFP3 masks. Making the much higher-quality face masks standard issue would save the lives of health workers who fall ill as a result of treating Covid patients, the BMA said. “At this critical point in the pandemic this is extremely urgent – a matter of life and death,” said Prof Raymond Agius, the acting chair of the doctors’ union’s occupational health committee. FFP3 masks, also known as filtering facepiece respirators, have been shown in a trial in Addenbrooke’s hospital in Cambridge to reduce the number of healthcare staff who become infected. However, the Department of Health and Social Care’s (DHSC) guidance on personal protective equipment, updated last week, only recommends their use in limited circumstances. “With a high transmissible new strain now circulating, and clear evidence that Covid-19 spreads in small airborne particles, healthcare workers must be given the best possible protection against the virus. Surgical masks don’t give the necessary protection against airborne transmission of Covid,” Agius said. The BMA has written to every hospital trust in England demanding that any health professional treating patients who are or may be Covid-positive should be routinely issued with FFP3s, which are much more expensive than the surgical masks usually provided. Surgical masks are “unsuitable” given the threat Covid poses, the BMA believes. In its letter it has reminded hospital chief executives of their legal responsibilities as employers to keep their staff safe from harm, including by providing FFP3s. A handful of hospitals are understood to already issued FFP3 respirators as standard, but most do not. Dr Claudia Paoloni, the president of the HCSA, said that giving staff proper PPE would help reduce the fast-growing tide of sickness absence among frontline workers who are getting Covid. “If we don’t get PPE right we risk contributing to a further wave of sickness absences when hospitals and patients can least afford it. “The current reliance on inadequate fluid-resistant surgical masks is likely to leave staff vulnerable in enclosed hospital settings,” Paoloni said. “The fear, as in 2020, is that we are seeing a cavalier approach to safety where infection control guidelines are once again being driven by supply issues and cost. “We need hospitals to see sense and take a precautionary approach,” by making FFP3s available to anyone who wants to use one instead of a surgical mask, Paoloni added. The BMA has also written to NHS England asking it to ensure all GP practices are also issued with FFP3s instead of surgical masks, particularly because family doctors often work in small, cramped surgeries. “Healthcare workers in hospitals and GP surgeries are putting themselves and potentially their own families at risk, particularly with this new, highly transmissible Omicron variant,” said Dr Vishal Sharma, the chair of the BMA’s pensions committee. The DHSC’s updated guidance, published last Tuesday, says “staff should assess any likely blood and body fluid exposure risk and ensure PPE is worn that provides adequate protection against the risks associated with the procedure or task being undertaken”. However, it only advises frontline staff to use an FFP3 if they are undertaking an aerosol-generating procedure, such as intubating a patient who is going on to a mechanical ventilator, and not with Covid patients generally. A DHSC spokesperson confirmed that it does not plan to recommend routine use of FFP3 masks. “The safety of the NHS and social care staff has always been our top priority and we continue to deliver PPE to protect those on the frontline. “Guidance on the appropriate levels and standards of PPE is written by clinical experts. Updated infection prevention control guidance was published this month to reflect the latest scientific understanding on how to prevent transmission of Covid-19. “Emerging evidence and data are continually monitored and reviewed and guidance will be amended accordingly if appropriate.”A funeral for Covid victims, Mumbai Divyakant Solanki/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock 23 April I was staying on the outskirts of Mumbai when news broke that there was a fire in one of the hospitals dealing with Covid patients. I rushed over to find them shifting patients to other hospitals; they said more than 10 people had died already as a result. The funeral was devastating. There were 10 to 12 Covid victims laid out on the funeral pyre with their relatives gathered around, many of them in tears. Dealing with the emotions of relatives and loved ones is the most difficult part of covering events as a photojournalist. Civic workers, such as the man in this photo, had a very important role in funerals during Covid – they were the only people allowed to issue last rites. Sadly, there wasn’t nearly enough PPE for relatives to be able to enter the funeral ground or touch the bodies of their dead family members. This photo is very close to my heart; I have seen so many dead bodies over the past year, but it is difficult to capture the impact that has had on me, let alone the people who have lost relatives. I think seeing a man in PPE, sombrely walking between funeral pyres, shows the human toll of the pandemic. As told to Alex Mistlin Tunisian people wait for help on a wooden boat, Lampedusa, Italy Santi Palacios/AP 25 July We were sailing in international waters just south of the island of Lampedusa when we heard fishers calling through the radio, saying there was this small boat with 17 people in it that was taking on water and desperate for help. The most difficult thing about working at sea is having to work around the rescue operation. The sea route connecting Libya to Italy is one of the deadliest migrant routes in the world. You are in the middle of nowhere, which can be very challenging, especially at night. But when you are lucky and have enough light, or a full moon, you really get the chance to show how lonely the crossings are. I worry that it is not always apparent how extreme these situations are. People have already seen pictures of refugees drowning in the Mediterranean; everyone knows that it is going on. So, the goal is to take pictures that better convey the intensity of their experiences. AM Kim Kardashian at the Met Gala, New York Justin Lane/EPA 13 September I have been covering the Met Gala for a number of years. It is always a bizarre scene. Any red carpet is exciting, but it is such a weird mix of people: businesspeople, music stars, movie stars. There is a frenetic quality to the whole thing that means you can get two completely random celebrities standing next to each other. This is a funny picture, in some ways. To have somebody show up in this outfit, totally covered in black – it shows how celebrity is at a weird juncture. Of course, there are plenty of bizarre outfits at the Met Gala – there is a long procession of crazy outfits and celebrities trying to one-up one another – but being covered in black was so different that it caught my attention. Something really wacky, or really sexy, is almost more mundane. Kim Kardashian is always of great interest to people. It is so much about what she has decided to do in that moment. AM A house covered by ash on La Palma in the Canary Islands, Spain Emilio Morenatti/AP 30 October The first time I went to La Palma to cover the eruption of the Cumbre Vieja volcano, the exclusion zone was protected by police, which meant I wasn’t able to get close enough. This was taken on my second trip. I spotted a house on the horizon that was completely covered in ash. My first aim was just to go there on foot, but it wasn’t possible, because of the hot rocks and stones rolling down from the volcano. It can be really impersonal using a drone, but sometimes it is the only option – the only way of capturing the magnitude of the tragedy. The volcano continued to emit vast amounts of magma and ash for more than a month after the eruption. I saw a lot of houses covered completely, but this one was the most visually affecting, because the house is so isolated. It is such a clean snapshot of the devastation the volcano caused. The house is still standing, though. AM A nun pleads with the police in Myitkyina, Myanmar Myitkyina News Journal/AFP/Getty Images 8 March Having been the de facto leader of Myanmar since winning a landslide election in November 2015 and assuming the role of state counsellor in April 2016, Aung San Suu Kyi was deposed in a military coup on 1 February. In the resulting protests, hundreds of people – including dozens of children – were killed by the security forces. This shot, by an unattributed photographer, shows a nun in the northern city of Myitkyina remonstrating with police officers amid the crackdown. An Indonesian burial team in Yogyakarta, Java Ulet Ifansasti/Getty Images 12 August In July and August, Indonesia was really struggling to contain its Covid outbreak. I had the idea of photographing a burial team to show how Covid protocols were affecting every aspect of life in Indonesia. Yogyakarta was particularly badly hit by the Delta variant; you would hear ambulance sirens everywhere you went and the burial teams were at the frontline. It is them who have to deal with the situation when people go into hospital and don’t come out alive. I was at a hospital when, at about 11pm, I got the call to put on my hazmat suit and head to the cemetery. Covid protocols meant that people had to be distant from their family in their final moments. It was so sad seeing the families praying outside the cemeteries, knowing that their loved one’s burial was being left to a team of strangers in hazmat suits. AM Tom Daley knits before the men’s 10m platform final at the Olympics, Tokyo Clive Rose/Getty Images 7 August I have been photographing Tom since Beijing 2008. He is a joy to photograph. This was just before his 10m Olympic final. With the Covid protocols, there wasn’t enough time to go back and chill in the Olympic village, so he just found a quiet corner of the swimming pool, practically under the diving board, and got his knitting kit out. Him not having his shirt on adds a nice touch, because of the contrast between his masculinity – his washboard abs and athlete’s physique – and how relaxed he looks, knitting away. I just thought it was a nice moment, not necessarily for now, but to look back on in 20 or 30 years’ time. It was quite a strange Olympics, because of Covid, but for an athlete to start knitting in the middle of an Olympic competition was truly unique. It is very much in keeping with who he is, which is cool. Looking back, people probably remember the whole knitting thing better than him winning his medals. AM A mob attempts to breach the US Capitol, Washington DC Victor J Blue/Bloomberg 6 January I had covered a series of large rallies in DC around Trump’s Stop the Steal campaign. By 6 January, we were all prepared for violence around the city, mainly from far right or fascist groups, but anyone who says they knew what was going to happen is a liar. Trump came on stage to the adulation of the crowd, but after 10 or 15 minutes people began peeling away and marching up Pennsylvania Avenue. Maybe they had just heard it all before, but I felt pretty strongly that I needed to be at the front of that group. This picture was taken towards the end of the riot, just after they had breached Congress. I had already been inside with the rioters and was very close to the killing of Ashli Babbitt by a Capitol police officer. The US Congress is a huge building and there were maybe 2,000 protesters trying to breach a set of wooden doors and re-enter the building. Police units inside the building had run out of the chemical irritant they use for crowd control and had resorted to spraying fire extinguishers out the doors. That was when one protester stood at the entrance, spreading his arms in triumph, almost as if to celebrate Trump’s victory in that moment. AM Police detain a woman as people gather after the kidnap and murder of Sarah Everard, Clapham Common, London Hannah McKay/Reuters 13 March Sometimes London can lack a community feel – you don’t know your neighbours – so seeing so many people, particularly young women, come out for this woman whom none of them knew really added to the sense of emotion on the day. There was a lot of crying. There was a small group of protesters addressing hundreds of people from the bandstand. As it was still during Covid restrictions, the police eventually arrived to end the gathering, but many were determined to continue paying their respects. It went from a reflective, emotional scene to an angry one. That was when the police and protesters clashed. I was in the centre of the bandstand when the police began arresting protesters. There was a commotion and I have no idea how Patsy Stevenson came to be forced to the ground, but I have pictures of her on the floor, face down with her hands behind her back. People have said it looks like a painting – she looks so striking with her pale skin and red hair – but it was pitch black and I couldn’t use flash because of the police hi-vis jackets. There is all sorts of luck involved in the elements coming together in this image. I think the picture of a lone female protester being restrained by faceless male police officers helped to propel the story into a talking point; it became a symbol of anger. AM A fisher feeds whale sharks in Tan-Awan, the Philippines Hannah Reyes Morales/The New York Times/Eyevine 30 September I thought it was really interesting to explore how lockdown measures were affecting the relationship between Tan-Awan, a town in the Philippines, and a species in decline. Living in the Philippines, you often witness the tension between wildlife conservation and local communities. Feeding the whale sharks has an impact on their nutrition and migration patterns, while the sharks have abrasions from swimming too close to the boats. But the chance to swim with the world’s biggest fish draws tourists to the town. These fishers wouldn’t be doing this if they had more promising economic opportunities, so I don’t believe in making villains of the community for this practice. I was swimming with the camera, positioning it above and below the water and photographing as widely as I could. To get the entire shark, you have to be quite far away, but not so far that you sacrifice visibility. I find underwater photography challenging – the world is so different beneath the surface. It was important to me to have the shark and the sea warden in the same frame, as this photo is really about a complex interdependence. AM Tourists watch a volcano erupt, Iceland Arnar Kristjansson 9 April This was taken just as the second crater started to form. Earlier in the day, I was caught in a massive snowstorm and I was worried there would be no way to capture it on film. But I decided to wait around just in case the snow cleared; you can never trust the forecast in Iceland. It was weird seeing people standing so close. It can be very dangerous, mainly because of the gas, rather than the lava – if the wind changes direction, then people can get violently ill. There was a teenager taking TikTok videos of himself jumping fewer than five metres away. It was one of those pinch-yourself moments where you capture something truly surreal. The crater you can see in this photo died within a few days, but some of the others formed from this eruption lasted for months. The one here is the most photogenic, however. I think it is really quite beautiful. AM The last moments of an orphaned mountain gorilla, Virunga national park, Democratic Republic of the Congo Brent Stirton/Getty Images 21 September I have worked with those gorillas for quite a long time. I was in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2007, doing a story on how a group of rangers had gone to South Africa for paramilitary training, to combat the various militia groups that were operating in that park. Three days into that assignment, we heard that a group of severely endangered mountain gorillas had been killed. Since then, I have been returning to the park on a regular basis. In September, I was focused on documenting an operation to clear a group of militias out of the park. While I was there, Ndakasi wasn’t doing well. I went to cover a medical procedure they were doing with her. When she came out of anaesthesia, her caregiver, Andre Bauma, and two vets worked to resuscitate her. After that, she was very weak and crawled on top of Andre. Every part of her was on top of him, the same way a baby would. It was very childlike. The park knew she was very sick, but was hoping she would recover. Then things took a turn. It was very sombre. Once it was clear what was happening, I shot these frames and left, because it became a very personal moment between her and Andre. She was the only gorilla to survive that massacre in 2007. She was a baby and was found suckling her dead mother. It was very cold and babies can die of exposure very quickly. On that day, Andre became her caregiver. The story is he put her inside his shirt for warmth and walked about four miles through a dangerous area. There is a certain cycle to how she died, being close to him, being held by him again. As told to Emine Saner A girl in her destroyed home, Gaza Fatima Shbair/Getty Images 24 May I was on assignment for Getty Images that day to cover Gaza after the [Gaza-Israel] ceasefire agreement. I headed straight to Beit Hanoun – the neighbourhood had been hit while families were in their homes. I visited all the families there, heard their stories and went inside the destroyed houses, including the home of Raghad Naseer. Raghad accompanied me from one room to another, carrying her teddy bear. I asked Raghad about her room and she took me to it. She was quiet the whole time, with signs of shock and sadness on her face. She stood in her room in complete silence, contemplating what had happened to the neighbourhood through the destroyed wall, as if she could not comprehend it. Seeing Raghad in this state was very painful. In this picture, she was expressing the feelings of all the residents of the neighbourhood. It sums up everything that happened. I visited Raghad again this month. She and her family had to leave the neighbourhood and rent a small house far away. Raghad and her siblings suffer psychologically from what happened; they feel very upset at losing their home and being separated from their neighbours. Taking this picture made me think: my home could have been like this at any moment and I would have lived with the same feeling. I look at the people in Beit Hanoun and think how strong they are. ES Taliban fighters at Hamid Karzai International airport recite evening prayers, Kabul Jim Huylebroek/The New York Times/Eyevine 28 August This was taken a couple of weeks after the fall of Kabul. Outside the airport, it was complete chaos; it felt like everyone in the country was trying to get in. Just a couple of days prior, the [Islamic State offshoot] ISKP attack had killed hundreds. These men are special forces who have been deployed to secure the airport. It was very difficult getting access and, on my previous attempts, I had either been turned away or beaten. That day, I was determined to get in. When night fell, I made my way inside, before explaining to a group of Taliban fighters that I just needed a few photos of them inside the gate. One guy, the man you can see leading the prayers, started speaking English; he said I might be able to take some after prayers. I asked if I could take them during. Seeing the fighters praying with their modern military equipment, uniforms and helmets seemed like a good encapsulation of how the Taliban had transitioned from a guerrilla force to a modern military operation. This image is important to me personally, because it vindicated my decision to stay through August. It was a gamble, because we knew things would be uncertain once the Taliban took over, but I felt I had to be there to document the end of the global war on terror as we know it. AM Revellers at Bushwig, a drag extravaganza, New York Stephanie Keith/Reuters 12 September I attended the first Bushwig 10 years ago and was taken aback; it was freer, more avant garde, than anything I had seen previously. Since then, it has become probably the biggest drag festival in the world, with hundreds of performers over two days. It is a must-do event in New York City queer nightlife. That is Amanda Lepore. She is quite the character, more icon than woman at this point. When she steps on the stage, everyone just flips out – girls, boys, straight, gay. She stands for everything that is important about drag: embracing yourself and having the ability to be whoever you want to be. AM A refugee is comforted by a member of the Spanish Red Cross, Ceuta, Spain Bernat Armangue/AP 18 May This was taken in Ceuta, one of two Spanish exclaves bordering Morocco on Africa’s Mediterranean coast. Given that politically it is in Europe, it is a long-established route into the continent. On 17 and 18 May, more than 8,000 people crossed over. This man arrived with his brother, who fell unconscious. He started freaking out, scared that his companion was dying. A member of the Red Cross consoled him, saying everything was going to be OK. It was just one of those moments; he had no choice but to collapse, not only because of the traumatic situation, but also, I imagine, because of the weight of everything they had been through in the previous few weeks. A lot of the time, arriving migrants do not receive the help or attention they need – it was so great to capture a moment of genuine connection between two human beings, independent of their backgrounds or religions. AM A horse being airlifted by the Swiss military, Saignelégier Fabrice Coffrini/AFP via Getty Images 9 April I was told the Swiss army veterinary service were carrying out tests and there were rumours that this would feature horses being airlifted by helicopter. I had no idea how that was going to work, but I suspected it might make for a nice picture. The horses are tranquillised and have their face covered before being attached to the helicopter. Their bodies are wrapped, too, as it gets quite cold up there. I couldn’t include the helicopter in the shot, as the cable was too long – almost 30 metres – but I think it gives the photograph a surreal air, just seeing a horse suspended like that. It is a very strange image. I think it is improved by not having the context of the helicopter. The horses are carried over quite long distances, often for more than half an hour. What I really like about this picture is that you can see the movement of the horse – you can almost feel it swinging in the wind. AM Residents evacuate an island hit by wildfires, Evia, Greece Konstantinos Tsakalidis/Bloomberg via Getty Images 8 August As soon as I reached the island of Evia, I could see the fires raging in the distance, rising above the sky and burning with this awe-inspiring intensity. You could hear this terrifying crackling sound across the island; it was unlike anything I had ever experienced. I saw Panayiota Noumidi, 81, moving awkwardly outside the house you can see here. She was clearly distressed, so I approached her. She said she couldn’t find her husband (they were later reunited) and that she was fearful for her home – they had built it slowly over 20 years and it looked like the flames were heading straight towards it (it was not damaged). It was a chaotic day, but I tried my best to capture the intensity of the fire, the desperation of people in Evia and the lack of government help for those in distress. I knew straight away the picture was an important reflection of the situation facing Greek people. But I couldn’t imagine it would go viral around the world. It has come to symbolise the climate crisis, with the catastrophic damage caused by the fires representing the damage that human activity is doing to the planet. For me, it is very special to take a photo that affects so many people around the world. AM Denmark footballers form a human shield around their teammate Christian Eriksen at Euro 2020, Copenhagen Friedemann Vogel/EPA 12 June This was taken roughly four or five minutes after Eriksen collapsed. At the moment I took this, no one knew if he was even alive. I tried to maintain distance throughout. Uefa’s Covid rules prevented me from going on to the pitch, but, regardless, I felt it was important not to do anything that might interfere with the medical team’s work. I got a lot of criticism for this picture, for trying to get a shot of someone who was potentially dead, but it is my job. It is really important to show the reality of the situation. Seeing the fans hoping and praying was so powerful. Regardless of nationality or support, everyone just wanted Eriksen to be OK. The faces of the players around Eriksen are unbelievable. They can clearly see how serious the situation is and they are extremely distressed. Restarting someone’s heart is incredibly difficult; when you see it up close, as I could, you realise how much every moment matters. AM People feed seagulls in the smog, Delhi Navesh Chitrakar/Reuters 18 November From the moment I arrived in Delhi, my eyes burned from the thick smog. I wasn’t there for work; it was more of a holiday, with my wife, so I took the opportunity to spend a few days waking up early and getting out to take pictures. After I came back from the shoot, I went through all the pictures and almost didn’t bother to file this one. But I asked my wife: “Which picture should I go with?” and this one was her selection. The initial story was about the pollution, but for me this picture is all about the birds; they look so dramatic against the smog-filled backdrop. AMThere was always one thing I was sure of – I’d not let Mum go into a care home or be looked after by a stranger. Marje has always been a brilliant mother, forever loyal when others wrote me off. So come the day when she tired of living by herself in Salford, or couldn’t cope, I’d be there for her. I assumed she would come to live with me – or my sister Sharon – in London. She could stay in our house, or we could build her a granny flat. We’d even allow her to live in a flat nearby so long as we could pop in every day and take care of her. There was only one problem with my plan – I hadn’t thought about what she wanted. Just tiny things, like her house, her friends, her independence. Marje is 93 now. Until last year she was in great nick. Although she was a shrunken version of her younger self, she was still warm, kind, curious, laugh-out-loud funny and fiercely independent. But earlier this year, she slipped on her bathroom floor and broke her femur. Somehow, she crawled back to her bedroom to call us. The ambulance came, she was operated on and there followed a lengthy stay in hospital. Suddenly, she seemed much older – almost her real age. She couldn’t move, she lost weight, she got infections that sent her potty. Her short-term memory was shot and she couldn’t focus. She was unhappy and in pain. After a few weeks in hospital, Marje was transferred to a rehab home. She lay in bed or sat in a chair and deteriorated even more. Still, she insisted she didn’t want to come stay with us in London afterwards. She wanted to return to her own home and get on with life. She was terrified of being a burden; of being unwanted. But there was more to it than that. Marje loved her mews house in the close that reminds me of a mini-Brookside. It was perfect for her – tiny, quiet, self-contained. She was part of the community she’d spent her entire life in (a five-minute walk from where she grew up and where she spent her married life). And her few remaining friends (invariably younger than her) meant a lot to her. London isn’t her city, and never could be. It’s where she used to come to visit family and have a break. Eventually, I accepted she wanted to stay put. So, with a degree of horror, I started talking to my sister about a full-time carer for Marje. What kind of children farm out their mother to a carer? Was this how I returned the love she had shown me? Why spend all her money on the care we should provide? What if she and the carer didn’t get on? What if the carer abused her? Sharon assured me the woman she had in mind came recommended. I trusted her and we all took the plunge. Enter Josie – small, smart, smiley, funny, kind. In other words, she’s very much like Marje. Josie has now been with her for three months, and Marje is totally transformed. She is learning to walk again, her short-term memory has improved, she has put on weight because Josie’s food is so delicious. And, for the first time, Marje has accepted that she can’t do everything for herself; that she’s reached an age where she’s earned the privilege of relaxing – watching TV, reading, listening to music, going for wheelchair walks when she’s got the strength. Josie cooks for her, helps her shower, sorts out her pills, deals with the nitty-gritty of running the house. But the most astonishing and beautiful thing is the relationship she and Josie have developed. They sit on the sofa together, chat and giggle. Josie tells Marje about her childhood in the Philippines, her children and grandchildren, the 21 years she spent in Madrid working for a famous singer and the time she cooked for Plácido Domingo. Marje talks to Josie about her children and grandchildren, and the years she spent teaching children with special needs. Josie tries to teach her a bit of Spanish. Marje tries to improve her tenses in English. Josie takes pictures of her, and sends us nice or funny ones. In one, she is wearing a fake fur coat, shades and is scowling – she looks like the angriest billionaire in Salford. (She isn’t angry or a billionaire.) Already, they are like mother and daughter, or sisters. Visitors occasionally pop in. Marje is glad of the visit, but she’s often relieved when they leave and it’s just her and Josie again. Josie feels as much family as Sharon and I do. Sometimes more. Josie is a full-time, live-in carer, five days a week. (On the other two days Josie’s daughter-in-law Marlene, who is also becoming like family, looks after Marje.) Often, Josie doesn’t bother going home on her days off; she simply does more of her own thing. Just a few weeks ago, Mum was frazzled. Now she is calm, secure and on the whole content. It was stupid of me to think I could ever look after Marje like Josie and Marlene do. I don’t have their patience or skill set. In a way, it was selfish – more about a misplaced sense of duty than what was best for her – and could have ended up imprisoning Mum. Instead, thanks to Josie and Marlene, Sharon and I have peace of mind, and Marje has been given a new life. Simon Hattenstone is a Guardian columnistWhat does Mark Zuckerberg care about? The 37-year-old tech executive has a wife, two kids, $110bn , and near absolute control over a group of companies – Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp – that shape the information, entertainment, and communication of 3 billion people. But in a year that kicked off with those companies playing a major role in fueling a violent and conspiracy-addled riot at the US Capitol on 6 January, and closed with a whistleblower revealing just how much Facebook knew – and concealed from the public – about the damage it was doing to individuals and societies, Zuckerberg has himself seemed remarkably unbothered. Gone is the Zuckerberg who repeated apologies and pledges to take a broader view of Facebook’s responsibility ad nauseum. New Zuck (dare we call him “metaZuck”?) appears to be primarily focused on his super relatable hobbies (electric surfing, fencing, hydrofoiling, boar hunting) and building a fantasy world that he hasn’t managed to mess up – yet. “I just decided to focus more on some of the awesome things we’re building, and doing more fun things with my family and friends,” Zuckerberg said to a fan who asked about the secret to his being “super laid-back and funny these last few months”. The Guardian would have loved to ask Zuckerberg some follow-up questions about that, but since metaZuck isn’t doing much in the way of sitting for interviews with critical journalists these days, we fell back upon a last resort: we built another Zuckerbot and interviewed it instead. To do this, we worked with Botnik Studios to create a predictive keyboard trained on the past two years of Zuckerberg’s public statements (archived by Marquette University’s Zuckerberg Files). Our previous interview with the Zuckerbot, conducted in 2019 and based on Zuck’s statements from 2016 to 2019, can be found here. Guardian journalists provided the questions; Botnik used the predictive keyboard to generate the answers. Hi Mark, thanks so much for taking the time to talk to the Guardian. It’s been a busy two years since we spoke, and your company has now been implicated in even more violence and unrest around the world. Congratulations! Thank you for welcoming me here today with your own self. Being present with you in person is going to be a killer part of history. To start, you recently changed Facebook’s name to Meta. Why? Imagine a multiplayer game where you pay off a bunch of publications who are physically afraid of content. This is the basic idea behind the internet. Now look up at the sun, close your eyes, feel completely wrapped in virtual goods and commerce. That is the ultimate expression of social networks. That is the metaverse. Can you share any details about what kinds of new experiences will be possible in the metaverse? We tested a model where a big Priscilla avatar fried people using an energy field if they said false things about my friends, and I think it’s going to unlock a lot of new community policies. The metaverse is really just about playing video games, right? The metaverse is a big, valuable baked dumpling full of content without nudity. How long do you think it will take for Meta to be implicated in a campaign of genocide or ethnic violence? The hardest technology to deliver is peace. We built tools that businesses can go, “OK, look at this inflection point. Now we’re entering into the metaverse. Blood conflict is just spam. Thank you, but I never want extreme stuff.” This vision is a reality if you peer through a custom headset. Do you have another name lined up for the rebrand after that? We have some fun brands around at this company for the last year of the metaverse. I really love “Click and Forget”, and then there is “Civilization Meats”, and we took a very different direction with “Earth Problem From Facebook”. We have a lot of these, so we think we’ll be awesome for a few years. Facebook has shown itself to be utterly incapable of policing its platform in this universe. What makes you think things will be better in the metaverse? Think about the metaverse as a symptom of our existence and you will actually feel completely hot for businesses. I believe that we’re building a type of modern relationship where people are spending time grilling with their sentient loans. Recently, former Facebook employee Frances Haugen left the company with a trove of documents that were shared with major news outlets. What is your response to her release of research showing that Facebook knew its products were harming society, and frequently failed to act? I think that people like that are big challenges that we’re dealing with all the time. We built a robot to go back to the beginning of Facebook and deleted all the data, so that’s going to be pretty cool in the past. The documents reveal that Facebook spends about 90% of its resources fighting misinformation on the United States, and 10% on the rest of the world, while about 10% of Facebook’s users are in the United States, and 90% are in the rest of the world. How do you justify that? In the world, we can do nothing to help. In America, we have to deal with senators and Elected Joe, so we build systems that stop terrorists from hacking your news. In VR, you can teleport to the news publishers’ newsroom and ask them if the information is real (they are going to misuse this, but it’s going to be really exciting to see). You appear to have spent a lot of time in recent years focused on your hobbies: hydrofoiling, e-surfing, VR fencing, boar hunting, and destroying democracy. What’s your secret to maintaining a good work-life balance? I am reminded of my favorite multiplayer experience: values. These are really important for relationships and I think generally they are the future of communication. So much fun for me to sit down with some pretty fundamental values and interests like Peloton bike and augmented traffic and just think about all kinds of topics. Instagram has stolen stories from Snapchat, Reels from Tiktok and IGTV from YouTube. What future plans do you have for further IP theft? We all want to take advantage of creators like that, but there’s a different way – yeah, I mean, basically just going in their data to help me to a compelling version of the issues, then also log in to the same tools that they were trying to work on and, um, we will actually be able to have their content remotely deleted. The metaverse is going to support that. Will you let your own children use Instagram, given your own company’s research into how harmful it can be to children’s mental health? Teenagers have a lot of ways to express their views on the internet and now they have one more; they can monetize their families with our “family permanence experience”. You were raised Jewish and have said religion is very important to you. How do you think God will judge you? I believe deeply in a wireless experience you have in the Next Time. You get a mentor and you see a cool effect, and then you go to juvenile detention center in the metaverse. It has a massive amount of problematic goods and it has solar-powered privacy controls that you can break by talking. And it has a major part with a judgment room, right in the top. In this room we are always faced by ourselves. This is inspiring for a second, but it starts to be clear that you are very afraid. That’s gonna be a big part of the challenge in the world to come. You control a 55% voting stake in your company. What safeguards exist to check your power? I need to ask permission from a big personal influence – my parents. They don’t expect that their friends will like the new things I’ve done. Hopefully, later on helping me will become their lives but for now we’re gonna roll with social media for all kinds of ages. Let’s play a game. What are two truths and one lie about yourself? One: I have no company. Two: I have no tolerance for the town square. Three: I do surfing and I am grateful for the world of water. Do you still think Facebook is making the world a better place? The world is going to end, and if we don’t make money from that, then we should just sit down in the water and make Reels right into the last couple of days.Theatre The Da Vinci Code Dan Brown’s 2003 thriller earned censure from some corners of the church for its alternative religious history and its depictions of Mary Magdalene and Jesus. That hasn’t stopped its success: after the big-budget Hollywood film, we will now see the first stage adaptation, with Nigel Harman playing Robert Langdon, the Harvard professor of religious symbology, and Hannah Rose Caton as police cryptologist, Sophie Neveu. • Churchill theatre, Bromley, 10-15 January, then touring until 12 November Animal Farm Robert Icke’s production of George Orwell’s classic political satire will be led by puppets of 33 life-size animals. The allegory of revolution and its aftermath is adapted and directed by Icke, designed by Bunny Christie, who created the sensational set for The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time, with puppetry by Toby Olié (War Horse). • Birmingham Rep, 22 January-5 February, then touring Spike Ian Hislop and Nick Newman’s play about the comedy legend Spike Milligan is set in the 1950s, with Olivier award-winning actor John Dagleish starring as Milligan. Staged to commemorate 20 years since his death, it tells the story of both Milligan and fellow Goons Harry Secombe and Peter Sellers, and how he channeled his dark past to create an entirely new absurdist brand of comedy. • Watermill theatre, Newbury, 27 January-5 March The Forest After the film success of The Father, Florian Zeller’s new play will focus on the demands – and torments – of family, career and sexual desire in a character’s life. Translated by longtime collaborator Christopher Hampton and directed by Jonathan Kent, the story will no doubt be told in Zeller’s characteristically captivating but unsettling way. • Hampstead theatre, London, 5 February-12 March An Hour and a Half Late Griff Rhys Jones and Janie Dee star as a couple of retirement-age empty-nesters in this spiky domestic comedy by French writers Gérald Sibleyras and Jean Dell. Their marriage blows up in a conversation that brings emotional outpourings and explosive home truths, all fuelled by plonk. Adapted and directed by Belinda Lang. • Theatre Royal Bath, 16-26 February, then touring Dogs of Europe Exiled from their native country, Belarus Free Theatre, who make underground work in secret locations, will stage this psychological drama set in the near future. Based on a novel by Alhierd Bacharevič (which is banned in Belarus), it revolves around a murder investigation in a dystopian super-state ruled by a secret service. Billed as both an epic fantasy and a political thriller about the dangers of looking away from authoritarianism. • Barbican, London, 10-12 March To Kill a Mockingbird Aaron Sorkin’s Broadway adaptation of Harper Lee’s novel finally arrives in the UK, two years after it was originally scheduled. Directed by Bartlett Sher and starring Rafe Spall as Atticus Finch, the story of racism in 1950s Alabama may resonate all the deeper after the resurgence of Black Lives Matter. • Gielgud theatre, London, 10 March-13 August The Human Voice After her acclaimed turn in Hedda Gabler, Ruth Wilson teams up again with the Belgian director Ivo van Hove. This time she will star in Jean Cocteau’s searing monologue, which takes place in a break-up phone conversation between a desperate woman and her lover. • Harold Pinter theatre, London, 17 March-9 April The Burnt City Pioneering immersive theatre company Punchdrunk present what is billed as their most ambitious production to date. This show tells the story of the fall of Troy, transposed to a future parallel world. Taking place across three Grade II-listed buildings, it plunges audiences into a dystopian cityscape where they choose to follow characters who emerge from the shadows. • One Cartridge Place, London, 22 March-28 August Orphans This promises to be a bold and boisterous new musical adapted from Peter Mullan’s cult 1998 film. Powered by the music and lyrics of the Emmy award-winning Scottish indie duo Tommy Reilly and Roddy Hart, it is a darkly comic story of grief, forgiveness and family life. A National Theatre of Scotland production. • Beacon Arts Centre, Greenock, Scotland, 1-2 April, then touring Red Ellen Ellen Wilkinson was a firebrand Labour politician who served in Winston Churchill’s cabinet. Caroline Bird’s play suggests she should be better remembered today: a working-class woman who entered parliament, she campaigned for the fight against Franco’s fascists in Spain, spoke up for Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany and led 200 workers in the Jarrow Crusade to end unemployment and poverty. • Nottingham Playhouse, 13-30 April The Cher Show With a book by the Tony and Olivier award-winning Rick Elice, direction by Arlene Phillips and choreography by Oti Mabuse, this promises to be one of the biggest, loudest and glitziest musicals of the year. Then there is Cher’s life story itself, from her Armenian heritage to her truck-driver father, Sonny Bono and later, the concerts, costumes and pop hits, 35 of which will feature in the show (from Believe to The Shoop Shoop Song). • Curve, Leicester, 15-23 April, then touring Prima Facie Jodie Comer will make her West End stage debut in Suzie Miller’s award-winning play about sexual abuse and the legal system. This monologue directed by Justin Martin tells the story of Tessa, a swaggering barrister who finds her position on judicial procedure shifting when she becomes a victim herself. • Harold Pinter theatre, London, 15-27 April The Father and the Assassin Brilliant Indian playwright Anupama Chandrasekhar last teamed up with the Kiln’s artistic director, Indhu Rubasingham, on a radically reworked version of Ibsen’s Ghosts which alluded to the Delhi bus gang rape of 2012. They reunite for what sounds like a gripping drama tracing the life of Mahatma Gandhi’s assassin, Nathuram Godse, from his beginnings as a devout follower to his radicalisation and their final encounter. Shubham Saraf plays Godse alongside Ayesha Dharker and Peter Singh. • National Theatre, London, 12 May-18 June A Hero of the People Brad Birch reworks Ibsen’s An Enemy of the People in this story of Mick, an MP whose “think positive” plans and “can-do” spin collide with his sister’s discovery that the town’s water supply is being polluted and he is called upon to act. Directed by Joe Murphy, the story pits the personal against the political, story against reality and emotions against facts. • Sherman theatre, Cardiff, 13-28 May The White Card Claudia Rankine’s 2019 play tackles white privilege and cultural appropriation. Directed by Natalie Ibu, it tells the story of a wealthy white couple who invite a talented Black artist to dinner, where tension brews high. It poses the question: can society progress when whiteness remains invisible? This is a UK and European premiere and the American writer’s first published play. • Home, Manchester, 18-21 May, and various locations The Glass Menagerie Jeremy Herrin revives Tennessee Williams’s semi-autobiographical masterpiece which explores the fragility and fallibility of memory. Amy Adams will make her West End debut in the role of matriarch Amanda Wingfield. In a novel touch, two actors (Paul Hilton and Tom Glynn-Carney) will play Tom, the aspiring poet and narrator. • Duke of York’s theatre, London, 23 May-27 August Noises Off Michael Frayn’s Olivier award-winning comedy, which premiered in 1982, took us behind the scenes of a company of actors to show the unpredictability of life in the theatre. Hailed as a timeless British classic, it will now be revived in a 40th-anniversary production by Elizabeth Newman and Ben Occhipinti. • Pitlochry Festival theatre, 27 May-1 October Dance Raymonda Tamara Rojo creates her first production for English National Ballet, transforming Marius Petipa’s little-performed 1898 ballet into a tale of nurses in the Crimean war, inspired by Florence Nightingale. Rojo has gone back to Petipa’s original choreography, mapping her story on to the master choreographer’s steps, finding a new way to breathe life into the classical repertoire. Set to Glazunov’s original score. • London Coliseum, 13-23 January; Mayflower, theatre, Southampton, 30 Nov-3 Dec A Tale of Two Cities The main thing you can be sure of is that this show by dance-theatre company Lost Dog will be a long way from Dickens. Choreographer/director Ben Duke’s fanciful imagination has previously turned Paradise Lost into domestic dramedy and Romeo and Juliet into a story of midlife marriage breakdown. Here he focuses on A Tale of Two Cities’ undercooked female character Lucie Manette, redrawing her as a complex 21st-century woman. • UK tour opens 8-9 February, Theatre Royal Bury St Edmunds Alice in VR Wonderland Rather than expecting audiences to come to her, choreographer Jasmin Vardimon is taking dance to the people – in virtual reality form – in a tour of UK shopping centres. It’s a 20-minute experience, based on Alice in Wonderland as filtered through Vardimon’s inventive, highly physical choreography. Sit back, enjoy some 360-degree dance, and buy some cut-price designer togs afterwards. • UK tour opens at Ashford Designer Outlet, 8-20 February Dance Reflections A new dance festival, featuring major classics of the contemporary canon – Lucinda Childs’ Dance and Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker’s Fase – alongside new works. Lesser known artists on the bill include Katerina Andreou with BSTRD, a duet for dancer and vinyl turntable; and Italian Alessandro Sciarroni, who has revived a Bolognese courtship dance, Polka Chinata, now practised by only five people in the whole of Italy. • 9-23 March, various London venues Traplord An immersive dance performance by choreographer Ivan Michael Blackstock (who has worked with Beyoncé, no less) confronting themes of mental health, masculinity and the stereotyping of black men. Traplord depicts a young man finding himself on a journey through life, death and rebirth, incorporating spoken word, film, opera, grime and trap music alongside raw and intense dance. • 180 The Strand, London, 26 March-16 April The Scandal at Mayerling The first chance for Scottish audiences to see Kenneth MacMillan’s stormy psychological drama of a ballet, Mayerling, based on the true story of Crown Prince Rudolf, found dead in 1889 beside his teenage mistress Mary Vetsera in a seeming double suicide. Scottish Ballet’s director Christopher Hampson has adapted MacMillan’s 1978 ballet for his company with the blessing of the choreographer’s widow, Deborah MacMillan. • Theatre Royal Glasgow, 13-16 April, then touring Like Water for Chocolate A new full-length ballet from Christopher Wheeldon, his first for the Royal Ballet since The Winter’s Tale in 2014, reuniting the choreographer with the same creative team: composer Joby Talbot and designer Bob Crowley. Based on Laura Esquivel’s novel, it’s a magical realist story of a Mexican woman’s emotions being transmitted through the food she cooks to the people who eat it. • Royal Opera House, London, 2-17 June Comedy Jamali Maddix A familiar face from TV, whose appearances on Taskmaster and Frankie Boyle’s New World Order never fail to raise a smile, Essex man Maddix is no slouch at standup either. He’s giving little away in advance of new touring show King Crud, but if the form book is any guide, expect slacker charm, a radiant sense of fun, and disgruntled social commentary from a working-class, Anglo-Jamaican-Greek perspective. • G Live, Guildford, 19 January, then touring Nish Kumar If there’s an upside to Nish Kumar quitting The Mash Report, the satirical show he fronted for five years on BBC Two then Dave, it’s that he’s refocusing on live comedy, which he does very well. With Your Power, Your Control, expect more furious, peeved and dismayed jokes about the disintegrating state of the nation – most of which, to be fair, rebound squarely on Kumar himself. • Bonus Arena, Hull, 2 February, then touring Leicester Comedy festival The UK’s second biggest comedy festival returns, with (fingers crossed) a return to live performance after last year’s digital event. All comic life is here, with stellar acts including Ahir Shah, Maisie Adam, Bilal Zafar, Flo &amp; Joan and fantastic Britain’s Got Talent graduate Nabil Abdulrashid. The fourth ever UK Kids’ Comedy festival runs alongside. • Various venues, 2-20 February Catherine Cohen Her 2019 Edinburgh fringe show The Twist?... She’s Gorgeous was one for the ages, a millennial-meets-maniacal oversharing cabaret, whose acid-bathed songs ranged across sex, self-image and neurosis in the age of Instagram. Now Cohen, a regular at Alan Cumming’s NYC nightspot Club Cumming, brings it back for a one-off gig in March, and musical comedy fans really shouldn’t miss it. • Clapham Grand, London, 2 March Hannah Gadsby Nothing she ever does will rival the global impact of Nanette, her 2017 show (and later, Netflix special) about the limits of comedy. Its success has created a buzz around every new show the Tasmanian announces, so Body of Work (“a feelgood live show”, Gadsby calls it, which may touch on her recent marriage) will be one of this spring’s hottest tickets. • Manchester Opera House, 6 March, then touring Joe Lycett Ubiquitous TV face Joe Lycett secured priceless publicity this month when his 2022 tour posters appeared with fellow comic James Acaster’s face substituted for Lycett’s own. A typical Lycett trick, that – and fans of the Birmingham man’s gadfly behaviour are unlikely to be disappointed by a show that promises, and will certainly deliver, “talking at a room of people in a queer and comedic fashion”. • Plymouth Pavilions, 11-12 March, then touring Maria Bamford Few comics are as well loved by their peers as US standup Bamford, whose autobiographical Netflix series Lady Dynamite – about mental health, like much of Bamford’s comedy – won her a new legion of fans. And deservedly: nuanced, emotionally exposing and eccentric, she’s unlike anyone else. An occasional visitor to the UK, a short run of dates in 2022 constitutes her first British tour. • Liberty Hall theatre, Dublin, 21 April, then touring Alan Partridge Inspired perhaps by the success of his new BBC vehicle This Time and podcast From the Oasthouse, Alan Partridge embarks on a rare live tour in 2022. Making his first stage appearance since 2008, Steve Coogan’s deathless alter ego promises a TED talk-style outing, offering “a roadmap to a better tomorrow”… • SSE Arena, Belfast, 22 April, then touring Jordan Brookes The reigning Edinburgh Comedy award champ, and the only one to retain the title three years running (thanks, Covid!), Jordan Brookes now launches a new show, Fix, exploring “how we’ve become so dependent on other people’s opinions of us.” This edgy and unpredictable comic has “always considered my act mainstream”, he says – and with this biggest tour yet, he now seeks to prove it. • Soho theatre, London, 23 May-11 June, then touring from SeptemberSeven years ago, in the year before I met the wonderful man I would fall in love with and go on to marry, I had a short but intense relationship with someone I had known as a friend of friends for some time. I’d suddenly and unexpectedly found myself becoming besotted with him after we suddenly and unexpectedly found ourselves sleeping together. JC was very tall, very handsome and very intelligent. Like me, he was recently out of a long-term relationship, and we were both enjoying the sexual freedom that came from not being committed to anyone. I don’t remember exactly how we ended up in bed together the first time, but I do remember liking it very much and rather hoping that it might happen again, which it did – with some regularity. While he could be very affectionate, he made it clear from the outset that he didn’t consider – or want – us to be anything more than friends with benefits. For much of the time we were carrying on our affair – relationship? Fling? I’m still not sure how to categorise it – I thought I was fine with that. I was certain I didn’t want to be in a committed relationship at that time, with him or anyone else. Yet when we were out together and he went home with somebody else, or when I heard he’d slept with someone after the last time we’d met, I found myself minding more and more, while knowing that I had no right to. It began to make me miserable. Winter came and, along with the cold, something that resembled common sense started to set in. I realised that I was besotted not so much with him, as the idea of him. I was enjoying la douleur exquise of wanting someone so unobtainable., and without even discussing it with him (you can’t really break up with someone you’re not actually going out with), I ended it with JC. Or so I thought. Late one very cold night at a notoriously debauched supper club, I was just getting stuck into my starter when I began receiving text messages from JC that seemed to speak directly to the feelings I’d been experiencing but had not expressed. “You know what you mean to me,” he said. Did I? I wasn’t sure. “You know I want what you want” – well, this was news to me. But my heart raced and my pulse quickened and, rather than sit at the table texting, I went outside and gave him a call. I was bitterly cold outside in just a T-shirt, and then it began to snow. Then JC told me, unprompted and as if reading my mind, that he loved me and didn’t want to be without me, but nor did he want to be in a relationship with me. The snow grew heavier and the wind blew it around in dramatic whorls, but I couldn’t bear to interrupt the moment to go back inside. I needed to hear what was being said, and a blizzard wasn’t going to prevent that. Half an hour later, my very drunk dinner companions having barely registered my absence, I returned to the table red-nosed and blue-faced. My skin was simultaneously freezing and burning, and I’d lost all feeling in my extremities. But I had heard things I’d needed to hear, which made it all worthwhile. I had known love in a cold climate. Shortly afterwards, by mutual agreement this time, JC and I did end things, acknowledging that there was nowhere for us, as a “we”, to go. We remain close friends to this day; although we have both gone on to long-term, more fulfilling relationships, I think he would agree that we had something special, whatever it was. On reflection, I’m not sure it was worth nearly contracting frostbite for. But what is life if we don’t sometimes do foolish things in order to know that we are loved?It has been a hell of a year, emphasis on the hell. Yet among all the sadness (and numerous revelations of Number 10 parties), there’s also been an array of uplifting, engrossing and fantastically strange television moments this year. Here are some of our favourites. Dermot O’Leary’s ‘brave’ coming out There were so many surreal, life-affirming clangers on This Morning in 2021. Presenter Josie Gibson hilariously fell into a lake and was dragged out live on air. Alison Hammond set herself up for a fall by asking Graham Norton whether his lovely dog was still alive (“no … dead,” Norton responded.) But the best was Barry Humphries mistakenly congratulating Dermot O’Leary – instead of Phillip Schofield – for coming out of the closet. Largely thanks to Alison Hammond’s hysterical laughter. That Rose and Giovanni Strictly dance This year saw the most diverse Strictly ever. While John and Johannes received widespread praise and proved that a same-sex partnership could actually enhance the show (rather than, as naysayers suggested, distract from it), it was the eventual winners Rose and her partner Giovanni who captured our hearts. In a Strictly dance that will be remembered for years to come, Rose and Giovanni continued to move as the song faded away, as a tribute to deaf people. “There’s so many things that Rose’s win symbolises for Deaf people like myself,” journalist Liam O’Dell told BBC News. “It goes to show how, with the right support, Deaf people can achieve anything.” Clare Balding and the unintended innuendo of the year Usually for the best innuendoes you only have to switch on Bake Off. Yet it was Clare Balding who provided the best double entendre of the year, while presenting the BBC’s Olympic coverage. Having just congratulated Matt Richards and Tom Dean for their gold medal in the 4x200 metre freestyle at the start of an interview, she enthusiastically noted that Matt’s “third leg was just phenomenal.” Their faces said it all. George’s debut on CBeebies To many adults, he was noted as the first BBC children’s presenter who has Down’s syndrome. To children watching, he is simply a bubbly and engaging presenter called George. His debut on CBeebies received widespread praise and was seen as a step forward for disability representation on television, but it was also the lack of special treatment George received that was celebrated. After his introduction, he merely told us about his fondness for cooking and his love of dancing. “I’m always super positive and always smiley and bubbly. I’m loving life,” he said in an interview with the Guardian. “There’s nothing stopping me.” Colin’s death on It’s a Sin Of all of the devastating moments in It’s A Sin, Russell T Davies’s blistering drama exploring the HIV/Aids epidemic in the UK in the 1980s, it was the unexpected death of the sweet, innocent Colin (Callum Scott Howells) that stuck with many viewers. Full of the joy of the big, bright city, so excited by finding his first set of LGBTQ+ friends, Colin’s death was a reminder that being HIV positive was not a result of a promiscuous lifestyle. And the way he was treated when he became ill? Inhumane. Left isolated and abandoned in a locked ward, while his mother received hate and abuse in the mail. And yet, throughout all this, his friends fought to get him out of the ward. And his mother loved him, unconditionally. La! When Ted Lasso Rickrolled Us All In a television first, the second series of the much-loved Apple TV+ sitcom Ted Lasso somehow managed to Rickroll everyone watching. In the middle of a eulogy, Rebecca (Hannah Waddingham) was unable to think up words to describe her father, so instead read aloud the lyrics of Never Gonna Give You Up to a packed church. And what did Rick Astley think? “I was completely blown away with what they did.” Ant and Dec’s ‘Evening prime minister’ Of all the things to have happened this year, Ant and Dec becoming a potent force for political resistance was certainly one of the most unexpected. After allegations of a Christmas party being held at 10 Downing Street during severe restrictions back in 2020, Ant and Dec captured the mood of the nation by using events taking place within the I’m A Celebrity camp to brilliantly mock Boris Johnson. “EVENING PRIME MINISTER … for now,” warned Declan Donnelly. Emma Thompson on An Audience with Adele An Audience with Adele, an ITV special featuring the singer performing songs from her latest album to a room packed with celebrities, featured many surreal moments. There was Bryan Cranston with his eyes closed losing himself to Something Like You. There was Alan Carr, drafted in to perform Make You Feel My Love, in front of Samuel L Jackson and Harry Hill. But the most surreal was seeing Emma Thompson completely losing it to Rolling in the Deep, apparently researching a new role: relative at a wedding disco, after one too many gins. Lord Merlin on The Pursuit of Love In a feat that can only be described as “Peak Andrew Scott”, the Sunday night BBC One drama The Pursuit of Love featured him, as the character Lord Merlin, entering a room to T. Rex, waltzing around in sexy pyjamas, necking champagne then proceeding to make out with whoever offered themselves. If only, if only, more period dramas were like this. The Succession ending Essentially a corporate Red Wedding, the show generated a thousand memes with the scene where Roman, Shiv and Kendall unexpectedly console each other after a monumental twist and downfall. Not only did it wrongfoot its viewers with a storyline that no one – including its characters – saw coming, its masterstroke was that we should have. After all, they’d teased it with a promotional image released weeks ahead of the third season actually airing. Sophie and Al finally get together in Stath Lets Flats The three series-long will they/won’t they dynamic of Sophie (Natasia Demetriou) and Al (Alastair Roberts) was so unbelievably sweet that there was only one way they could finally get together: in the shyest way possible. One of the most adorably understated, heartwarming moments of television in 2021. Owain Wyn Evans and the BBC News theme In the early days of the first 2020 lockdown, the immaculately dressed BBC weatherman Owain Wyn Evans went viral for performing the BBC News theme on his own drum kit. A surreal but uplifting orchestra of musicians playing the theme on the actual BBC News channel soon followed. But it reached its climax with more than 50 drummers playing the theme, as part of a 24-hour drumathon to raise money for Children in Need. Who knew the news music could rock so hard?Travel Man: 96 Hours in Iceland 8pm, Channel 4 There is no such thing as too much Mr Lycett at Christmas, so here is Joe again – this time as the new Travel Man, replacing Richard Ayoade after nine seasons and several Christmas specials. A four-day trip – twice the usual length – around Iceland with Bill Bailey requires a bumper itinerary that includes visiting a punk museum in a disused public toilet, taking a dip in a geothermal “nature bath”, flying in a plane across Iceland’s longest fjord and having a go at husky sledding. Hollie Richardson The Voice Kids 7.30pm, ITV The talent show for teenyboppers returns. Sporty Spice herself, Melanie C, joins the McFly guitarist Danny Jones, will.i.am and Pixie Lott on the judging panel. The three‑part competition will continue tomorrow and Wednesday. HR MasterChef: The Professionals Rematch 2021 8pm, BBC One Nervously serving up posh festive grub to the critics Grace Dent, Jimi Famurewa and Jay Rayner are the 2020 finalists Philli Armitage-Mattin, Santosh Shah and Bart van der Lee, plus the runner-up from 2017’s series, Jamie Park. Jack Seale Jon &amp; Lucy’s Christmas Sleepover 9pm, Channel 4 Comedy couple Lucy Beaumont and Jon Richardson – the stars of their own sitcom, Meet the Richardsons – attempt to brighten up the lull between Christmas and New Year with this one‑off get-together with their closest pals. Joining them for a boozy feast is Roisin Conaty, along with the inescapable Romesh Ranganathan and Rob Beckett. HR Clarice 9pm, Alibi Clarice has the unenviable task of following up one of cinema’s most highly regarded horror films, The Silence of the Lambs. A year after the film’s events, Clarice Starling (Pretty Little Liars’ Rebecca Breeds) is struggling to handle her newfound notoriety within the FBI when a grizzly killer strikes. Sometimes schlocky, but undeniably moreish. Henry Wong Curb Your Enthusiasm 9pm, Sky Comedy Season 11 of Larry David’s acidic comedy of ill manners dropped hints that it might be the equivalent of an origin story as the moneyed curmudgeon successfully sold a lucrative streaming series about his formative years. But, as the season concludes, any self-reflection on Larry’s part has been in short supply. Graeme Virtue Film choice West Side Story (Robert Wise and Jerome Robbins, 1961), 4.35pm, BBC Two Steven Spielberg’s take on the stage musical is in cinemas now, but you could do worse than stay on the sofa for Robert Wise and Jerome Robbins’ Oscar-laden 1961 version. In this Romeo and Juliet tale updated to mid-50s New York, Richard Beymer and Natalie Wood may not be the most vital of leads (Jimmy Bryant and Marni Nixon were employed as their “ghost singers”), but with support from George Chakiris and Rita Moreno, and a rollcall of jazzy numbers from Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim, it is the swingiest thing. Simon WardellFestive celebrations were disrupted, Jesus statues were smashed and effigies of Santa Claus were burned in a spate of attacks on India’s Christian community over Christmas. Amid growing intolerance and violence against India’s Christian minority, who make up about 2% of India’s population, several Christmas events were targeted by Hindu right wing groups, who alleged Christians were using festivities to force Hindus to convert. In recent years, Christians have increasingly faced harassment around Christmas but this year saw a notable surge in attacks. In Agra in Uttar Pradesh, members of right wing Hindu groups burned effigies of Santa Claus outside missionary-led schools and accused Christian missionaries of using Christmas celebrations to lure people in. “As December comes, the Christian missionaries become active in the name of Christmas, Santa Claus and New Year. They lure children by making Santa Claus distribute gifts to them and attract them towards Christianity,” said Ajju Chauhan regional general secretary of Bajrang Dal, one of the right wing Hindu outfits leading the protest. In Assam, two protesters in saffron, the signature colour of Hindu nationalism, entered a Presbyterian church on Christmas night and disrupted proceedings, demanding that all Hindus leave the building. “Let only Christian celebrate Christmas,” said one of the men, in a video filmed during the disruption. “We are against Hindu boys and girls participating in Christmas function … it hurts our sentiments. They dress up in church and everyone sings Merry Christmas. How will our religion survive?”. The police have subsequently arrested both men involved. In state of Haryana, on Christmas Eve, an evening celebration at a school in Pataudi was disrupted by members of a right wing Hindu vigilante group. Storming into the school shouting slogans such as “Jai Shri Ram”, now a clarion call for Hindu nationalism, they claimed that the festive event, which included Christmas songs and dance and teachings of the bible, was being used for “religious conversion under the garb of celebrating Christmas” and alleged they were “brainwashing children through drama and speeches into accepting Christianity”. In the same state, the day after Christmas, a Jesus statue was torn down and the Holy Redeemer Church in Ambala was vandalised in the early hours. A Christmas event that is held every year at Matridham Ashram in Uttar Pradesh was also targeted by a Hindu vigilante group who stood outside shouting slogans such as “stop conversions” and “missionary murdabad”, meaning “death to missionaries”. Speaking to local media, Father Anand, a priest at the ashram, said the protests were indicative of the increased attacks that Christians in India have been facing in recent months, as allegations of forced conversion of Hindus to Christianity have become rampant and an anti-Christian hysteria has begun to grow across India. “This is a symbol of what is happening because these people have impunity, and it creates tension,” said Anand. “Every Sunday is a day of terror and trauma for Christians, especially those belonging to those small churches.” The Christmas attacks are only the latest examples of incidents of violence against Christians, part of a growing atmosphere of religious intolerance towards India’s non-Hindu minorities, namely Muslims and Christians, under the ruling Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government. Since the BJP came to power in 2014, attacks on Christians have been on the rise. According to a report by organisation Persecution Relief, crimes against Christians increased by 60% from 2016 to 2019. In recent weeks, Christian missionaries have had their bibles set alight and Christian schools have been disrupted by right wing groups who allege that Christians are forcing Hindus into converting by offering them money and gifts. In the state of Chhattisgarh, the BJP have taken up the issue of alleged forced conversions, holding dozens of rallies. In the same state several pastors have been violently attacked and many church services now have to be conducted in secret for safety. This month, the government of Karnataka state became the latest to pass a controversial “anti-conversion” law. Though it does not explicitly mention Christians, its provision against “unlawful conversions” has been used in other states to target Christian pastors and the state has already seen a surge in attacks, with 39 Christian hate crimes just this year. According to a report released in October, there were more than 300 documented attacks on Christians across India in the first nine months of 2021.Experts are urging caution around Sydney’s planned New Year’s Eve celebrations amid surging Covid-19 cases in New South Wales. On Friday, the NSW tourism minister, Stuart Ayres, said New Year’s Eve fireworks would proceed as planned under the current public health order, despite the growing Omicron outbreak. “Particularly for those family fireworks at nine o’clock, we really want to make sure that still goes ahead,” Ayres said. “I do expect less people to attend. People are managing their own health, they’re taking those precautionary measures.” The event is ticketed this year, with revellers encouraged not to travel into the city to watch the fireworks without a venue reservation or an entry ticket for one of 24 vantage points. Though attenders are encouraged to be double jabbed, vaccination is not mandatory. On Monday epidemiologists called for precautionary measures to be implemented during the celebrations. Chair in epidemiology at Deakin University, prof Catherine Bennett, said: “We now have such established community transmission that [New Year’s Eve] probably will lift up case numbers.” Prof Robert Booy, an infectious diseases paediatrician at the University of Sydney, said spread on the night was likely, due to the high transmissibility of the Omicron variant. “Everyone predicted problems last year from New Year’s Eve and they didn’t eventuate, but last year was a different strain,” he said. “[Omicron] is at least half as likely to put you in hospital as Delta. But because it’s at least twice as transmissible, the fact that we have no perturbation in the number in intensive care [yet] is just a false reassurance,” Booy said. “Numbers coming into hospital are going up by 50 per day, so we do need to maintain sensible precautions.” Head of the University of Melbourne’s school of population and global health, prof Nancy Baxter, said the best place to watch the fireworks was from home. “There are risks associated with gathering people together, even if it’s outdoors, when you have the highest caseload that Australia has ever seen and the most contagious variant that we’ve ever seen,” she said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Baxter cited an outdoor concert that took place earlier this month in Puerto Rico, where more than 2,000 attenders – who were all required to be vaccinated – later tested positive for Covid. New Year’s Eve fireworks organisers should consider requiring masks to be worn, or providing high-quality masks to attenders, Baxter said. “If the officials are going to allow this to continue, they need to take some responsibility for mitigating the potential transmission that’s going to happen at the event.” All experts said those planning to view the fireworks in person should take precautions including mask wearing, social distancing where possible, and minimising the time spent in crowded environments. “No matter what the mask rules are, wear masks when you’re around other people, whether you’re indoors or out – if you’re comfortable doing that, you’ll reduce your risk,” Bennett said. Anyone with even mild symptoms should avoid attending the event, Bennett said. “It is just not fair to other people.” One silver lining of Omicron might be that symptoms became apparent sooner after infection than with other variants, she said. Those taking precautions could still be infected with Covid, but with a lower viral load, Booy said. “That might lead to a less severe infection.” “If you’re unlucky to get infected … because of a low viral load and on the back of already being double vaccinated, you might turn out OK. “If you’re someone who has a chronic medical problem and you’re coming up to five months [from your second jab], then look to get your booster,” he said. “This virus is becoming less problematic, but it’s still a killer.” New Year’s Eve events have been cancelled in several cities amid outbreaks of the Omicron variant. There will be no fireworks over the Acropolis in Athens or along the Champs Elysées in Paris. Planned celebrations in Rio de Janeiro and Bangkok have also been scrapped. The Sydney city council was contacted for comment.If you like number patterns, here’s something to look forward to next year. Shortly after 10pm on February 22, the time and date will consist of a single repeating digit – the last time it will happen this century. 22:22:22/22/2/22 Toot toot! Which leads us to today’s first puzzle. 1. What was the question? The person at the rail station’s information desk replied: “2222222” What was the question? 2. The question I ask every year – with the smallest incremental change. This is an annual ritual for the readers of this column. Fill in the gaps so the following equation makes sense: 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 = 2022 You are allowed to use the mathematical symbols +, -, x, ÷ and as many brackets as you like. In other words, your answer should be of the form , 10 x 9 + (8 – 6) x 5 x 4 – ((3 x 2) + 1)), although not this one, which doesn’t equal 2022. 3. Three twos and a nought. Construct the numbers from 1 to 10 with the digits 2, 0, 2 and 2. You are allowed to used the mathematical symbols +, -, x, ÷, √, the decimal point, the factorial !, as many brackets as you like, concatenation and exponentiation. You are also allowed to use the symbol for repeating decimals, usually a dot or a bar on the digit that is to be repeated ad infinitum. For example, an expression for 7 is: (.2/.02) – 2 There isn’t a way to draw a dot or a bar on a digit using this software, so I have denoted a repeating digit by having it in bold. .02 is thus .02222… where the 2s go on for ever. Clarifications: The factorial symbol ! means that the following whole number is multiplied by each of the whole numbers less than it. For example, 3! = 3 x 2 x 1. Concatenation means you can place two or more digits together, as in .02 above, and exponentiation means you can have numbers a and b in the form ab. NO SPOILERS PLEASE I’ll be back at 5pm UK with the solutions. Meanwhile, please post your favourite facts about 2022 below. UPDATE: You can read the solutions here. Thanks to Inder Taneja for reminding me of the monodigital date. Inder is an international guru of number patterns, and has written a 78-page article about all the fun and games to be had with 2022. My favourite is the following: both expressions add to 2022 when read normally, when read upside down, and when read in a mirror. Thanks also to Lewis Baxter for suggesting the third puzzle. In fact, Lewis extended the brief and has worked out all possible fractions (with single digit numerators and denominators), using only the digits 2,0,2 and 2 and the operations listed above. He has found expressions for all of them except 8/7. If anyone can find an expression for 8/7, let us know! Finally, thanks to all the readers of this column; this year it received almost 3 million views. Please keep on suggesting puzzles, making recommendations, improving on my answers and spotting mistakes. In case you missed them, the five most popular puzzles were: 1. Oxford university admissions questions 2. The magic of the Borromean rings 3. The crazy maths of crypto 4. Russia’s Prime Minister sets a geometry puzzle 5. From Russia with logic Happy New Year! I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I’m the author of several books of puzzles, most recently the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (online and in person). If your school is interested please get in touch.As US regional health authorities reacted with alarm to a jump in child Covid infections that caused some school districts to announce returns to remote learning, a leading public health official questioned the need for schools to close, saying: “We know how to keep schools open, we know how to keep them safe.” Over the past three weeks, as Omicron-related cases soared in New York City and elsewhere, the number of children hospitalised in New York with Covid-19 quadrupled, the state health department said. The California state epidemiologist Dr Erica Pan wrote on Twitter: “Unfortunately New York is seeing an increase in pediatric hospitalisations (primarily amongst the unvaccinated), and they have similar [five- to 11-year-old] vaccination rates.” Across New York state, about 16% of five- to 11-year-olds and 71% of 12- to 17-year-olds are fully vaccinated. “Please give your children the gift of vaccine protection as soon as possible as our case [numbers] are increasing rapidly,” Pan wrote. Rising numbers of pediatric cases have convinced officials in some states to order a return to remote learning after the winter break. Around 300 schools in Maryland, New Jersey, New Mexico and New York will remain closed. In Mount Vernon, a New York suburb, virtual learning is scheduled until at least 18 January. “I have been very reluctant to close schools but given the current trends in Covid cases it would be risky not to do so,” district superintendent Kenneth Hamilton wrote. In Maryland, Prince George’s county public schools, one of the 20 largest districts in the US, transitioned more than 136,500 students to virtual learning last week. The district chief executive, Monica Goldson, told families staff “must be able to deliver in-person instruction and other activities in conditions that prioritise their own health, as well as the wellbeing of the school community. “The increased positivity rates have significantly challenged the ability to do so, causing anxiety among many school communities and disruption to the school day.” In New Jersey, Paterson public schools will start 2022 with two weeks remote. “A surge of new cases has occurred in north-eastern New Jersey and it is expected that the trend will continue through the holiday break,” said the superintendent, Eileen Shafer. Some officials have expressed frustration. Dan Domenech, director of the School Superintendents Association, told Newsweek: “Just when we thought this past October – when we had about 98% of kids back in schools in person – that things were moving in the right direction, here we are right back where we were last year.” On Sunday, a leading health expert questioned the need for any schools to close. Ashish Jha, dean of the Brown University School of Public Health, told Fox News Sunday: “We know how to keep schools open, we know how to keep them safe. This really shouldn’t even be on the table. I’m disappointed to see this happening. “We know that for kids being in school is the right thing for them, for their mental health, for their education. And we have all sorts of tools to keep schools open so I don’t really understand why school districts are [closing schools]. “… There could be times when you have such severe short staffing shortages that it may be hard to keep schools going. That really should be the only context I think at this point.” Concern about Omicron infections among children remains high, however. On Friday, Christmas Eve, the New York health department warned healthcare providers of rising numbers of child hospitalisations around New York City, where Omicron was first recorded on US soil. The department warned that admissions rose four-fold from the week starting 5 December to the week starting 19 December. Approximately half the admissions were of children under five and thus not eligible for vaccines. For the week starting 19 December, none of the five- to 11-year-old patients were fully vaccinated. “The risks of Covid-19 for children are real,” said acting state health commissioner Dr Mary Bassett. “We are alerting New Yorkers to this recent striking increase in pediatric Covid-19 admissions so that pediatricians, parents and guardians can take urgent action to protect our youngest New Yorkers.” The health department advised parents to protect “children who are five years and older by getting them fully vaccinated and protect children under five by making sure all of those around them have protection through vaccination, boosters, mask-wearing, avoiding crowds and testing”. The California public health director, Dr Tomás Aragón, warned to expect rising admissions there. “Why? Omicron is so contagious that it finds unvaccinated/non-immune people who are most vulnerable for hospitalisations and deaths.” Throughout the pandemic, experts have said children are less likely to develop serious illness. For the week from 9 to 16 December, the American Academy of Pediatrics reported 169,964 pediatric Covid-19 cases, representing 1.8% to 4.1% of hospitalised patients.Laali was alone at home when she realised her legs were drenched in blood. The bleeding did not stop for eight hours. As she fell unconscious, the 25-year-old thought she would die alongside the foetus she was losing. She had been three months pregnant when she was taken for prenatal sex determination. “When I learned it was a girl, I started feeling as though I was suffocating,” she says. An abortion pill was forced down her throat, without a doctor’s supervision, and subsequent complications led to hospitalisation. The night she was released, Laali cried herself to sleep – and in the morning returned to her work in the fields. Laali’s unborn daughter is among India’s estimated 46 million “missing females” over a period of 50 years, ten times the female population of London. A deepening gender bias, breeding rampant sex-selective abortions and female infanticides, means that India accounts for nearly half of global missing female births. “The traditional pattern of marriage and customs dictate an inferior position to women in Indian societies,” says Prem Chowdhry, a gender activist and retired professor at the University of Delhi. Since girls leave their birth family after marriage, she says, the dowry and cost of raising a girl is considered an unwelcome obligation, and sex-selective abortions are common. Prenatal sex determination was criminalised in 1994, but it is a widely flouted law. The practice has thrived with medical advancements, spread to more regions, and is still easily accessible in privately run clinics. Surrounded by vast sugar cane fields, Laali’s village is 40 miles from Delhi. Social health activists who run an unregistered support group for women here estimate that “every third house in the village” has aborted a foetus because of the sex. “Families want a son at any cost. Any cost!” Laali says. “If I die, my husband will remarry tomorrow morning, hoping the next woman will give birth to a son.” Laali was 19 when her marriage was arranged with a farmer in 2009. In the next three years, she gave birth to two daughters. During her second pregnancy, she was regularly drugged by traditional and faith healers in order to “make” a boy. When her baby girl was born, no one from her family came to see them in the hospital. Returning home was worse. “My mother-in-law refused to see my daughter’s face,” Laali said. “She refused to take care of me, saying: ‘you are giving birth to girl after girl. How far can I take care of you?’” Every night, as she sat down for dinner after a day of labour in the field, someone would toss in a taunt. “When anyone had a son in the village, it was a nightmare for me,” she recalls. “My family abused me in front of my girls.” The government of India appears unwilling to act. A recent government survey hailed the fact that there are more women than men for the first time. However, activists on the ground and experts are sceptical of the data. “The main objective of the survey was to look into data on reproductive health and family welfare indicators and not on the population sex ratio,” said Sabu George, a researcher and activist based in Delhi. “All state-wise trends show a different picture.” Dr Prabhat Jha of the University of Toronto, who led India’s Million Death Study, agrees: “The UN Population Division, the most careful demographic work, estimates the number of ‘excess men’ in India is growing.” India’s own registrar general’s estimate suggests a similar trend. A 2021 Lancet research paper, co-authored by Jha, claimed that the situation has worsened, with missing female births increasing from 3.5 million in 1987–96 to 5.5 million in 2007–16. The male child bias has cut through class and geographical divisions. In August, a 40-year-old woman from a wealthy upper-class Mumbai family said she was forced to abort eight times to satisfy the family’s desire for a son. She was given more than 1,500 hormonal and steroid injections before she lodged a police complaint. Last year, in southern India’s Karnataka, a 28-year-old woman died after complications during a third forced abortion. Endless harassment pushed Laali to seek psychiatric help, and she is currently on medication. Two abortions and a surgery later, doctors have advised her to not get pregnant again. “My womb has weakened and my body cannot bear another child,” she said. Family interference can cause huge stress for women. Bhavna Joshi, 39, from Chittorgarh in Rajasthan, had eight pregnancies in her 11 years of marriage, and finds her experience so painful to talk about that she only wants to share the basic facts: she was taken to “uncountable” numbers of traditional healers, had three abortions and lost two infants as babies. It didn’t stop until she finally gave birth to a son, now aged five. After two abortions, Laali wishes for a boy too. “I want this to end. They are drugging me and I cannot eat or drink for days,” she said. “I just want out of it, badly.” Over the past two decades, trends in sex-selective abortions have shifted. The Lancet research found that as more families in India become nuclear, abortions are more common with the third pregnancy. “Families let nature decide twice, but then – for the third time – they make sure it is a boy,” said Jha. “Violence against women is a cultural thing in India. The problem is going to get much worse before it might get better.” After having two daughters, 36-year-old Meenakshi was taken by her in-laws for a prenatal sex test when she fell pregnant for the third time. “The area was completely deserted and hidden,” she says, hiding in another home for the interview. “I was scared. It wasn’t a normal clinic.” Meenakshi, currently seven months pregnant, wasn’t directly told the result. “My husband and his mother looked happy so I understood it was going to be a boy,” she said. “Otherwise, they would have killed it [before the birth].” In India’s deeply patriarchal society, women’s full sexual and reproductive rights are still a distant dream. Women like Meenakshi are fighting for acceptability in the family. Meenakshi’s parents raised her to expect freedom after marriage. But everything is worse, she says, sobbing. For Laali, harassment is part of her daily life. By the time she was 15, her mother had aborted two female foetuses, and her younger sister has aborted at least three. “You are brought up in an environment where this violence against women is completely acceptable and normalised,” says George. “The question is: how do you resist this on the ground? And that’s frightening.” Both Laali and Meenakshi were isolated in society, lacking any emotional support. Talking of their experiences, hidden inside their rooms, makes them cry, and their daughters, all in their teens, console them with hugs. Laali and Meenakshi are desparately worried they will not be able to protect their daughters from similar trauma, but for now the girls are mostly oblivious. Meenakshi’s eldest daughter jumps with joy as she sees a plane passing over their heads. “She wants to be a pilot,” says Meenakshi, wiping her tears. “When I cry, she tells me: ‘Mamma, it’ll get better, and one day we’ll fly together, in a plane that I’ll pilot.’” • In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:It was a Saturday night in early October 1986. My 30th birthday party, or what passed for it. Just a handful of junkies and my few remaining friends sitting on the floor of a grey, bare room in a flat in south London. I had thought it would be fun, as, for once, there was no shortage of heroin. Instead, I felt wretched. I was in total despair, as a rare moment of self-awareness had kicked in. It wasn’t just that I had trashed my entire 20s, achieving almost nothing of any note; it was also that I could see no prospect of any future. My self-destruction was complete. I had hit rock bottom. It was a terrifying moment, so there was only one thing for it. Take more and more drugs until I fell unconscious. Happy birthday to me. For most drug users, heroin is the ultimate taboo. For me, not so much. I embraced it, actively sought it out. When I first took it, at 20, it was like connecting with an old friend. I felt warm, invulnerable. It was the barrier between me and the outside world that I had always been looking for. All my feelings of low self-worth, failure and self‑loathing swept aside. I didn’t need anyone or anything else. Not that I intended to become an addict. Like every other junkie I have met, I thought I could beat the system. I would be the one able to control my intake; the smack wouldn’t control me, thank you very much. For the first few years, I just about got away with it. I set myself strict limits, like taking heroin only on Saturdays. But everything became blurred. Saturdays rolled into Sundays. No real harm done. Then I didn’t see why I shouldn’t start on Fridays. Then Mondays. To take the edge off the weekend. Before long, I was taking it every day. Then, one morning, after a day in which I couldn’t get any drugs, I woke up to find I was sweating, had severe cramps and needed to throw up. It took a while for it to dawn on me that I had a habit. The next eight years were ones of not-so-steady decline, years in which I did all the things I had always sworn I would never do. Injecting heroin was only for real addicts, so I would never do that. Except I did. All the squalor, rip-offs and shabby betrayals associated with drug addiction became part of my everyday life. Lying and cheating became second nature. I did get a number of shitty jobs, but could never hold them down, as being a junkie was a full-time business. I lost count of the hours I spent hanging around in cars, pubs and street corners, waiting for dealers to turn up. There were no mobile phones; back then, you had to work for your habit. I tried to give up on countless occasions, either by slowly reducing my daily intake or going on a methadone cure, but nothing worked. I didn’t know any addict who had managed to get clean. But with every failure, my self-esteem fell lower and my sense of futility grew. Above all was the sense of shame at what I had become. It is always the shame that gets you in the end. Almost everyone had given up on me. I had given up on me. My rock bottom lasted for the best part of six months. The feelings of despair that had overwhelmed me on my 30th birthday grew steadily worse. I wanted to give up, but had no idea how to do it. So, increasingly, I sought self-annihilation. My using became worse and worse. I would shoot up, only to come round lying on the floor much later. Overdosing became a way of life – the only way I could medicate my self-hatred. Then came a moment of clarity. Or a miracle. Call it what you will. I was challenged to stop by my wife – whom I had married in 1985 and who had stuck by me despite everything – and one of my last friends. And rather than just fob them off by saying I would do yet another methadone cure that I knew wouldn’t work, I agreed to do whatever they suggested. My desire to live was, briefly, stronger than my desire to die. A few days later, they came back with the name of a rehab centre. I had barely heard of such a thing, let alone known someone who had been to one. Within a week, I had been admitted. I can’t remember much of my four-week stay in rehab, other than they made me go cold turkey – I was sick as a dog and barely slept for the first two weeks – and that I was astonished to hear that I would have to stop taking all drugs, including alcohol. There must also have been therapy groups, but by far the most important thing rehab gave me was an introduction to the 12-step programme. I will never forget my first Narcotics Anonymous (UKNA) meeting. I sat at the back, shaking with fear and entirely mute. What I heard changed my life. Here were addicts with months and years of clean time – something that seemed an impossibility – whose stories were similar to mine and who were talking about feelings with which I could identify. I had never known such people existed or that recovery was possible. It was like a homecoming. Meetings became a lifeline for me when I came out of rehab and I felt ridiculously proud when I was chosen to be the greeter, offering tea and coffee. Then again, I was the only person to volunteer. The meeting secretary later told me his heart had sunk when I had put up my hand, because he was certain I would last only a few weeks before relapsing and disappearing without trace. But I kept coming back, made lasting friendships and slowly rebuilt something that approximated to a normal life. Finding work proved problematic: who would want someone with an unexplained 10-year gap in their CV? Yet after a couple of years of part-time jobs, I was inspired by a friend I admired in UKNA to write. I sent something off to the Independent on Sunday and they accepted it. Mainly, I think, because they thought I was the novelist Jim Crace. No matter; I had an in. Soon I was writing regularly for the nationals and had been offered a book deal to write about cricket. It took time for relationships to mend, for former friends and members of my family to trust that my recovery wasn’t yet another flash in the pan. But slowly, after a lot of therapy – I am still with the same therapist 30 years on – things took shape. After five years, my wife and I even felt secure enough to start a family, that we had the resources to be decent parents. Our children are now 29 and 26 and are far more emotionally articulate and accomplished than I was after many years of giving up drugs. I could not be more proud of them. Even so, recovery has not been easy. Many of my friends and acquaintances have died. Aids, hepatitis C, suicide and overdosing after a relapse accounted for many. Incidences of cancer and heart disease also seem far higher in recovering addicts than in friends who didn’t spend years abusing their bodies. No one gets away scot-free. My mental health is a tussle with depression and anxiety and I am often on the losing side. There have been many days when I can barely get out of bed because I am having a panic attack, while nightmares are an almost nightly occurrence. I regularly have dreams in which I am back taking drugs. Twice, things have got so bad that I have had to be admitted to a psychiatric hospital – most recently this summer. Even on the good days, low self-worth and a lack of self-confidence are ever present. The desire to disconnect, to disappear, can be overwhelming. I am in little doubt that if I had continued taking the quantities I had been using in the last year of my active addiction, I would have been dead within six months. Just another junkie statistic. Mourned by a few and long since forgotten by everyone else. Yet here I am, nearly 35 years later, still buggering on, my life far fuller, richer and longer than I could ever have dared imagine at my rock bottom. I couldn’t have done it without the love and support of so many people. To all of them I owe a debt of gratitude I can never repay. A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99) is out now. To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or by emailing jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. The mental health charity Mind can be contacted on 0300 123 3393 or by visiting mind.org.uk. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.orgNot with a bang, not with a whimper, more with a green-inked letter of complaint and a designed-to-be-overheard grumble. The world in Joy Williams’s new novel (her first long-form fiction in 20 years) is definitely coming to an end but this time with a mixture of resentment, indignation and apathetic fightback. Following an unnamed catastrophe that seems to have eliminated most land animals and poisoned most trees, “all conservation attempts are considered reactionary... People think the planet is attempting to make threats... and it pisses them off”. The human race, as pictured in this fever-dream snapshot, is certainly no longer represented by angry Thunbergs or hard-talking Attenboroughs. Avoidance seems to be the key: “The amusement industry has heroically re-established itself. Disney World has rebooted and is going strong.” In fact, the only people willing to do something are the aged and terminal who have gathered at a crumbling former hotel they now call the Institute, resolved to dedicate their imminent deaths to fiery protest. Khristen, our teenage guide to this blasted world, stumbles across them in a search for her mother some time after the apocalypse has struck. Khristen, originally named Lamb (this is not a book that is shy of religious symbolism or language), has been sent to a boarding school where “There were no books, no paper. One was simply supposed to remember the gnomic things the instructors uttered.” Even this is probably a relief after a childhood with a mother who was convinced that her daughter had died for several hours while in the care of a babysitter, during which she “witnessed ruthless and troubling mysteries”. Doctors refute this quasi-death experience, but her mother obsessively attempts to retrieve what her daughter saw anew; Khristen/Lamb has no answer. Keeping her daughter home-schooled in the hope of a breakthrough, her mother employs tutors who are as likely to ask her “How do you spell commensurable?” as “We all lead three lives, the true one, the false one and what is the third?” Compared with this, a paperless, gymnasiumless, Nietzsche-quoting school seems like a distinct upturn. But when the school closes, Khristen is placed on a train to the conference centre where her mother was last located. Gradually passengers disembark and “the moment I realised that I alone remained on board, the train stopped for good”. She locates the hotel in question on the shores of a huge lake – now poisoned and black – known simply as Big Girl. There, she finds herself among the dwindling band of geriatric eco-terrorists, even though “those of your age are anathema to our whole concept”. Marshalled by Lola, herself a triumph of Vicodin over reality, the remaining residents are a “gabby seditious lot, in the worst of health but with kamikaze hearts... determined to refresh, through crackpot violence, a plundered earth”. The problem is that macular degeneration or osteoarthritis can severely militate against the efficiency of terrorist outrages. Honey finally hobbles towards her target but is “ripped in strips” by a shotgun-wielding householder as she reaches for one of his tomatoes. When Lola finally strikes, blowing herself up at a factory making baby wipes, the result – beyond her own death – is negligible and unremarkable. By this point, we are in the neighbouring town, presided over by a 10-year-old judge who insists, when Khristen is brought before him, that she read and parse a passage from a Kafka short story. By now the novel’s credentials are clear: this is the apocalypse as reimagined by a committee headed by Dalí, Kafka and Yorgos Lanthimos. Williams has always skirted near this territory: in her last novel, The Quick and the Dead, nominated for the Pulitzer prize, the quasi-surrealism perfectly captures the adolescent outlook of her three teenage heroines. And the result can be very funny – Williams has a delicious ability to land a gnomic assertion and then watch its inherent contradictions twist in the wind. Harrow is less immediately witty – maybe because the tangible reference points are so distant, so surrealised, that the contradictions are inevitably less immediate – but the overall picture is intense, disturbing and always questioning. And the title? We are told that the symbol of the new government, painted on all available walls and doors, is a harrow. But what exactly is it? A dictionary will tell you it is a form of plough, designed to break up and smooth out the earth. But surely the more intended image is the “harrowing” that Christ unleashed on hell, during those dog days between crucifixion and ascension, in order to release the captive souls. In fact, this whole book feels as though it is set in a kind of limbo, a period when mankind must decide which way it wants to turn: down to a slow death in the hell of Disneyland or up to resurrection by caring for a planet that otherwise seems doomed. • Harrow by Joy Williams is published by Tuskar Rock (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWhen persuading someone to change their mind on a major topic, what’s being said isn’t always quite as important as how it’s said. If a person feels attacked or disrespected or condescended to, they’ll turn off their brain and block out the most rational, correct arguments on principle alone. Homo sapiens are odd, emotional creatures, more amenable to a convincing pitch than poorly presented rightness. It’s why we vote for the guy we’d gladly have as a drinking buddy over the somewhat alienating candidates with a firmer grasp on the issues. It’s why we feel heartbreak when the worst person we know makes a great point. Adam McKay’s new satire Don’t Look Up, a last-ditch effort to get the citizens of Earth to give a damn about the imminent end of days spurred by the climate crisis, appears to be at least somewhat aware of this defect in human nature. It’s all about the difficulty of compelling the uninterested to care, in this instance about a gargantuan comet hurtling toward the Earth on a collision course of imminent obliteration – an emphatic if rather ill-suited metaphor. (Everyone’s blasé about global heating in part because it’s so gradual, because it isn’t a force of instant destruction with a due date in an immediate future we’ll all live to see.) Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence portray astronomers Randall Mindy and Kate Dibiasky, flummoxed to find that no one’s all that alarmed about the “planet-killer” they’ve discovered – not the grinning daytime cable-news dummies played by Tyler Perry and Cate Blanchett, not the White House led by Trump-styled president Meryl Streep and not the American people. McKay evinces a clear understanding that some measure of this apathy comes from Dr Mindy’s dry approach in spite of his message’s gravity, the crucial facts and figures boring chief of staff Jonah Hill into mock-sleep. But the director suffers from a variant of the same problem himself, putting off even the audiences inclined to agree with his stances through an ineffective delivery. As opposed to the stammering of the panic-attacked Mindy, McKay browbeats at high decibels; his technique is much closer to Dibiasky’s on-the-air screaming that we’re all going to die. Except that his script states the obvious as if everyone else is too stupid to realize it and does so from a position of lofty superiority that would drive away any partisans who still need to be won over. Fingers point in every direction, only for the blame to boomerang back to the mindset this film embodies. The easy potshots at celebrity culture and our fixation on it – mostly in the form of a bubbleheaded pop star named Riley Bina, played by good sport Ariana Grande – ring hollow in a production packed to bursting with attention-grabbing A-listers. The big bad media proves unhelpful, more interested in salacious clickbait than honest reportage, though the script also relies on the mass communication machine as the one thing capable of turning the tide of public opinion. Most damningly smug of all is McKay’s idea of reg’lar folks, from Dibiasky’s center-right parents (“We’re in favor of the jobs the comet will create,” they inform her before allowing her in the house) to the veteran tapped to pilot the hail-mary mission in space (Ron Perlman as a racist drunkard who addresses “both kinds” of Indians, “the ones with the elephants and the ones with the bow and arrows”). It’s all reminiscent of the noxious focus-group coda to McKay’s previous film Vice, and the implied sneer at the Trumpite blurting out “libtard” as well as the millennial who’d rather see the new Fast and Furious movie. McKay is so un-shy about expressing his blanket contempt that one starts to wonder who this could possibly be for. The only group simpatico to its repellent self-celebratory attitude would be the pocket of liberalism on that same ideological footing, estranging others ostensibly on their side with an air of superiority. The toothless comedy has both the tone and reach of a political Facebook meme sent by a well-meaning elder relative, the point less to critique than reaffirm that we all hate the same sorts of people. The character making it out of this film least-scathed is Timothée Chalamet’s Yule, a young skate rat hanging out around the hometown to which Dibiasky eventually returns. A soft-spoken and soulful kid, he’s an ex-evangelical still figuring out what his faith means to him, philosophically adrift but self-assured enough to stick up for himself when she offhandedly says something callous during the fling that sparks between them. He gets the one emotional beat that works in its context, as he does the courtesy of saying a final prayer before the apocalypse hits, a moment so affecting due to McKay’s willingness to consider Yule’s humanity. This scene stands out as an anomaly in its power to move, not just sentimentally but in terms of alignment. As the first instance compelling an audience to invest in any of these characters or the beliefs they represent, it’s the only time Earth seems to be worth preserving.Financial markets are poised for a bumpy ride in 2022 in the face of soaring inflationary pressure, rising interest rates and ongoing disruption to international supply chains caused by the Omicron variant of coronavirus, experts have said. Analysts and financial investors said Omicron’s emergence had raised the prospect of a stagflationary start to the new year, with weaker levels of economic growth despite intensifying price pressures in already stretched supply chains. The winter energy crisis will also weigh on Europe’s economies. “Covid vaccines and treatments will take some of the edge off any social disruption we may face, and while many businesses have learned to trade through the stops and starts of the pandemic, a return of substantial winter restrictions [in the UK] and abroad would be a blow for the global economy,” said Laith Khalaf, the head of investment analysis at AJ Bell. If the pandemic does ease in 2022 as hoped, central banks are expected to raise interest rates or cut back on their multitrillion-dollar quantitative easing bond-buying stimulus programmes to try to rein in inflation. The US Federal Reserve said this month that it anticipated raising borrowing costs three times in 2022, which could spook markets and weaken a recovery that is already expected to slow in 2022. “High inflation has central banks feeling the heat, but by late 2022 we see a very different backdrop, with stagnation a bigger risk than stagflation,” said analysts at the Japanese bank Nomura. Victor Golovtchenko, of the online broker Think Markets, said the US Fed was in the unenviable position of choosing between “persistently high inflation numbers, and persistently overvalued financial markets”. Joost Beaumont, a senior fixed income strategist at the Dutch bank ABN Amro, said the coming year would be choppy for markets as a result. “We expect tighter global financial conditions, in particular from Fed rate hikes and rising US rates to again trigger bouts of volatility in markets.” AJ Bell’s Khalaf said the bond market must face a day of reckoning eventually, unless monetary policy never normalises. “It might be a gradual deflation rather than an explosive rupture, but it does look like a question of when, not if. Long dated government bonds would be most in the firing line, so bond investors could seek to protect themselves by looking to shorter dated bonds, higher yielding markets, and strategic funds that employ a flexible approach,” Khalaf said. The Bank of England is also expected to raise interest rates in 2022, perhaps two or three times, having unexpectedly lifted its main interest rate to 0.25% at its December meeting despite concerns over Omicron. “In a very different modus operandi from the last pandemic resurgence, central banks are now on a firm tightening road,” said George Lagarias, the chief economist at Mazars. “We believe that for 2022, investors should at the very least be prepared for more volatility.” Surging energy prices in Europe and Asia drove inflation higher this year, as supplies struggled to meet demand after the easing of lockdown measures over the summer across advanced economies. Inflation is expected to stay elevated in the short term but could then drop back through the year. Bill Blain, a market strategist and the head of alternative assets at Shard Capital, said investors had not priced in the winter energy crisis that is driving up bills and forcing some factories to suspend work. “Markets are vastly underestimating just what higher power prices are going to do to corporate earnings and growth across the globe,” he said. Europe is particularly vulnerable, while power outages and “industrial dislocation” in China could cause fresh supply chain chaos, Blain added. High-growth but low-profitability tech stocks may fare badly in a world of higher inflation and rising interest rates. The share prices of many of those pandemic winners such as Zoom and Peloton have already fallen back from record highs in 2021. Paul Craig, a portfolio manager at Quilter Investors, said extreme growth-oriented stocks may continue to struggle. “We are potentially witnessing the end of the valuation bubble in emerging startups, hyper-growth and companies wearing tech clothing, and it would not be a shock to see more pain going into 2022,” he said. The US economy could stutter if Joe Biden does not get his $1.75tn (£1.31tn) Build Back Better legislation through the Senate, where the Democratic senator Joe Manchin is blocking the package. A slowdown or worse in China could also jolt markets in 2022. “Despite Beijing’s recent shift in policy stance, we expect growth to weaken further in spring 2022 on a worsening property sector, rising costs of the zero-Covid strategy, an export downturn and widespread factory closures before and during the Winter Olympics,” said Nomura, which fears “the worst is yet to come”. “We expect Beijing to take more decisive action to arrest the downward spiral in spring 2022, and growth could bottom out after that,” Nomura added. Weaker growth in the world’s second largest economy could pull commodity prices down. Oxford Economics predict iron ore prices will end 2022 below current levels, while Beijing is expected to press its steel industries to curb greenhouse gas emissions. Higher vaccination rates, particularly in emerging markets, will be crucial to fighting the pandemic and easing supply chain bottlenecks, said Seema Shah, the chief strategist at Principal Global Investors. “In 2022, governments in emerging market [EM] countries accelerating the pace of vaccination should become more tolerant of Covid and ease strict containment policies. This means some Covid-driven activity surges for EM still lie ahead, providing a promising opportunity to extend the reopening trade. It also likely implies less frequent factory and port closures,” Shah said. There is also the risk of geopolitical turmoil on the horizon; with Russian troops massing at the Ukraine border, increased tensions between Taiwan and China, and elections in the US and France. Will Hobbs, the chief investment officer at Barclays Wealth and Investments, said: “The straits of Taiwan have been hotting up, as has Ukraine’s border with Russia. Right now, many will argue that the liberal democratic model is the one that looks a little more rickety. Upcoming elections will continue to be nervy affairs for a while yet – US midterms and French presidential elections are the ones to watch in 2022.” Most Wall Street banks have forecast that equities will keep rising in 2022, adding to strong gains in 2020 and 2021. Mark Haefele, the chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management, has a positive outlook on stocks for the start of 2022. “Global economic growth is likely to remain above trend for the first half of 2022, monetary policy is still accommodative, even if emergency support measures are being scaled back, and we expect 10% growth in global corporate earnings in the year ahead,” he said. But strategists at Bank of America predicted a slightly negative year, as “there are too many similarities between today and 1999-2000 to ignore.” The UK still stands out as cheap and unloved compared with other markets, said Alex Wright, the portfolio manager of Fidelity’s special situations fund. That could mean further takeover action in the next 12 months, if overseas predators pounce on undervalued UK companies. “UK equities remain significantly undervalued compared to global markets and reasonably valued in absolute terms. This has been reflected in a meaningful uptick in M&amp;A activity, which has been a key contributor to performance for our funds. We are likely to see more bids if valuation discounts compared to overseas companies do not close,” he said. But dangers abound as the new year approaches. “The three main risks lie in a policy mistake causing financial havoc, a disorderly energy transition seeing a surge in selected commodity prices, and a nasty variant escaping vaccine protection,” analysts at Generali Investments said.The government has quietly backtracked on proposals to require every shop, office or factory in England to install at least one electric car charger if they have a large car park, prompting criticism by environmental campaigners. The original plan required every new and existing non-residential building with parking for 20 cars or more to install a charger. However, the Department for Transport (DfT) has now revealed it will only require chargers be installed in new or refurbished commercial premises amid fears over the cost for businesses, according to a response to a consultation. The move has prompted concern in the car industry and among experts that public charger access will lag behind demand, as sales of electric vehicles accelerate ahead of the 2035 ban on sales of new fossil-fuelled internal combustion engines. A quarter of new cars bought in the UK in November can be plugged in to recharge, according to industry data. Greg Archer, the UK director of Transport &amp; Environment, a campaign group, said: “Car parks are an ideal place for drivers of electric cars without driveways to charge. By failing to require commercial buildings with car parks to install a small number of charge points, the government has missed a simple opportunity to level up the charging available for less affluent drivers who park overnight on the road. “It is inexplicable that a government committed to phasing out conventional cars has failed to follow through and implement its own proposals from more than two years ago, and instead say it needs longer to consider the options.” Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced plans last month for a charging point to be required for every new or refurbished residential building from next year amid great fanfare, saying the regulations were “world-leading”. However, the decision to drop the requirement for existing non-residential buildings means the UK could fall behind the EU, which is introducing a rule for existing buildings to install cable routes for chargers after 2025. The government could still introduce more ambitious requirements for existing car parks – such as mandating a minimum number of chargers per parking space. The Office for Zero Emission Vehicles is considering comments on a separate consultation that closed last month on the future of transport regulations. The DfT’s consultation response said it wanted to find “a more tailored approach” for existing non-residential buildings. Despite worries over the financial costs, the cost of about £1,500 for installing a charger point can be recouped within a few years by charging users for electricity. The DfT declined to share the identities of those who objected to the policy on cost grounds. The consultation responses showed the most common objection was a lack of ambition for the number of charging points for larger premises. Only a “small number of respondents raised concerns about who would pay”. The DfT said it would draft an alternative policy. All the large UK supermarket chains, led by Asda, Sainsbury’s and Waitrose, have already started installing electric car chargers to try to lure shoppers – who can top up on energy while they shop. A DfT spokesperson said: “We have recently introduced world-leading legislation which requires new homes and non-residential buildings, such as offices and supermarkets, with associated parking to have charge points installed. “This will see the installation of up to 145,000 new charge points across England each year, ensuring consumers are able to buy homes ready for an EV future, and more charge points are available at shops and workplaces. With about 80% of all EV charging happening at home, this is a significant step forward as we accelerate towards our net zero targets and power up the electric revolution.”Here’s one to ponder while gazing at another dull and drabby December sky. Can colour affect sporting performance? Tiger Woods certainly thinks so. “I wear red on Sundays because my mom thinks that’s my power colour,” he said, while blasting his way to 15 majors. So does Sir Alex Ferguson, who famously changed Manchester United’s grey kits at half-time during a 1996 defeat to Southampton because, he claimed, his players had struggled to pick each other out. Meanwhile, for more than 15 years a battle has raged in sober journals over whether a red uniform can provide a winning edge – and whether other colours lead to a disadvantage. Newspapers, including the Guardian and New York Times, have also reported on the latest developments with breathless fascination. “Red is the tint for winners,” we wrote in 2005. “When all else is equal, a sporting strip of scarlet is enough to tip the balance.” Our report highlighted a highly influential study in Nature that examined combat sports at the 2004 Olympics and found that across 19 of 29 weight classes in boxing, taekwondo, Greco-Roman and freestyle wrestling, red had more winners than blue. According to the academics the colour red had provided a slight yet robust enough advantage to tilt the outcome. Meanwhile in 2008 a separate team of academics made another startling claim: that teams wearing red not only won more titles in English football between 1946 and 2003, but they won more at home and had a higher average league position relative to derby rivals in the same city who wore other colours. There was even a theory to explain this apparent phenomenon, rooted in evolution and culture, and linking red to dominance and a tendency for aggressive behaviour. As the Guardian explained in 2005: “Redness indicates anger, testosterone and male aggression in humans, mandrills and sticklebacks. In experiments, red leg bands have helped ringed birds win a higher place in the pecking order. Red plays a big role in signalling superiority throughout the animal world.” It might sound plausible. Perhaps even enticing. However a new study, Red Shirt Colour Has No Effect on Winning in European Soccer, published in the January 2022 journal of Psychology of Sport and Exercise crashes a large torpedo into the red superiority hypothesis. First researchers reanalysed the original 2008 study on English football and found some of the assumptions and conclusions “flawed”. Then they made a detailed statistical analysis of Premier League results between 1992-2018 to see whether red made a difference in more recent years but found “no evidence for the alternative hypothesis of a colour effect on percentages of home wins, points per game, and average ranking”. That wasn’t all. The academics at the University of San Diego and the German Sport University then looked at matches in Portugal, Germany, Netherlands, France and Italy over the last 20 years. Once again they discovered a team’s kit colour did not significantly impact their expected performance. “Overall with the statistics that we have, it’s a lot more likely that that null hypothesis is true: that there aren’t any colour effects,” explains one of the report’s authors, Dr Philip Furley. “And so it’s about 10 times more likely that across all the data, that there is no colour effect, as opposed to there is a colour effect.” Another of the report’s authors, Nadav Goldschmied, says the findings reflect a wider pattern. “It sounds like a good story, that wearing red can make a difference,” adds Goldschmied, who has tried to find evidence of the effect of red superiority in men’s and women’s NCAA basketball without success. “But it isn’t supported empirically.” That, though, isn’t the end of the matter. A second area of discussion focuses on whether wearing certain colours affects visibility. Intriguingly the theory developed after researchers noticed those wearing blue over white appeared to win more judo bouts at the 2004 Olympics in Athens than would be expected by chance. Their explanation? That those in white stood out more against the background of fans and therefore their movements were more easily detected by opponents. Yet when other researchers looked at judo in the 2004 Games they found no advantage to those wearing blue. Meanwhile a third area of research, examining how umpires unconsciously react to a team’s kit, suggests that teams in black might be penalised more often. The theory is that black is associated with malevolence, and thus professional players wearing the colour are deemed to be more aggressive. And, intriguingly, one major study, looking at 25 seasons of NHL penalty-minute data, appears to back it up. It found that teams wearing black were handed more penalty minutes, while white jerseys were uniquely associated with less aggression in contrast with coloured uniforms. What’s more, for the 10 teams that switched to – or from – black uniforms, the effect was marginally significant as well. Even so, it pays to be cautious here. So many things that go into a referee’s decision in a team sport – from home advantage to the aggression levels of the players themselves – that great care has to be taken into separating those effects. Claudio Gentile would still be Claudio Gentile whether he wore white or black. So would Gary Lineker. So where does all this lead us? As a major review into 33 studies dealing with the link between colour and sporting performance noted last year, there is a “highly ambiguous pattern of results” in this nascent discipline often due to small sample sizes and questionable research methods. However its conclusion is clear: “The current state of affairs leads us to doubt the possible sway uniform colours have over sport performance and subsequently game outcome.” And don’t tell Tiger, but the assumed superiority of red looks dead.Instead of more medals, more compassion. Instead of extraordinary superheroes, brilliant human beings. Instead of a chest-beating accompaniment to “the best ever” chant, simple expressions of pure joy. What a fascinating year of sport, where what happens on the pitch is now much more connected to what happens off it. And what incredible leadership from sportsmen and women across the world who have gone beyond the traditional boundaries of the sporting world to show us a better way to think, behave and connect. In the Euros Gareth Southgate demonstrated that compassion and care play a central role in high performance, on and off the pitch. He emphasised the importance of ensuring players felt a sense of belonging to the England team as a precondition for delivering their best performance on the field of play, operating at a deeper level than simple team formation and match tactics. He invested as much in those who sat on the bench, those who shared the touchline with him and those who supported the team behind the scenes as he did in those who took to the pitch. And he had no problem reaching out and comforting opponents towards whom he felt instinctive empathy and connection. The recognition of Simone Biles as Time magazine’s athlete of the year and recipient of the BBC lifetime achievement award in a year when she won fewer medals than ever before in her career signals a significant shift. Are we, at last, starting to see beyond the shallow, short-term glimmer of those round inanimate metallic objects and realising that lasting success might look very different, with greater impact and lasting value far beyond any metal discs? Biles’s courage to step back under the global spotlight in Tokyo and put her own mental and physical health first sent shockwaves round the traditional “win at all costs” sporting world. In perhaps her swiftest and most agile of moves, she undercut our entrenched macho narratives around pain, sacrifice and drive to be the best at all costs and exposed them for what they are – made-up narratives that diminish rather than enhance performance, controlling mantras that constrain rather than inspire athletes. Biles has emboldened those who seek to reset the old heroic language that persists at both grassroots and elite levels of sport. There is much to do to continue to break it down. Eddie Jordan’s much quoted yet nonsensical comments that Lewis Hamilton lost the last race of the F1 season because he had become “too sporting and too nice” showed how easy it remains to perpetuate this shallow approach. If you stop to think for a second about his comment, you realise the inherent contradictions and lack of meaning: is he suggesting that Hamilton was “nasty” for the seven years when he won his championship titles? Did he become nice all season, or was it just during the last lap of the last race of the season? It would be good if we could all pause for a moment and think before repeating any of this sort of nonsense. Hamilton’s integrity in an incredibly difficult and controversial situation should be lauded – it is there, not on the podium, that he offers the most powerful lessons. In other sports we have found further examples of athletes who have played their part in breaking down these old heroic myths. Ben Stokes and Naomi Osaka stepped up to show that they were willing to use their platforms to lead sport in a different direction (and to cope with the inevitable social media drubbing that accompanies such bold, fresh thinking). Their actions also served to highlight the woeful lack of leadership by managers and directors across sporting organisations. I hope those designated leaders will take time to reflect on the potential of sport to lead positive social change, affect attitudes and inspire young people to do more than become “heroes”, and take strides to catch up with these brilliant athletes. The maturity of the next generation of sportsmen and women is as breathtaking as their performances. The unashamed joy that Sky Brown and Emma Raducanu take in their sport regardless of their results resets the foundations in a way that is desperately needed by a sporting world that has been plunging into a credibility crisis, whether through shocking doping, repugnant corruption or simply the latest round of “win at all cost” incidences. There is a striking humanity through sport that this new generation of role models are opening up: their language is different, humility shines through, no more “I’m the best” chanting, no more talk of “crushing opponents” and “destroying the opposition”. Sport has always offered us a way of seeing human possibility played out in the context of multiple challenges and opportunities, hopes and fears, luck and risk, skill and grit. It is a world that we all relate to as we too seek to explore what is possible in our own lives. In one of the most challenging years in memory, it is refreshing to see sportsmen and women offering us fresh thinking, a new approach and a better way to succeed that could serve us all well on and off the field in the years ahead. Cath Bishop is an Olympic rower, a former diplomat and the author of The Long Win. She is an adviser to The True Athlete Project and chair of Love Rowing, GB Rowing’s charitable foundation.On the southern Mediterranean coast, nestled in the shadow of the Rock’s sheer limestone cliffs and its tangle of wild olive trees, the Gibraltar Stock Exchange (GSX) is quietly preparing for a corporate takeover that could have global consequences for the former naval garrison. Less than half a mile away, next to the blue waters of Gibraltar’s mid-harbour marina, the peninsula’s regulators are reviewing a proposal that would prompt blockchain firm Valereum to buy the exchange in the new year – meaning the British overseas territory could soon host the world’s first integrated bourse, where conventional bonds can be traded alongside major cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin and dogecoin. It is a bold move for a territory of just 33,000 people, where the financial sector – which accounts for roughly a third of Gibraltar’s £2.4bn economy - is overseen by a regulator staffed by 82 employees. If all goes to plan, the enclave could become a global cryptocurrency hub; if the controls set by the small team of regulators fail, it risks reputational damage and ultimately diplomatic sanctions that could threaten its economy. While countries including China and the UK have either banned or openly warned against investments in crypto assets, Gibraltar has bucked the trend, having committed to formally regulating cryptocurrencies in an attempt to future-proof the territory’s status as a financial hub. It comes as Gibraltar struggles to shake off a reputation as a global tax haven, with the government having sued a Spanish newspaper in an attempt to restore its global standing. Albert Isola, Gibraltar’s minister for digital, financial services and public utilities, says that while Gibraltar was a tax haven 20 years ago, the territory has now overhauled its tax and information sharing policies. The introduction of crypto regulation is having a similar effect: rooting out bad actors and providing assurance to investors, he says. “If you wanted to do naughty things in crypto, you wouldn’t be in Gibraltar, because the firms are licensed and regulated, and they aren’t anywhere else in the world,” Isola says. Gibraltar’s regulator has so far approved 14 cryptocurrency and blockchain firms for its licensing scheme, attracting the attention of ex-Sirius Minerals chairman Richard Poulden, who chose Gibraltar for Valereum’s crypto-exchange project. Valereum, he says, is trying to harness a cryptocurrency sector that is worth roughly $3.5tn (£2.6tn) – roughly the combined value of all companies listed on the London Stock Exchange. Poulden is the chairman of Valereum, which is based in Gibraltar and focuses on providing technology for linking mainstream conventional currencies such as the pound and the dollar with crypto assets. It will be a major task to overhaul an exchange that is currently staffed by only three employees, and will require a change in Gibraltar’s regulations to govern how crypto is going to be traded on the GSX. But Poulden says his firm is leaning on technology, rather than people, to weed out any bad actors. He says running anti-money laundering checks on cryptocurrencies is “not vastly different from running it on currency from any any other source. And indeed, in some cases, because you can trace back through the blockchain and see exactly where that money has come from, it can actually be substantially easier than trying to find where a block of funds in a bank has come from.” Other countries will be watching closely. Neil Williams, London-based deputy head of complex crime at Reeds Solicitors, ssays: “If it’s a success, you’d certainly think that other jurisdictions would look to follow, because it’s an ever increasing valuable commodity.” However, experts have warned that Gibraltar could face sanctions by countries such as the US if its regulators end up giving legal approval to crypto firms that – even inadvertently – give a pass to money launderers, black market criminals or kleptocrats who prefer the anonymity of crypto assets. It comes amid concern at major global financial regulators, including the Bank of England, over the rapid development of crypto assets and the potential consequences for consumer and investor protection, market integrity, money laundering and the financing of terror groups. “It could enable or facilitate money laundering, sanctions evasion, terrorist financing, so everyone’s wary of that as well,” says Charlie Steele, a partner at forensic accounting firm and consultancy Forensic Risk Alliance and a former US justice department official. “Regulators worldwide, almost all of them really, are approaching it from a position of deep scepticism … so it’s a little outside that strain of thinking for a country to welcome them in to buy a stock exchange.” . A month before Valereum announced its bid for the GSX in October, the head of the US Securities and Exchange Commission, Gary Gensler, declared that as an asset class, crypto was “more like the wild west…rife with fraud, scams, and abuse in certain applications”, raising further concerns over the possibility of criminal funds seeping into the mainstream financial system. Lax anti-money laundering (AML) controls have resulted in jurisdictions such as Malta being grey-listed by the world’s money laundering and terrorist financing watchdog (FATF), for lacking basic financial safeguards. It could seriously damage Malta’s economy and has been a stark warning for other countries and territories that might be tempted to let regulations slip. Meanwhile, Singapore has had to U-turn on its approval for the standalone crypto exchange Bitget. It suspended the exchange earlier this month for promoting a digital currency involved in a high-profile dispute over branding, having used an unauthorised image of K-pop band BTS to allegedly maximise its profits. “If this starts to look like everyone ran to Gibraltar to get away from real regulators, it’s going to not go well for them,” Steele warns. If anti-money laundering or sanctions rules are broken or evaded, “there’s lots of things they could do, and lead internationally through the FATF, to make things hard on Gibraltar. You’ll see that the FATF can impose all kinds of measures, which will require its members to put limits on business with that country,” he adds. But Gibraltar insists that it has welcomed crypto firms with its eyes wide open, having consulted on its regulation for the sector for four years before introducing it in 2018, helping it to secure a reputation as “Blockchain Rock”. By filtering through and licensing firms, says Isola, they weed out bad actors. “I don’t understand how there can be any increased risk in Gibraltar, when you can go to any other European country today and run exactly the same business without being supervised, without being licensed, and without being regulated. So how can we be more exposed by regulating them? It’s completely the opposite,” Isola says. He stresses that the country’s regulator has approved applications for only 14 firms over three years, a number that he claims speaks to the rigours of the licensing scheme. “It’s hardly a gold rush,” he says. “The knee-jerk reaction for any commentator when it comes to blockchain-based innovations – particularly when it involves a small jurisdiction like Gibraltar – is ‘Oh my God, risk, alarm and all the rest of it,’” says Tom Keatinge, director of RUSI’s Centre for Financial Crime and Security Studies.“I do think it’s very important to understand the capacity of the jurisdiction before jerking knees, and the reason I say that is because of all the small jurisdictions on the planet, the one that has invested the most time and effort in understanding the opportunity posed by blockchain is Gibraltar.” The Gibraltar Financial Services Commission declined to comment on the Valereum deal.“When all this is over …” These words started so many wistful sentences during Britain’s lockdowns of 2020. They carried the weight of our hopes and fears and grief and loss. When all this is over, we should have a national day of mourning for everyone and everything we’ve lost. When all this is over, we should honour our collective sacrifice by “building back better”. When all this is over, we should have a huge party and celebrate being able to dance and hug and feel free again. But for anyone who still doubted it, the rapid spread of the Omicron variant brings home the difficult truth: the moment isn’t going to come “when all this is over”. The pandemic isn’t like a war, to be survived until the day when peace is made, and we can all exhale and begin picking up the pieces. It’s a new reality that will, at best, gradually fade into the background as the threat recedes and our coping strategies improve. The problem is that our bodies aren’t designed to cope with this. As Emily and Amelia Nagoski point out in their book Burnout, our stress response is designed to help us run away from lions. It is something we are supposed to move through: it has a beginning, a middle and an end. One reason so many of us struggle with our mental health is that modern life is full of chronic stressors that we can’t run away from, so we get stuck in a constant loop of edginess and fear. And the pandemic is the ultimate chronic stressor. When lockdown was lifted, instead of being told to “stay home”, we were encouraged to “stay alert”. But nobody can stay alert for two years straight, at least not without consequences. I learned this the hard way when I burned out at the end of July. Like many people, I thought I could just plough on through the pandemic and still meet my own wildly unrealistic expectations of myself. In my case, this meant juggling parenthood with writing my first solo book and taking on a new senior leadership role. As it turned out, I was spectacularly wrong. After several months wrestling with anxiety, depression and fatigue, I finally faced up to reality and decided to step away from the new job. It was wrenching, but I just couldn’t ignore the message my body was giving me: I had to slow down. When I went public with my situation in November, I was overwhelmed by the outpouring of supportive messages. It helped me enormously, but also made me a little sad: it seemed to confirm my hunch that so many others were struggling too, yet were no longer seeing those struggles validated in the public discourse. Now, instead of being given space to process our collective trauma and let our minds and bodies heal, we have been plunged into more uncertainty. December is notoriously a month when the pressure to have fun can itself become a source of stress, when family tensions flare and relationships are strained. This year, the weight of expectation to make up for lost celebrations, alongside the risk of spreading the new variant and the prospect of further restrictions, vaccine disagreements and traumatic memories of 2020 are likely to put this on steroids. I’m sure that there are people out there who embraced the summer’s return to normality; who had moments of catharsis and collective joy at festivals or weddings or gatherings, and enough rest and relaxation on summer holidays; who are feeling recharged and ready to deal with whatever the pandemic throws at them. But I’m also sure that I’m not the only one whose experience has been very different. For many clinically vulnerable people, “freedom day” was anything but freeing, with the acceptance of sky-high infection rates making their lives even more restricted and dangerous. Those dealing with poverty or unemployment have faced cuts to universal credit and the tapering of support schemes, with many being pushed into debt. Frontline health and support workers are drained and traumatised. Even for those of us in more privileged positions, the experience of “freedom” may still have been one of fear and uncertainty, ushered in by the chaos of the “pingdemic”. Navigating daily life involves new layers of administrative and emotional complexity. Sending children to school entails repeated cycles of cold symptoms, testing and isolation. Travel plans are haunted by the spectre of last-minute cancellations. As a result, many are facing the “Omicron emergency” feeling broken and exhausted, our resilience worn down by two years of unrelenting demands. The country faces a deep mental health crisis, with nearly a quarter of a million people expected to develop PTSD and dramatic rises in anxiety and depression. At least a million adults are suffering with long Covid. In Germany, people struggling with such conditions can apply to go on a “Kur” – three weeks of treatments at a spa. In the UK, where mental health services are stretched to breaking point, you are doing well if you manage to get a phone call. I am incredibly lucky that I had the financial and social safety net to weather my burnout. Even so, I still had days when I doubted whether I would bounce back. I saw with terrifying clarity how easily someone can slip into a downward spiral of unemployment, debt and mental ill-health. I felt angry that we have built a society that allows this. Such times call for leaders with emotional sensitivity, but instead we have the misfortune to be stuck with leaders who are emotionally stunted, too often adding to our pain and fear instead of calming it. Revelations about Downing Street parties prompted a wave of grief and rage from those who felt this made a mockery of their own heartbreaking sacrifices. We have been told it is now our individual responsibility to manage our own Covid risks, even as government decisions fuel those risks in ways we cannot control. Instead of feeling held by something larger, we are constantly being given the message: you’re on your own. So what can we do? We might not be able to deal with our stressors, but we can find ways to deal with our stress, calm our nervous systems and make our bodies feel safer. We can tell ourselves that we’re not alone. Above all, this festive season, we can give ourselves and each other what our government steadfastly refuses to give us: the acknowledgment that we are hurting and doing our best in impossible times; gentleness, patience and kindness; a sense of safety and stability in an unsafe world. We can find refuge in our fundamental connectedness, our belonging to each other and to the Earth. In the words of the Nagoski sisters, “The cure for burnout is not self-care. It is all of us caring for each other.” Christine Berry is a freelance writer and researcher based in Manchester2021 was the year that America’s democracy came under attack from within. Donald Trump’s effort to overturn the election results, an endeavor that culminated in the 6 January assault on the Capitol, ultimately failed. But the lies the former president spread about fraud and the integrity of the 2020 results have stuck around in a dangerous way. False claims about the election have moved to the center of the Republican party. Republican lawmakers have seized on the fears created by those baseless claims and weaponized them into new laws that make it harder to vote. Between January and October, 19 states enacted 33 laws to restrict voting access, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. But Republicans haven’t stopped there. There is now a concerted effort to take more partisan control of election administration. Trump is supporting election deniers in their efforts to take control of key offices that control the rules of elections and counting of ballots. That effort has elevated fears that Trump is laying the groundwork for another coup in 2024, when supporters in those roles could help overturn the election results. All these actions are taking place against the backdrop of the once-per-decade redistricting process, which Republicans dominate in many states. Republicans are taking full advantage of that power, drawing districts that will entrench their control of state legislatures and win congressional seats for the next decade. Joe Biden has described this attack as “the most significant test of our democracy since the civil war”. But Democrats in the US Senate have been unable to pass two bills with significant voting rights protections. Whether Biden and Senate Democrats can find a way to get those bills through Congress looms as a major test of his presidency. Here are the ways that voting rights emerged as the most important story in American politics in 2021: New voting restrictions When state legislatures convened at the start of 2021, many moved quickly to enact new laws making it harder to cast a ballot. Many of these new measures targeted voting by mail, which a record number of Americans used in 2020. One of the most high profile battles was in Georgia, a state Trump targeted with baseless claims of fraud after a surprising loss to Biden there. Republicans enacted a law that requires voters to provide additional identification information on both absentee ballot request forms and the ballot itself. They also restricted the availability of absentee ballot drop boxes, a popular method of returning ballots in 2020. The law also criminalized providing food and water to people standing in line within 150ft of a polling place. In Florida, Republicans enacted a new law that also restricts the availability of ballot drop boxes, imposes new rules around third-party registration groups, and requires voters to more frequently request absentee ballots. The fight over new voting restrictions exploded in July, when Democrats in the Texas legislature fled the state for several weeks, denying Republicans the quorum they needed to pass new voting restrictions. Republicans eventually succeeded in passing a law that banned 24-hour voting, established regular citizenship checks for voter rolls, made it harder to assist voters, and empowered partisan poll watchers. Undermining confidence in elections A staggering number of Americans continue to deny the results of the 2020 election. A September CNN poll found 36% of Americans do not believe Biden was the legitimate winner of the election. Trump has fed that disbelief by continuing to make claims of irregularities that have already been debunked. Republicans in several states continue to call for the “decertification” of elections, something that is legally impossible. Republicans in some places have gone even further, authorizing unusual post-election inquiries into election results. The most high-profile of those reviews was in Arizona, where Republicans hired a firm with no election experience, called Cyber Ninjas, to examine all 2.1m votes cast in Maricopa county, the most populous in the state. That monthslong effort, which included a hand count of every single ballot, was widely criticized by election experts, who noted that the firm had shoddy methodology and its leader had embraced conspiracy theories about the election. Ultimately, the Cyber Ninjas effort affirmed Biden’s win in Maricopa county. Republicans elsewhere have embraced similar reviews. In Wisconsin, Republicans in the legislature have hired a former Republican supreme court justice to examine the election, but that effort has been marked by sloppiness and accusations of partisan bias. “This is a grift, to be clear,” Matt Masterson, a former top official at the Department of Homeland Security, who works on election administration, said in December. These efforts have been coupled with an even more alarming effort in Republican legislatures to empower lawmakers to alter election results. Lawmakers in seven states, including Michigan, Arizona, Missouri and Nevada, introduced 10 bills this year that would empower them to override or change election results, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. Some of the bills would allow partisan lawmakers to outright reject election results, while others would allow for post-election meddling in the vote count. Attacks on election officials Over the last year, there’s been a surge in election administrators who have left their positions because of threats and harassment. Experts are deeply concerned about that exodus and say that it could make room for more inexperienced, partisan workers to take over the running of elections. Ben Ginsberg, a longtime Republican election lawyer, said earlier this month the effort was an attempt to take election administration “from the pros” and give it “to the pols”. Trump has endorsed several candidates who have embraced the myth of a stolen election to be the secretary of state, the chief election official, in many states. So far, he’s made endorsements in GOP primaries in Michigan, Arizona, Georgia and Nevada – all swing states that could play a determinative role in 2024. Extreme partisan gerrymandering At the start of each decade, state lawmakers across the US draw new congressional and state legislative districts. In 2020, Republicans dominated the down-ballot races that determine who gets to control the redistricting process. And this year, they’ve used their power remarkably powerfully. In Texas, where 95% of the state’s population growth was from non-white people, Republicans drew maps blunting the political power of minorities. They drew no new majority-minority districts, instead giving Republicans an advantage at winning the state’s two new congressional seats. Republicans have also moved to shore up their advantage in politically competitive states like North Carolina, Ohio and Georgia. Democrats are gerrymandering the states where they have power, like Illinois and Maryland, but control the redistricting process in far fewer places than Republicans do. These rigged districts will insulate Republicans from threats to their political power for the next decade. Federal voting rights legislation One of the biggest frustrations of the first year of Biden’s presidency has been that Democrats have not been able to pass two crucial pieces of voting rights legislation through Congress. One bill would set a minimum of access across the country, guaranteeing things like 15 days of early voting, as well as prohibiting partisan gerrymandering. The second bill would re-establish a critical piece of the 1965 Voting Rights Act requiring states where there is repeated evidence of voting discrimination to get voting changes approved by the federal government before they go into effect. There is growing frustration that Biden has not pushed hard enough to get rid of the filibuster, which Republicans have relied on to stall those bills. Democrats have pledged to find a way around the filibuster next year.Root and Stokes both have super powers, but they’d have to dig out another...200? In classic bowling conditions. Against bowlers with stoked furnaces in their bellies. With a tail that is elegant in its longitude. In conclusion, England are stuffed and the Ashes are lost. Prove me wrong, oh cricketing gods. Thanks for all the messages and tweets, time for black coffees all round. We’ll be back tomorrow at 11pm GMT, have a lovely day. Glenn McGrath is reflecting “That last hour, that’s as tough as any batting conditions you’re ever going to have. Any little mistake, there’s bounce, there’s pace, there’s seam, you can’t be too tough on the English batsmen. This pitch is not getting any easier to bat on, not only is there bounce and seam movement, there’s a lot more pace too. Stokes and Root are two fighters and they’re going to have to fight as hard as they ever have.” That was one of the most torrid, exhilarating, periods of fast bowling I’ve seen. Cummins was magnificent in his wicket-lessness. Starc and Boland marvellous, roared, screamed, on by a wired-up crowd. That England’s fragile batting didn’t survive, is no real surprise. With the ball, England had their best day, despite the early-morning Covid scare. Better lengths, better catching, better inspiration. But all, an hour later, for naught. “I don’t expect to wake up after three hours of sleep to hear “England just have to survive these last 10 minutes, and tomorrow.” types a resigned Chris Purcell. “And then lose another two wickets! Haven’t these boys been practising? Maybe we need to set up a training establishment, on a remote island, or maybe a remote continent? I’m not angry, not even slightly miffed, but deeply disappointed. When you lot get back, see me the next day at 7 am. Right, I’m going to open up another barrel of brandy cream.” 12th over: England 31-4 (Stokes 2, Root 12) In a tiny act of defiance, Root drives Cummins down the ground for 3 off the last ball of the day. What to say? 11th over: England 23-4 (Stokes 1, Root 9) Boland gets his chance in front of a fired-up crowd. We glimpse Hameed’s eyes, stretched wide as perppermint creams as he watches him run in. A good leave second ball, a nick third to a beauty moving off the seam. Who is handed the poisoned chalice? Jack Leach of course, but even he can’t stonewall in the face of this Australian pressure. He successfully leaves the first, we’ll draw a veil on the second. Ben Stokes crawls to the crease. Inelegant slaughter. Nightwatchman Leach dares to leave and is rewarded with the death rattle. Boland’s third ball, squared up, and Hameed paper darts an easy catch behind. 10th over: England 22-2 (Hameed 7, Root 9) A brief respite as Cummins slips outside the off stump and Root largely ignores it. Ten minutes left. 9th over: England 22-2 (Hameed 7, Root 9) Root is tempted again by Starc, his soft hands save him as the edge flies just short of slip. And some temporary light relief as Hameed leans into a drive which zips all the way to the long-off boundary. As punishment he gets a snorter next ball and a back of the length screamer the next. “When I saw Crawley escaping with a snick, I thought England’s luck might just have changed but I realise that was a vain hope.” taps Colum Fordham “Dawid Malan was desperately unfortunate to get such a good first ball which was only just clipping. Here in Naples, people keep a small red horn in their pockets/wallets/whatever to ward off evil (and Mitchell Starc). “But having managed to stay up till three in the morning (3.00 am Italian time, 2.00 am Uk time), I set the alarm at 7.00 to see if England could muster the fightback they seemed to be showing last night. And I was pleasantly surprised to find the bowlers have done so. Can Hameed now save his test career and eke out a stand with his captain and re-start our Ashes tour?” “Here’s hoping against hope and symbolically clutching on to the Neapolitan horn.” Survival tonight would be a victory. 8th over: England 17-2 (Hameed 3, Root 8) Hameed survives an over of vintage Cummins that begins with a huge lbw shout which Cummins correctly decides not to review. The man is a god. Seventeen minutes left. 7th over: England 17-2 (Hameed 3, Root 8) Root chases a half volley which wouldn’t make his greatest hits album but it slices between third slip and gully and England can’t complain about their luck here. Hass picks up a single off one that slides down leg stump. Half an hour or so left in the day. 6th over: England 12-2 (Hameed 2, Root 4) I don’t know how England are only two down after that Cummins over, but they are. Hameed starts by surviving a huge lbw appeal, Root closes it with a straight-drive for four off a rogue loose ball. Total respect. “Following on from Boycotts’s old maxim that one should add two wickets to a score to visualise how quickly the complexion of a game can alter, I always think of England beginning their innings 0-2,” sniffs Hugh Molloy. “Saves disappointment. “ 5th over: England 7-2 (Hameed 1, Root 0) The hat-trick ball is a beauty, unplayable perfection, and not even Root can touch it. Just the double-wicket maiden for Starc, who is patted by everyone like a very favourite dog. Root allows himself a wry grin. Writes Andy Roberts. “Andy from FNQ enjoying the cricket at home in plenty of heat and under grey and humid skies. Enjoying a bit of a contest for a change, but having seen them bat I still wouldn’t put it past England to finish being defeated by an innings at this point. Loving the prospect of 5-0! England, don’t ever change; your cricket can always be counted on for a good laugh.” Oh my, that is unlucky, the replay shows the ball clipping the top of leg stump, but it’s umpire’s call and off he goes. That’s two in two - and Starc is on a hat-trick. Joe Root must face it. In hope not expectation Angled across, geometric perfection, a slither of an edge, captured by Carey. Crawley marches off miserably in 6/8 time. 4th over: England 7-0 (Hameed 1, Crawley 5) More majesty from Cummins. Crawley closes the face, gets a nick and the ball flies, but just short of Warner and Carey behind the stumps, neither who go for the catch.. Crawley all at sea but riding his luck, accidentally hogging the strike with an inelegant squirt off the final ball. 3rd over: England 2-0 (Hameed 1, Crawley 0) Hameed gets another monster first ball, which flies up and somehow misses catching glove or handle. A maiden is tailed with a tempter outside off stump which Hameed is magnetically drawn to play. No! No! No “Looking forward to this last hour of the match, possibly the series,” writes Robert Speed. When you say “looking forward”, do you mean watching from behind the sofa? 2nd over: England 2-0 (Hameed 1, Crawley 0) Ooof ! Cummins’ first ball is a brute, rearing off a length, Hameed springs like a puppet on a string, with no clue where the ball is, and it flies behind slip for a leg bye. The third zips through Crawley, the remaining three tease and tempt. Sublime bowling. 1st over: England 1-0 (Hameed 1, Crawley 0) Hameed faces the first ball with the burden of two ducks in his last two innings. Starc’s first ball is wide and for a mili-second I think Hameed’s gone for it, but he’s just swerving his bat out of the way. In fact, Starc’s first four balls are all wide of off stump and Hameed nudges a single off his ribs. The sixth is also wide and Crawley watches it pass. Over one: survived. Starc stretches those lampost legs at the top of his mark. 88.5 overs: Australia 267 all out (Starc 24 not out) Mark Wood hugely deserved that wicket for his efforts today, crucial firepower support for the magnificent Anderson (23-10-33-4). The lead is a nasty 82 thanks to excellent wagging from the Australian tail, who now prepare to bowl at England’s poppadom openers. Sixteen overs left in the day as the heavy roller does its thing. Smashing catch by Crawley in front of his chops at second slip, and just reward for Wood who never slowed his smooth charge to the crease. Boland pushed waywardly. 87th over: Australia 261-9 (Starc 21, Boland 3) Sorry about that, up and working again now. Boland fences his first Test runs and that is DRINKS. Australia lead by 76 and the options for the last hour are either that England get this last wicket quickly and then have a tricky 40 minutes to navigate, or Australia keep ticking away and picking up irritating last-wicket runs. The lead is probably already too big on a tricky surface tbh... 86th over: Australia 257-9 (Starc 20, Boland 0) Robinson is back on and rattles through an over. I’ve somehow lost tv coverage by pressing the wrong button when it threatened me with turning off. Bear with me a second. 85th over: Australia 254-9 (Starc 18, Boland 0) A huge roar for the local boy Boland and a crucial breakthrough for England. Anderson on song today. “Morning Tanya.” I’ve been waiting Brian Withington. “As a son of Essex I must join in protest at Graham Gooch’s characterisation as boorish by an earlier correspondent. He led England from the front with a professional pride and determination that seemed conspicuous by the contrast with his predecessor. As for David Gower’s after dinner speaking, I can confirm from personal experience that he wasn’t the only one in the room ‘bored rigid’. Ditto for his truly tedious career in commentary.” Anderson to the rescue as Cummins top-edges to point where Hameed collects like a knitter at the guillotine. 84th over: Australia 249-8 (Starc 17, Cummins 21) Stokes finishes the over, and his four balls go for 8, including a shiny-new bib and tucker hook for four by Starc. 83.2 over: Australia 245-8 (Starc 9, Cummins 21) Robinson replaces Wood after two overs, and immediately creates a chance as Starc drives straight back but Robinson can only put up his hands to protect his face rather than hold on. He slips and falls onto his back and is wincing, starts his run-up, pulls out, and now walks off, clutching the back of his left hamstring....poor Joe Root looks as if another bucketload of old scrap has been loaded on his shoulders. 83rd over: Australia 245-8 (Starc 9, Cummins 21) Better from Anderson, Cummins can’t lay a bat on him. A maiden. “In reply to Mr P Reynolds,” writes the Rev Nicholas Gates, “let’s have faith and dare, to dream the impossible... An England fight back. One of our ducks, could become a hero.” 82nd over: Australia 245-8 (Starc 9, Cummins 21) Wood, who doesn’t like the feel of the new ball in his hand, takes it from the other end. His first delivery is full and driven straight back past his falling fingertips by Cummins. What flourish! And, oh, then Cummins lays into a pull and Anderson launches into the air and somehow reaches the ball with his right hand but can’t hold on at mid-on. He’s suitably furious. The lead stretches to 60. 81st over: Australia 240-8 (Starc 9, Cummins 16) Nothing doing from Anderson. Darryl Accone “On David Gower: he played with the casual grace of the gods, he captained with graciousness in defeat (obliteration by the West Indies) and he had wryness and wit that completely escaped his boorish successor, Essex Man Gooch. Viva David Gower Viva!” The Snow White and Rose Red of English cricket. I’m not sure about boorish to describe Gooch though. He did try and install some boring but essential discipline to that England dressing-room. The tracksuit transformation was probably overdue. 80th over: Australia 233-8 (Starc 5, Cummins 13) Wood gets the last over with the old cherry. Three from it and England’s hopes rest with the shiny red ball currently resting in the umpire’s right hand. “It’s the bloody hope thing starting up again,” writes Paul Reynolds, “help please.” Shall I speculate about how quickly the new ball might fly to the boundary? Or mention how adept these big Australian fast bowlers are with the bat? 79th over: Australia 233-8 (Starc 5, Cummins 13) Stokes bleeds five and this Australian lead is abuilding - 48 and counting. 78th over: Australia 228-8 (Starc 3, Cummins 10) WinViz have England’s chances of a win up from 17 per cent this time yesterday to 20 percent today. Do with that what you will. Wood purrs in again, but Cummins and Starc are up to the challenge. Was this at Adelaide? I think Gower referenced this yesterday. An absolute shocker! 77th over: Australia 226-8 (Starc 2, Cummins 9) Cummins muscles Leach over the long-off boundary for an effortless four. Another single, hit hard to the fielder patrolling the oundary. “Listen,” taps Eamonn Maloney, “I don’t think Pat Cummins is a number 8 at the best of times and surely not now he’s captain and most important bowler. Surely Starc when he’s playing.” Eamon, you provoked him! 76th over: Australia 220-8 (Starc 1, Cummins 4) Starc survives a good probing, the last ball flayed just in front of gully. Australia lead by 35. England need to keep this below 50 if possible. Will he be tempted? Yes he will! A fat wide one with chocolate sprinkles and Carey can’t resist, edging the ball safely into Buttler’s gloves. 75th over: Australia 215-7 (Carey 16, Cummins 3) Ooof, Cummins edges just past slip and I think I detect a sparkle behind the spectacled eye. 74th over: Australia 211-7 (Carey 15, Cummins 0) Carey squeezes four priceless runs from Robinson. I must admit having a soft spot for the old rogue. I spoke to him earlier this year and he was obviously bored rigid doing after-dinner speaking about old times. I think he’s still got something to offer. 73rd over: Australia 207-7 (Carey 11, Cummins 0) Nicely done and England look thrilled for their put-upon teammate. Just nine, ten, Jack to go. Umpire’s call! A confidence boosting scalp for Leach, with the ball bumping the front pad on the knee and would have gone on to clip the leg stump. On field decision is out. 72nd over: Australia 206-6 (Carey 10, Green 17) Root entrusts Robinson with the first over after tea, with nine overs to the second new ball. Gorgeous straight drive from Green, head over bat, front foot eating up half the pitch, for four. They pick up another couple “Jeff Tweedy of Wilco fame once said the scariest thing about screaming into the void is when the void answers back,” says Adam Levine. The lesser of two evils? In the studio, the ever-courteous Moeen Ali, resplendent in a salmon shirt, suggests that Leach should have bowled less down the leg side and more at the stumps and that he wasn’t threatening enough. But points out that he probably needs to get his confidence back. England are walking back out Root and Bairstow are in jumpers like the northern softees they are. A crucial session this, put the kettle on and settle in. 71st over: Australia 200-6 (Carey 9, Green 12) I hope Leach never listens to his character assassination by Chappell on TMS. Having said that, Carey picks up two with a reverse sweep, another two with a sweep, fairly easily. And that is tea! Advantage Australia, but not out of reach. Time for a coffee. 70th over: Australia 196-6 (Carey 5, Green 12) Wood rattles through, and with ten overs left to the new ball, Root turns again to Leach. 69th over: Australia 195-6 (Carey 4, Green 12) Stokes, collar up, skins to the wrist, is not looking as dangerous as Anderson did, and Australia are able to bleed three from the over. The lead now 10. I was beginning to wonder if I was typing into the void, but an email lands. Thank you Adam Levine! “Whilst it might difficult to pick the winner amongst the litany of mistakes and missed opportunities on this tour from batting first and dropping Broad in the first test, bowling too short and not picking Wood in Adelaide, the palm d’or of incompetence has to go to the England selectors for the continued non-selection of Ben Foakes. He is by far and away the best keeper of this generation and hardly a mug with the bat. I am baffled by the blind faith they continue to (mis) place in Buttler.” I think what Buttler has had in his favour is the potential to transform a game, with the selectors just forever tempted by his white ball wiles. I’m not sure many keepers will average much over 30 in Test cricket, so then you’re on glove work - where Buttler has obviously not had a great tour. I think he dropped another half chance this morning? 68th over: Australia 192-6 (Carey 1, Green 12) Wood switches ends after two overs, and Carey picks up his first run. Might have been tight if Hameed had hit with is swoop and release. Greg Chapple suggests that Australia are running with the mindset that England won’t hit the stumps. Another rears up off Green, but not close enough to point, then Green glances his last ball down to the boundary as Wood slips legside. 67th over: Australia 187-6 (Carey 0, Green 8) Stokes’ first ball is edged by Green past gully to the bowler’s disgust, and Australia squeeze into the lead. The sun shines onto Stokes shirt, shadows darting across his chest as he vigors in. Green resists the temptations of a short ball and that’s a good first over back. 66th over: Australia 184-6 (Carey 0, Green 6) Another Anderson maiden. Carey has now played 15 balls without scoring. Anderson 19-9-24-3. Can England make this pressure count? 25 minutes till tea. It looks as if Ben Stokes is going to get a bowl. 65th over: Australia 184-6 (Carey 0, Green 6) Fierce from Wood, who gets some exceptional bounce, one steeples into Green’s glove and flies uncontrollably short of point. Australia sniffing towards parity now, but England threatening. 64th over: Australia 181-6 (Carey 0, Green 3) Green crouches over his bat and plays Anderson back. Carefully does it. He’s a big ball striker when he’s in the mood, but reins himself in. An old dog v a coiled spring Is anyone out there at the MCG? What’s the atmosphere like? 63rd over: Australia 181-6 (Carey 0, Green 3) Now we get the change as Wood replaces Leach and immediately the danger level is raised. Green is a sniff away from edging behind until he scampers away up the other end leaving Carey to see out the over. 62nd over: Australia 180-6 (Carey 0, Green 2) The old dog showing all his tricks. Carey sees out the over with some difficulty, pinged on the gloves. Anderson bowling nice and full, just like Joe likes it. Nicely played by Harris, securing his place for the next Test. Another catch for Root! Beautifully done by Jimmy, one that straightens as Harris prods, and the ball angles off the bat dropping at shin height to Root. 61st over: Australia 180-5 (Harris 76, Green 2) Leach stays on for his eleventh over: Green is impotent but Harris square drives with aplomb. 60th over: Australia 177-5 (Harris 73, Green 2) Anderson is whipped into action and he’s full and Green can’t get any purchase. Some stattage - 83 per cent of Anderson’s balls this year have been dots in Test cricket. I don’t have any comparisons to that but it seems pretty mindblowing, the old miser. 59th over: Australia 176-5 (Harris 72, Green 2) Harris picks up Leach for three, and Green sees out the over. Yes, I’d be tempted to bring back one of the fast men. I guess Root is trying to bowl him into rhythm with a long spell - obviously the middle of a crucial Test not the ideal place to do this... 58th over: Australia 173-5 (Harris 69, Green 2) Robinson - I’m trying to think of a more flattering verb than trundles - through another over. A maiden and that is DRINKS. 57th over: Australia 173-5 (Harris 69, Green 2) Just a single off Leach, as Green stretches his giant limbs forward and slips into a drive. Here’s the latest on England’s covid cases, which could yet threaten the tour. I’ve just sent the two positive teens in this house upstairs but am enjoying breathing their covid-air in the living room. 56th over: Australia 171-5 (Harris 69, Green 0) Tasty bowling by Robinson dangling the bait, which Head couldn’t resist. A vital breakthrough for England on what has been a barren afternoon after a sprightly morning. If they could just rattle through the next few, all is not lost. Australia currently just 14 runs in arrears. Head prods inelegantly and the edge flies safely into the hands of Root at navel height at slip. 55th over: Australia 170-4 (Harris 69, Head 27) Leach wheels through a quick over of fairly flattish fare. 54th over: Australia 169-4 (Harris 69, Head 26) Good morning and thanks Jonathan, just an easy workaday session for you there.... Now where are we? We get a close up of Buttler looking stony faced behind the stumps before Harris cuts Robinson down to third man for four with quite the zing. Australia’s out-of-form batsman now striding towards his century. And with that, I’ll hand you over to Tanya Aldred. Catch you here tomorrow. 53rd over: Australia 165-4 (Harris 65, Head 26) Since moving over the wicket Leach has looked a very different operator. Head doesn’t know whether to stick or twist in this latest over that goes for a couple of singles. 52nd over: Australia 163-4 (Harris 64, Head 25) Decent line and length from Robinson at 130kph and his accuracy draws an edge from Harris, but it’s played with soft hands and dies short of Bairstow at a very short third slip. England battled hard in the morning session to wrest some control after yesterday’s horror show, but this now 53-run partnership has taken the wind out of their sails. Australia are happy to grind their way into a lead. England need an injection of magic form somewhere. 51st over: Australia 163-4 (Harris 64, Head 25) Leach, starting an over from over the wicket for the first time today, draws a false shot from Head, sweeping off the top edge that lands not far from Robinson at square leg. Then he beats Harris with a fast dart down the leg-side that turns and bounces - STUMPING CHANCE! - but Buttler can’t hang onto the opportunity. That’s the second half-chance the England gloveman has missed today. 50th over: Australia 157-4 (Harris 63, Head 22) Ollie Robinson gets another chance, replacing Mark Wood, and he soon teases Harris into fishing outside his off stump with the angle across the left-hander. Once again, the opener recognises his error of judgement and returns to his compact ways. This has been an excellent demonstration of temperament from Harris. 49th over: Australia 157-4 (Harris 63, Head 22) The Leach nonsense continues with easy singles on offer whenever Harris or Head want them. Belatedly, Leach comes over the wicket, but what preceded will remain one of those most baffling passages of play I can recall. 100%. But presumably this isn’t all (or at all!) on Root. This was surely a plan devised over a 40-minute break with coaches and analysts. It’s barmy. 48th over: Australia 155-4 (Harris 62, Head 21) Harris has been patient and compact all day but he’s lucky not to nick a swoosh at Wood well outside off stump. He reverts to type immediately afterwards, as has been his great strength this innings, and pushes a simple couple through point. 47th over: Australia 152-4 (Harris 60, Head 20) More of this Leach around the wicket weirdness, and it almost buys a dismissal with Head dawdling a single, but Stokes misses the direct hit after some smart fielding. Whatever happened to run outs? Are they still a thing? I remember when Ricky Ponting and Jonty Rhodes were at their pomp in the 90s and every team had a baseball coach and specialist fielding drills and it seemed as though an era of dead-eye fielders was upon us. Nope. 46th over: Australia 149-4 (Harris 59, Head 18) Wood runs in hard, hits the deck hard, and hits the bat hard, but he’s too short and Head is happy to see off an over of dots from the crease. After a cool morning, the sun’s out over the MCG and it’s lovely and warm. “All this talk about turning the ashes into an intercontinental competition because England are so poor. It’s worth remembering that Australia haven’t won a series in England for over 20 years.” Euan Roberts with some perspective. 45th over: Australia 149-4 (Harris 59, Head 18) Another nothing over from Leach, but only two singles milked from it. All that diligence of the morning session feels like it’s leaking away for the tourists. 44th over: Australia 147-4 (Harris 58, Head 17) Wood is a more rational choice at the opposite end to Leach but he begins by bowling too full to Harris who punches a compact drive down the ground to bring up a dogged half-century, repaying the faith of the selectors after a lean series to date. Harris follows that up with a guided glance through the gully for four more. That was a shot from a batter in control of his game - solid platform, modest ambition, at ease with the pace of the ball. Australia have come out flying after lunch. 43rd over: Australia 137-4 (Harris 48, Head 16) The mind boggles. Leach bowls the first over after lunch, and it’s that same defensive line from around the wicket to the left-handers, with that weird-in-out field. Any mild frustration from England supporters must surely become untempered rage after three deliveries when a rank long hop is pounded behind square-leg by Head for four. Talk about allowing a batter to settle in after an interval. Cheap singles follow and logic sails out of the visiting dressing room window. And a quick shoutout to any Melburnians (local, or visiting) who might be keen to check out how Geoff’s beard’s going... How fast was Mark Wood this morning? The fastest. That was a welcome breather. Back to the cricket. England bowled excellently this morning session. Great control, fuller lengths, and they deserved more than the three wickets which came their way. Anderson in particular was superb. Marcus Harris has been dogged for Australia, riding plenty of edges and plays and misses for his 48. At the other end he hasn’t found a lasting partner. That all said, the major action probably took place off the pitch with four of England’s touring party failing RAT Covid tests and the remainder of the tour on a knife-edge while the full PCR test results come back. 42nd over: Australia 131-4 (Harris 48, Head 11) Robinson’s lethargic over is the only one of his spell with Mark Wood swapping ends to hurry up Marcus Harris with lunch in sight. Wood does beat the edge, twice in the over, but as he has all day, Harris gets his head down, brushes off any concern and presents the full face of his bat to a fuller delivery to earn a couple of runs, then leans into a glance that brings him closet to a half-century. 41st over: Australia 127-4 (Harris 44, Head 11) Now it is time for some spin, and the first overs from Jack Leach since his Gabba nightmare. Lisa Sthalekar is immediately furious at the defensive in-out field, as well as Leach bowling his left-arm orthodox from around the wicket to a pair of left-handed batters. There’s turn and bounce, but it all seems very confused from England with both batters able to milk runs unchallenged into the on-side. Not hugely promising from Root and the brains trust. 40th over: Australia 123-4 (Harris 43, Head 8) Anderson’s superb morning comes to a close. On comes Robinson, and out goes the ball - all the way to the cover fence. Not for the first time in his Test career the seamer struggles to his mark early and Head pounds a merciless square cut to a soft long hop. He works three more through the covers later in the over. Robinson simply cannot afford to miss his line and length at 125kph with a ball that isn’t moving in the air. There’s a run-out scare late in the over, but England never hit the stumps with a shy, do they? 39th over: Australia 116-4 (Harris 43, Head 1) Consecutive maidens for England but Wood was again too short to the watchful Harris. 38th over: Australia 116-4 (Harris 43, Head 1) Anderson is into the sixth over of his superb spell, and he continues to keep Head tied down, targeting the stumps from around the wicket, searching for that hint of tail away from the bat. Another maiden, Anderson’s seventh from 15 overs all up. It might be time to take a look at some spin soon. 37th over: Australia 116-4 (Harris 43, Head 1) Back comes Wood for a burst before lunch. He was lively in his wicket-taking two-over spell earlier, but he can’t find the right length here, allowing Harris and Head to hang back and defend from the crease. Until the final delivery of the over that is, when Harris is fortunate to see a thick edge bounce before the cordon and scuttle away for four. “England’s bowlers finally seem to be listening to their captain (not to mention pundits and cricket fans) and pitch the ball up,” emails Colum Fordham. “As soon as Robinson increased his length, he enticed Lyon into the forward defensive prod and got the wicket. Likewise, Wood has settled upon a fuller length and is really testing the Aussie batsmen, getting the crucial breakthrough of Labuschagne. It’s up to Root to set more attacking fields, encourage his bowlers to land the ball in good areas to put Australia under pressure for the first time this series. I like the way Anderson is bowling around he wicket to Harris. We might just get something from this morning’s session.” #Astute 36th over: Australia 110-4 (Harris 38, Head 0) Anderson is bowling beautifully. Head is welcomed to the crease with a delivery angled into him from around the wicket that seams away past the outside edge off the pitch. Terrific wicket-maiden from the veteran. Smith never looked settled during his 31 ball stay at the crease, failing to get bat on ball as much as he would normally expect. Harris now has an important job to convert his dogged start. There’s that in-ducker again from Anderson to Smith, this time the edge is thicker and there’s no need to bring the keeper into the equation because the ball ricochets down onto the stumps and the bails go flying. A richly deserved wicket for England. 35th over: Australia 110-3 (Harris 38, Smith 16) Some rare runs off the bat, three of them, to Smith, who stands tall outside off-stump and drives confidently. Harris then milks three of his own when Stokes strays onto his pads. Tom van der Gucht has dropped me a line. I agree with the analysis, not convinced about the practicality of the remedy. This is the market at work, right, comrades? “I’ve read a great variety of reasons as to the decline in our cricketing fortunes, but I’ve been brewing a longstanding concern regarding the impact of a talent drain upon England’s sporting fortunes through football clubs hoovering up all the top athletes at an early age. Football academies snap up the most talented pupils whilst at primary school - encouraging them to sign their sporting future away and spend the next decade missing out on a rich and varied diet of different opportunities they never get the chance to excel at. Then, at 18, 99% of them fail to make it and get released... Imagine all the sporting talent slipping through the net... they may not be footballers, but they were recognised for their athletic potential that could have flourished if they’d been able to apply it elsewhere. I think all Football academies should be forced to run other competitions in the off season: A T10 cricket league between premiership clubs; an annual athletics competition; mini Wimbledon; indoor rowing 2KM races (we need to up our game there too); and possibly handball as we may have an outside shot at an Olympic medal there.” 34th over: Australia 105-3 (Harris 36, Smith 13) Now Harris plays and misses to Anderson, but the length is a fraction short to demand an edge. And again! Fuller this time, angling into the left hander then seaming enough to hold its line. England continue to probe, as they have all morning, but the Gods have not been on their side. To his credit, Harris has shrugged off any moral defeats and played every ball on its merits. 33rd over: Australia 105-3 (Harris 36, Smith 13) Stokes beats Smith’s outside edge again in another tight over for England. They have dried up the runs, but Australia’s batters are keeping their heads; for now. 32nd over: Australia 104-3 (Harris 36, Smith 13) Smith rotates the strike early against Anderson, who then denies Harris anything to work with. England have bowled diligently this morning but they need to find some magic to convert that pressure into wickets. Only Wood has really seemed capable of delivery something out of nothing. “Could Covid scupper the entire series if there were more outbreaks?” asks Andrew Benton. Possibly, yes. “Maybe need the whole thing to be played again?” I hope not. “Or at least not listed as a series defeat for England?” Lol. “Do we know what the possible scenarios and actions are?” The immediate response will be based on the volume of cases and the need for isolating. We then have the issues of internal movement between states in Australia with the final Tests in NSW and Tasmania. Lots of logistics to work through, if required. 31st over: Australia 103-3 (Harris 36, Smith 13) Good over from Stokes, angling the ball into Harris from around the wicket, but the Australian survives and continues to look assured at the crease for the first time this series, offering an aggressive pull soon after his near-dismissal. “It’s true that the ECB seems to be favouring short-form cricket against the proper game, but that’s because they are chasing the money,” argues John Starbuck. “That they don’t account for the effects of doing this on the players only reveals the shortcomings of accountancy. Players don’t have sufficient experience of the longer game, which isn’t just about pacing their innings or bowling spells, it’s also about how you bat or bowl with differently-set fields. How many short-form games have a full slip cordon, for instance? Players naturally play to the strengths of the short-forms because they can win matches; in the short term, this works, but the ECB and corresponding bodies elsewhere don’t take a longer view. Much the same can be said of politicians these days, who aim to set the tone for their societies.” I would like to be smart enough to write a book with a title along the lines of: “The death of custodianship: What happened to the public good?”. See Premier League football clubs as further examples. ... yes, yes there was an inside-edge, a very skinny one that relied on snicko to confirm. Hot spot missed it. Ben Stokes pins the Australian opener on the pads from around the wicket. Paul Reiffel’s finger goes up. Was there an inside edge? Keeps the scoreboard ticking over, irritates bowlers, fielders, and captains, gets him to the non-striker’s end. Superb. 30th over: Australia 103-3 (Harris 36, Smith 13) Anderson sends down a tight over to Smith, who respectfully sees off a maiden. Only one delivery catches the eye, an inswinger that moved appreciably in the air, the ball carrying over the stumps with the batter already way outside off-stump. Drinks. 29th over: Australia 103-3 (Harris 36, Smith 13) Just a two-over burst from Mark Wood, which doesn’t bode well. The speedster is replaced by Ben Stokes for his first trundle of the day - and he immediately finds a thick edge from Smith’s bat, but it flies through the vacant third slip region and away for four. Smith, still yet to settle, then mistimes a slap of a pull that clears the infield but plugs a long way from the midwicket boundary. England are not enjoying the rub of the green. “Don’t forget the America’s Cup,” emails Jen Oram, in response to the suggestion the Ashes may have outlived their usefulness. “It went from 1881 to 1962 until the Aussies were allowed to challenge. (There were a couple of Canadian challenges before that.) If we’ve got another 70 years or so to wait before someone else can compete for the Ashes. I might give up and start following bog-snorkelling.” 28th over: Australia 94-3 (Harris 34, Smith 6) DROP! ISH! Anderson’s length draws Smith forward, then he finally gets some movement off the pitch, leading to an inside-edge that clips the pad and carries through low to Buttler’s left. The keeper dived full length but could only get his fingertips to the opportunity. That was tough, with Buttler only seeing the chance at the last minute. Still, add it to the tally. As is often the case, Angry Anderson brings out the best in the Lancastrian and he peppers Harris’ outside edge for the remainder of the over. 27th over: Australia 93-3 (Harris 34, Smith 5) Wood leaks onto Smith’s pads and goes for three at the start of an over lacking the same precision of the England paceman’s previous efforts. “Yes, we can all have a good laugh about England and ask whether a Big Bash XI could do any worse,” opens Andrew Cosgrove. “But over the past few years, a lot of England’s selection policy appears to have been predicated on the question ‘could they do any worse?’, and the answer has usually been ‘yes. Yes they can’. Look at Jason Roy. Vince and Hales’s test careers don’t really inspire much confidence. Mills can only bowl about four overs a day. Abell and Mahmood I’ve thought for a while are likely to have promising careers for England at some stage, but they scored no runs and took no wickets for the Lions against Australia A. So, on balance, I think no, we wouldn’t be better off with a team from the Big Bash.” 26th over: Australia 88-3 (Harris 33, Smith 1) Robinson strays onto Harris’ pads, allowing the Australian opener an easy three. Smith has yet to settle at the crease, but he avoids a duck with a nurdle into the on-side. 25th over: Australia 84-3 (Harris 30, Smith 0) That extra pace makes so much difference in these conditions, hurrying up the Australian batters before their eyes are in. Smith is skittish at the crease with Wood bowling a tight fourth stump line, the speed gun registering 151kph. England have an opening they must take advantage of before lunch if they are to breathe life into this series. Mark Wood, the pick of England’s bowlers yesterday, is a welcome introduction to the attack. Harris leans into a nice drive for three, but then Labuschagne goes! A rare cheap dismissal for the Australian run-machine, who is late to a fizzing Wood delivery on a length and can only send a regulation edge to Joe Root’s bread basket. England might just be onto something here. 24th over: Australia 81-2 (Harris 27, Labuschagne 1) Robinson is bowling stump-to-stump to Labuschagne and the Australian is unable to work any runs away on the leg-side. He’s also caught in the ribs with a delivery that rises off a length. Not a whole heap going on out in the middle, especially compared to what must be happening behind the scenes. “I have been on a cricket break for a bit but was just coming back to it for this series; doing the usual, reading articles listening in for the first few hours, texting pals about batting collapses. But tonight it’s a toss up between a podcast or TMS, I’ve not even chatted to pals about it,” emails Lennie Lenford. “Every year since 2005 it seems to matter a little less. And maybe there’s more important things right now. I hope I’ll tune in again and hope there’s still something to tune into.” 2005 remember, the year cricket left terrestrial TV in the UK. 23rd over: Australia 80-2 (Harris 27, Labuschagne 1) Anderson is on the money bowling around the wicket to Harris, pushing the ball up and forcing the opener to defend a maiden from the crease. There is no lateral movement to speak of so Anderson is somewhat de-fanged. I think England have tried this approach already (see Sibley, Pope, Crawley, Archer etc) but for one reason or another it just hasn’t worked, nor have many of the up-and-comers demonstrated they have the techniques or wherewithal to be persevered with in the expectation they will come good. 22nd over: Australia 80-2 (Harris 27, Labuschagne 1) Marnus is off the mark with a squirty inside-edge behind square on the on-side. Marcus also adds a run to a similar location, albeit mirrored, with him being a leftie and all. “Will the Ashes go the same way as the Wightman Cup - an inter-continental competition that was scrapped because the British team kept being whitewashed?” asks Dominic O’Reilly. Or perhaps it morphs into a Ryder Cup style event with England becoming Team Europe? The European Cricket Championship is making inroads... 21st over: Australia 78-2 (Harris 26, Labuschagne 0) Harris has his top score of the series so far after being backed in by the Australian selectors, and he whips a couple off his pads to move to 26. On his home deck he looks compact and assured. They sure are, and there is of course a grey area between RAT and PCR tests that invites an element of risk to proceedings. 20th over: Australia 76-2 (Harris 24, Labuschagne 0) Robinson’s reward for removing the nightwatchman is the sight of the No 1 batter on the ICC’s rankings. Marnus Labuschagne is happy to let a couple of sighters through and allow the bowler a wicket-maiden. “If a Covid case takes out the entire England team, or this current shower of a side is sent home,” emails Brendan Jones, “maybe a scratch side made up of England players currently here for the Big Bash could be pressed into duty. Could they do any worse? Vince, Billings, Hales, Brook, Duckett, Abell, Evans, Thompson, Mills, Mahmood, Jordan.” Even if it was worse, it would be more entertaining, surely? When the fun stops, stop. Nathan Lyon had a couple of swipes but Robinson’s line and length eventually does for him. Textbook seam bowling, textbook lower order outside edge off-balance through to the keeper. 19th over: Australia 76-1 (Harris 24, Lyon 10) Another four through the cordon. This time Harris uses soft hands to ruffle Jimmy’s feathers. Early doors, but this looks like a run-scoring day. 18th over: Australia 71-1 (Harris 20, Lyon 10) Lyon has come for a good time, not a long time. Ollie Robinson, who has a tendency to bowl a rank long hop loosener at the start of a spell, is slapped for four with disdain through midwicket, to the delight of the crowd. Robinson adjusts and catches the edge of Lyon’s bat, but it flies just to the left of the diving Bairstow in the gully. Maybe a half-chance of a catch? The ball then beats the outside edge before Lyon farms the strike with a single. 17th over: Australia 62-1 (Harris 20, Lyon 1) Nathan Lyon is keen to get bat on ball early and the third of a series of mistimed strokes eventually earns him a run. Marcus Harris is more watchful. Nothing to report in the air or off the seam for Anderson. You’re not the first to raise this point. Barney Ronay in particular has been very forceful on the topic. James Anderson has the ball, nightwatchman Nathan Lyon is on strike, Michael Atherton is on comms. The sun is shining. Cricket it is, after all. Despite all of that, play is about to get underway at a cool and breezy MCG. Cricket Australia have released a statement. Confirmed four cases (so far) in the England tour party following the Rapid Antigen Tests this morning. PCR tests to come. “Hi Jonathan,” hello John Davenport. “You wonder: ‘how such a well-funded cricket board can deliver an outcome like this with such consistency.’ This sadly matches the question that exasperated British club tennis players have been asking of the LTA for the last 50 years. The one word reply to both is probably: super-amateurish.” I fear the opposite end of the scale may be the case here. Super-managerial perhaps? Robert Wilson has logged on, and he has Viv on his mind. “Continuing yesterday’s theme of moral correction, I was very sad about the death of Archbishop Desmond Tutu given that he once publicly ticked me off good and proper for laughing at an Ulster Unionist politician who had the temerity to read out a quote from Nelson Mandela’s memoirs. I’m not sure how familiar the Archbish was with Ulster Unionism’s usual policies on inclusion and universalism (it was quite a mild telling off in the end). It felt agreeably buzzy and ticklish, a fizzy kind of fruity disapproval. He was a mensch. I can’t help hoping Root doesn’t beat Viv Richard’s deathless year of Homeric grandeur. Because reasons (my loving faithful heart might break). But also because nothing should come close. I’ve been trying to write a tight five pages about it for the last couple of years but I keep getting bogged down in asinine hero-worship, slack-jawed awe and frankly disturbing surges of molten passion. Look at the dates on that list of boss-bat years. All post 2000 apart from Viv. He’s the heroic outlier, the sine qua non, the ‘grovel’-crusher, the national (and international) unifier, the greatest walker to the wicket, the caressing butcher, the gumchewing panther, the erotic...” This has been an odd morning. It could easily become a landmark day. As with the Yorkshire racism scandal, the lack of openness and accountability at the top doesn’t help either. “Less than a year ago England were competing with India for a place in the final of the world test championship,” emails Ben Skelton. “Is the English system really dong as badly as Geoff Lemon is currently claiming on Test Match Special? Or have they just had a dismal year in extraordinary circumstances?” I would concur with Geoff, and other esteemed observers of the English system, notably George Dobell, who have been warning of this outcome for a long time. Sure, these are extraordinary circumstances that are possibly magnifying the problems, but this is not a case of a few batters with odd techniques, it is a systemic issue that has been a long time coming. This Tweet from Guardian alum Will Macpherson could prove more significant as the series wears on. Lateral flow tests are not the gold standard here in Victoria, but then PCR testing is overloaded with some results delayed by days. We are in a grey area with regards clearance. Kim Thonger is the first cab off the rank. “I think if Australia want to finish this game off quickly they could declare after the first ball today, roll England over again for, say, 120ish, and knock off the 250 or so needed to win, quite comfortably in 40 to 50 overs, and still have three days of rest on the beach. I had planned to retire in time to enjoy a visit to Australia for the NEXT England Ashes tour, but I’m beginning to think this may be the last.” If Pat Cummins did such a thing I think he would receive a stern email from the Cricket Australia CEO and a large bill from the host broadcaster. It would be very funny though. Ok, it feels as though the morning rush of news has subsided for now. Time to look ahead, and get stuck into some of your correspondence. The Guardian data gurus have been sifting through the noise of England’s calamities looking for signals. And they’ve come up with some pretty graphs, and a splendid headline. England’s latest batting collapse in Australia follows on from a series of below average scores from the men’s Test team in the past year. Statistics show the top order fairs poorly compared with other countries, and well adrift of their six main rivals. Here’s Ali Martin’s latest report from the MCG after England delayed their journey to the ground following a positive Covid test. Jonathan Liew riffs on the predictability of England’s latest collapse and how a system that has produced such a taut white-ball group can have delivered such a haunted Test outfit. There was a time when England collapses had a kind of fascinating car-crash quality. These days, by contrast, they feel strangely banal: tedious, overfamiliar, predictable, like a recurring anxiety dream. The openers disappear early. Joe Root does something pointless and defiant. All of a sudden you’re back at your old school. Someone in the middle order plays a stupid shot. You turn over the exam paper, but there’s nothing on it. Jonny Bairstow will be in action soon, and the England No 6 had the unenviable job of fronting the media after yesterday’s shambles. It’s one of those days that … we will look back on and probably reassess next time and potentially take different options. Vision coming through now of the England side striding out onto the MCG for their warm-ups. Ben Stokes is wielding a protein shake. England are on their way. Start time delayed by 30 minutes. You can also listen to Geoff (and Adam Collins and Emma John) dissect play on The Final Word Podcast if you like. Ok, on with the show, and back to yesterday, where Pat Cummins demonstrated once again that he is bloody impressive. Geoff Lemon tells the tale. You could easily arrive at the conclusion that Patrick Cummins had been blessed by some benevolent god. The best-on-ground performance in the teenage Test debut, the personal qualities that made people speak of him as a future captain, the rise to that position despite a century and more of entrenched Australian opposition to bowlers taking the job. That interpretation, though, would be overlooking the long, long wait after that teenage beginning, when Cummins had played one Test but spent six years being denied the next, the cycle of injuries whirring as endlessly as the exercise bikes on which he did another stint of rehabilitation. Your early 20s are supposed to be a time of impulsiveness and expression, not of quiet dedication to a long-term goal. There may still be a delay to the scheduled 10.30am start, but we’re on course for action. While we wait for more news to filter through about if and when England take the field, let’s recap yesterday’s action, starting with Ali Martin’s report from the close of play. Shortly after tea on the opening day at the MCG – not even halfway through the series as a whole – the Barmy Army trumpeter could already be heard pootling the theme from the Great Escape. A rejigged England side featuring four changes were eight down during what became an eventual 185 all out in 65.1 overs. And that was a total swelled by Ollie Robinson, the No 9, throwing the bat to the tune of 22 runs. So, Channel 7 has just come on air in Australia and the frontline broadcasters (Ponting, Botham etc) are off having PCR tests. They have been replaced by the crew normally on BBL duty - Alister Nicholson, Brad Hodge, and Lisa Sthalekar. Further, the ECB has just released the following statement about a touring family member also testing positive. Once again the precarious nature of this series reveals itself. Some early reports coming through on Channel 7, the host broadcaster, that the MCG press box has a confirmed case of Covid-19. I’ll bring you more as it comes, but it wouldn’t surprise me if there was some disruption to how this match is broadcast. Hello everybody and welcome to live over-by-over coverage of day two of the Boxing Day Ashes Test. We’re underway at the Melbourne Cricket Ground at 10.30am local time (11.30pm UK). History doesn’t repeat, but it often rhymes, or so the saying goes. If that’s the case, then England’s Ashes series is turning into something from the Dr Seuss canon. On day one at the MCG all the familiar failings materialised. Both openers fell cheaply, set batters got out to poor shots, no pressure was applied to Australia’s attack, and (although this is minor in comparison) England’s one true hope, Joe Root, could not convert a half-century into a Test-defining score. There was plenty of noise after Adelaide that England had talked frankly about their performances. This set the tone for the topic of conversation throughout a miserable day’s play: that of England not backing up their words with deeds. I think we’ve all been willingly, or unwittingly, overthinking things. Put simply, England are not very good. They are especially not very good in Australian conditions. They are very extremely especially not very good in Australian conditions against a well-drilled bowling attack, led by the magnificent Pat Cummins. What happened yesterday was normal. Sometimes it’s that straightforward. From England’s perspective, the remainder of this series has to focus on how such a well-funded cricket board can deliver an outcome like this with such consistency. Something very significant is wrong that cannot be addressed by interrogating a heated dressing room debate or the angle of an opener’s blade. This Test is not over, yet, but England’s first-innings dismissal just 65.1 overs after the toss means it is moving on apace. The next two days promise the best batting conditions at the MCG. Further ignominy for the tourists awaits. I’ll be back with more shortly, but if you would like to join in, you can reach me by email or Twitter (@JPHowcroft).Storm Arwen came hurtling down from the north at the end of November, causing a tsunami of trees to crash to the ground across Scotland, northern England and parts of Wales. Winds of 100mph flattened conifer plantations like dominoes; large country houses lost 250-year-old oaks; and gardeners grieved for uprooted magnolias and rhododendrons. Three people died and more than 9,000 were left without power for more than a week in bitterly cold weather. Phones were down, roads were blocked and people had trees coming through their roofs. “You weren’t going anywhere,” remembers Heather Swift, the Woodland Trust’s Cumbria site manager, who has been assessing the tree damage in the area. Storm Arwen has brought about dramatic changes in the landscape, but such upheaval also presents an opportunity to increase forest diversity, expand the provision of wildlife-rich dead wood and create more variation within plantations, say experts. “We think they’re disasters, and momentarily they are, but in the grand scheme of things, this is natural,” says Swift. Many compare the damage to the “great storm” of 1987 that ravaged the south-east of England and London when 115mph winds uprooted 15 million trees, except Arwen seems to have attracted less attention, perhaps as it affected less populated parts of the country. “It was similar in terms of scale of damage, the disruption it caused and size of trees that went down,” says Swift. “There have been some mighty fine trees that have gone down, and there was nothing wrong with them. Huge, beautiful oaks just laid flat on their sides.” Estimates suggest that 8 million trees have been affected in Scotland and 4 million in England, although it will take weeks to work out the full extent of the damage. Currently there are no estimates available for Wales. The National Trust is the largest single custodian of ancient and veteran trees in Europe, and for some properties in the north of England, this was the worst storm in 40 years, with an estimated £3m in damage across sites nationally. Staff were left devastated after losing trees and gardens they’d spent whole careers looking after. “To lose so many in such a short period, I think that’s what is so heartbreaking … Trees are just as important to many of our properties as historic buildings and collections,” says John Deakin, head of trees and woodlands at the National Trust. More than 50 trees were uprooted at Bodnant Garden in Conwy, including the tallest redwood in Wales, which stood at 51 metres and was expected to reach double that height. The Wallington estate in Northumberland saw half its veteran trees blown over. Storm Arwen had a disproportionately large impact on trees because it came from the north, rather than the south-west, which is the prevailing wind direction. Trees are adapted to withstand winds piling in off the Atlantic by anchoring their roots in a specific way and putting on wood in particular places. Woodlands also naturally have smaller trees on the south-west so they are more aerodynamic in strong winds, but this means they are ill-prepared when the wind switches direction and they are battered square on. After the 1987 storm (which did come from the south-west) there was a rush to clear away all the fallen trees, but conservationists say the mess left behind transformed our understanding of woodland ecology, highlighting the benefit of diverse, scruffy, open habitats within woodlands. The response to Storm Arwen will be different from the 1987 storm, and as many fallen trees will be left as possible, say conservationists. “It’s now part of our cultural and historical landscape – clearing it all up kind of obliterates the memory of it,” says Swift. She plans to reroute footpaths around some fallen trees, rather than removing them. The National Trust will leave fallen trees if they are not negatively affecting tenants or posing a risk to visitors, seeing the stricken lumber as another chapter in the story of their properties. This could have significant biodiversity benefits. In wild, natural woodland a quarter of wood is dead, but in most managed woodlands this is less than 10% as people clear it away. The aftermath of Storm Arwen is an opportunity to leave dead and decaying wood in situ, creating rich and underserved wildlife habitats as a result. “We really have a history of overgardening, perhaps seeing some of these natural habitats as untidy … We’ll leave as much [dead wood] as we possibly can,” says Deakin. Storm damage creates opportunities to build more structure and diversity into woodlands in a way that might not have happened before, he says. High winds are likely to hit the UK more frequently and with more strength as the climate crisis goes on because warm air holds more moisture which fuels storms, and so these rare events will become more common. Conservationists and foresters are working out how they can reduce the damage when the next storm hits. The National Trust is looking to move towards more natural tree management. Ancient oaks, for example, lower their branches as they age to make themselves more stable. Sometimes people might overplay the need to take limbs off trees from a health and safety perspective, but the risk of being hit by a fallen branch is incredibly low, says Deakin. “Overzealous intervention is not going to do a tree any good at all. It’ll make it more susceptible to many different factors of which storm damage is one.” Many trees that were knocked down were single-species, single-age conifer plantations, which are more vulnerable to storms than native, mixed woodland. “Over the next 50, 100 years, the forests we’re producing now will be much more diverse … They’ll be better adapted for Storm Arwen-type events and more generally climate change,” says Doug Howieson, Scottish Forestry’s head of operational delivery, who has been working with trees since the 1987 storm. The benefits of work being done since Storm Arwen will be seen in decades to come. “The trees that we plant today, we will not see mature, but people in the future will appreciate our work,” says Howieson. In the meantime, forestry and conservation organisations are urging the public to stay away from damaged trees as they can be dangerous. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresWhat do you look for in a video game? Excitement? Immersive escapism? A sense of achievement? Or to be reduced to a blubbering mess? My youngest daughter, Sharkie, said I would get all of that from What Remains of Edith Finch. So I leap into the game, not even angry that the title doesn’t have a question mark at the end. The most intense gaming experience I ever had was crying during Final Fantasy VII on the PlayStation. You know the bit I’m referring to, don’t you? Genuinely great things in life make you cry, whether they be movies or songs, first loves or sports-final defeats. Laughing is easy. We laugh every day, even when things aren’t actually funny. But crying takes something special, such as Aeris dying, or Terry Jacks singing Seasons in the Sun, or the finale of Buffy Season 2, or watching Mr Holland’s Opus on a plane when you are drunk. I cried at all of that, but I never cried at the births of any of my children. I always thought that made me a terrible parent from day one, and this is what is going through my mind as I play Edith Finch, which is about a family whose children all die in strange circumstances. That’s our biggest fear as parents, isn’t it? As we flounder in the ocean of our parental failings, we cling to that one rock: at least we haven’t killed them. And that’s what makes it impossible for me to enjoy this game. That’s not to say I don’t admire many things about it. The individual styles of each death story are beautifully varied, from scenes in heartrending POV to others drawn through a retro Viewmaster. This is art coded on to a constantly changing gaming canvas. I would go as far as to say the section where one of the brothers slowly loses the will to live working in a fish cannery is the most creative video game level I have ever seen. I like the pace, too. Great art cannot be rushed, and here you’re always walking: it’s probably the slowest game I’ve played since Lords of Midnight on the ZX Spectrum. This means I can consume a sliced turkey and cream cheese bagel while I play, the kind of lunch you simply cannot eat while playing Call of Duty. But I can’t escape from the fact that most of the gameplay in What Remains of Edith Finch revolves around kids dying. Kids of all ages. From teenagers hit by storm debris to a baby drowning in a bath. For an angsty middle-aged parent, this is far more upsetting to watch than any claret-ejaculating Mortal Kombat fatality. And it’s all so avoidable! Basically all of the deaths in this game come down to bad parenting. One character dies from food poisoning after eating stuff left lying around. No! I spent so much of my life cleaning out fridges and putting safety locks on cupboards precisely so that didn’t happen. I am that parent who is obsessed with predicting what can go wrong. I put rubber on the edges of every countertop. I made all my kids wear bicycle helmets in the house when they were learning to walk. My children turned me into such a paranoid parenting wreck, they killed off all the wanton joy of being an irresponsible 90s lad. You can’t do anything to save the characters in Edith Finch; you just have to watch their individual tragedies. That’s kind of the point of the story, but for me this is as frustrating as watching Titanic. Actually, it’s worse, because you are not just watching them die, you are unwillingly steering them towards their demise. I have spent 23 years as a parent trying not to get my kids killed. I really don’t want to play a game where I can’t save them. While What Remains of Edith Finch didn’t give me escapism, achievement, immersion, or the emotional release of my own tears, it did make me conduct an extensive health and safety recce of our house and dig out the old bicycle helmets for the kids. Even though they are now aged 15, 17 and 23.If the NFL was hoping to keep more teams in the playoff hunt longer by expanding the regular season from 17 weeks to 18, well, mission accomplished. Week 16’s slate of games is nearly completed, yet much remains unsettled, particularly in the still wide-open AFC. If there’s one team that’s taken advantage of their situation, it would be the Kansas City Chiefs, who are currently the only team in the conference guaranteed a playoff spot. It feels like ages ago, but it was only late October when the preseason favorites looked to be in serious trouble. After a demoralizing 27-3 loss to the Tennessee Titans, the Chiefs had stumbled from the gate with a perplexing 3-4 record. Since then, however, they have rattled off eight straight victories and look to be in great shape to make their third straight Super Bowl. While previous Chiefs teams were famous for outscoring opponents, this Kansas City team has found a more sustainable model of success, as their Patrick Mahomes-driven offense is now balanced by what has become one of the league’s best defenses. It’s to the point, where the Chiefs easily handled the Pittsburgh Steelers on Sunday despite being without all-world tight end Travis Kelce, who was on the team’s Covid-19 list. With Sunday’s 36-10 victory over the Steelers, Kansas City became the first team in the AFC to clinch their division, partly thanks to the New England Patriots’ own reversal of fortune over in the East. On top of that, they are one game ahead of the Tennessee Titans for the conference’s top seed. Coincidentally enough, the Chiefs’ Super Bowl LV opponents also clinched their division on Sunday. The 11-4 Tampa Bay Buccaneers have won the NFC South for the first time since 2007. Even before the season began, it felt like a rematch between these two squads was potentially in the cards and it hasn’t looked more possible than it does now. However, given how relatively competitive the NFC has been this year, the Chiefs have a clearer path to a championship than the Bucs. Tampa Bay’s record looks sterling, but they are missing key elements of their offense: running back Leonard Fournette and wide receiver Mike Evans both suffered hamstring strains while receiver Chris Godwin is out for the foreseeable future thanks to a torn ACL. On top of this. linebacker Shaq Barrett strained his MCL during Sunday’s win over the Carolina Panthers. Meanwhile, their competition looms. Despite his recent heel turn, reigning MVP Aaron Rodgers hasn’t forgotten how to play football: he has helped lead the 12-3 Green Bay Packers to the best record in the league. The Los Angeles Rams and the Dallas Cowboys – both of whom also clinched a playoff berth on Sunday – have identical 11-4 records, and LA holds a tiebreaker over Tampa Bay. Meanwhile, right now, the Chiefs are the only AFC team that knows its season will last beyond Week 18. These are, however, only regular-season records. While rewards like a bye week and home-field advantage provide huge dividends come the playoffs, they don’t guarantee anything in a single-game elimination format. Look at the defending world champions, who came into last postseason as a wild-card team and still went on to finagle a victory over extremely talented opponents. This brings us back to the chaos of the 2021 NFL season. At no point has a team looked invulnerable and – with the obvious exception of the season’s bottom-feeders (the Detroit Lions and the Jacksonville Jaguars) – every team has seemed capable of putting together a winning streak. It hasn’t helped that teams have had to piece together pandemic-ravaged active rosters as they continually lose players to Covid-19 and the surrounding protocols. When the postseason comes, it’s not set in stone that previous results will dictate future success or failure. Right now, the Chiefs looked primed to make their third straight Super Bowl appearance, but if there’s one lesson to take away from this year it’s not to read too much into the current NFL landscape. Video of the week Maybe things would be better for the Jets if they just played the Jacksonville Jaguars every game. Not only did the much-maligned Zach Wilson go off on a 54-yard touchdown run, but the Jaguars allowed a 102-yard kickoff return to Braxton Berrios. In any case, it was a rare entertaining win for the Jets, who beat Jacksonville 26-21, which meant it was a day-after-Christmas miracle for the waitress who received Jets tickets from Wilson as a tip. MVP of the week Joe Burrow, QB, Cincinnati Bengals. His 299 passing yards were the most a quarterback picked up in the first half of an NFL game all season. He ended throwing for 525 total yards and four touchdowns, without a single interception. What can you say? The dude really loves playing against the Baltimore Ravens. OK, it didn’t hurt Burrow or his receivers that the Ravens’ defense has been decimated by illness and injuries, but that’s not enough to explain the sophomore signal-caller’s utter dominance. Baltimore’s injuries weren’t just limited to the defensive end of the game, they were without both of its quarterbacks in Lamar Jackson and Taylor Huntley. So, the very well-traveled Josh Johnson ended up starting for Baltimore on Sunday and while he threw two touchdowns himself, it obviously wasn’t enough for the Ravens, who were beaten 41-21. Stat of the week 1940. That was the last time the Pittsburgh Steelers went five straight games without a first-half touchdown. While the Steelers won two of those five games, they are still in great danger of dropping out of the postseason mix after their blowout loss to the Kansas City Chiefs. At this rate, we might see the end of Ben Roethlisberger’s career sooner than we anticipated. Quote of the week “Football aside, sorry, but I’m doing a story about New Year’s resolutions and I was just wondering if you had any you wanted to share with your fans and our readers?” – a reporter to New England Patriots head coach Bill Belichick following his team’s 33-21 loss to the Buffalo Bills Infamously, Belichick’s professional demeanor is such that when he uncharacteristically issued an apology for his treatment of the media last week, it was a massive local news story. If there ever was not a time to throw up a softball, human interest question to him, it was not after his team’s most unfortunate loss of the regular season. The 9-6 Patriots have now lost their last two games while the Bills have won their last two and – just like that – things are all tied up on the top of the AFC East. If Buffalo win out, they will win the division that New England could have clinched. Given that he just witnessed Josh Allen absolutely slice through the vaunted Patriots defense, it’s understandable that the coach replied “not right now”. When it comes to football, the entire team’s resolution should be not to fall out of the wild-card standings. In any case, all of this is good news for the 7-7 Miami Dolphins, whose playoff hopes remain alive heading into Monday night’s game against the New Orleans Saints. Elsewhere around the league • The NFL attempted to crowd into the NBA’s gimmick by giving us a pair of Christmas Day games. In the first, the Green Bay Packers faced the Cleveland Browns. Cleveland QB Baker Mayfield threw three interceptions in the first half, each one of which eventually resulted in an Aaron Rodgers touchdown. The Browns made a solid comeback attempt but the game essentially ended on – what else? – a fourth Mayfield interception. The Packers won 24-22 while the Browns are forced to spend another week speculating about Mayfield’s near and long-term future with the franchise. • On Saturday’s second game, the Arizona Cardinals continued their inexplicable late-season slide, falling to the Indianapolis Colts 22-16. In the game, running back Jonathan Taylor failed to record a touchdown but he continued his own MVP campaign by putting together a 108-yard rushing performance in front of a depleted offensive line. • The Detroit Lions kept their losing ways alive with a 20-16 loss to the Atlanta Falcons that dropped their record to 2-12-1. Comically, that one tie continues to be their undoing in their quest for the number one pick in next year’s draft. The Jacksonville Jaguars’ previously discussed loss to the New York Jets dropped their record to 2-13, the league’s overall worst. • The quarterback cavalcade continues in Carolina as Sam Darnold has returned to replace fan favorite Cam Newton, who once again struggled after making an impressive season debut. Instead of picking one, Panthers head coach Matt Rhule decided instead to rotate the pair depending on the in-game situation. As noted earlier, this time around it resulted in a 32-6 loss to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. Rhule’s sticking with his platoon strategy, however. “I believe it’s 1000% working,” a defiant Rhule said after the game, “I just know nobody can see it and I apologize. As I tell our team all the time, it took Jay Z seven years.” Jay Z was unavailable for comment. • With their 30-23 win over the Minnesota Vikings, the 11-4 Los Angeles Rams secured a playoff berth despite three interceptions from quarterback Matthew Stafford. As Baker Mayfield could tell you, it’s the fourth INT that really puts a nail in your team’s coffin.There was a moment, two and a half hours into the greatest men’s high jump competition in Olympic history, where no one had the foggiest idea what was going on. A second earlier, the Italian Gianmarco Tamberi and the Qatari Mutaz Barshim had been calmly talking to an official. Now they were high-fiving, leaping into each other’s arms, and pogoing in pure delirium. Tamberi then collapsed and began rolling around the track with his hands on his face as if he had been possessed, or shot, or possibly both – while Barshim was using his coach’s shoulder to soak up his tears. It turned out that the most joyous and life-affirming moment of the sporting year was unfolding before our eyes. And soon it wasn’t only Tamberi and Barshim overcome by emotion; the rest of us also found ourselves wiping something from our cheeks. Until Tokyo there had not been a shared Olympic track and field gold medal since 1912. Yet towards the end of an extraordinary high jump final, in which six men were still jumping at 2.39m, Tamberi and Barshim were still unable to be separated. As the judge began to talk to both men about having a jump off, an idea formed in Barshim’s head. “Can we have two golds?” the Qatari asked, thinking out loud about whether he might be allowed to share triumph with his great friend. “If you want to, you can,” replied the official. There were no more words. Just a look, a smile, then an almighty clap of hands. It was not just an act of sportsmanship. But, in such uncertain times, massage balm for the soul. However, it was so unexpected that not even Sebastian Coe, the president of World Athletics, knew what was going on. “It was a great competition, everybody was focused on it,” says Coe, who was sitting with IOC vice president John Coates, and the heads of cycling, rowing and gymnastics. “But when suddenly Barshim and Tamberi embraced, everyone started looking at me.” They wanted an explanation as to what had just happened. But Coe didn’t have one. “I was thinking, ‘Guys, what the hell is going on here? Oh my God, they’re going to share the medal,’” Coe tells the Guardian. “And then John said to me, ‘So what’s happening?’ “Well, they’ve obviously come to an arrangement,” Coe replied. Coates’ look said it all. “You’ve let the athletes decide that?” Eventually Abby Hoffman, a member of World Athletics’ executive board, found a rule allowing shared medals had passed at the 2011 congress in Daegu. “I didn’t remember it at all,” admits Coe. “And I suddenly thought, ‘I bet that went through in a raft of amendments just 15 minutes before lunch’.” After watching Tamberi and Barshim celebrate, Coe went to bed unsure what the fallout would be. “I thought I’d wake up in the morning to all sorts of negative headlines,” he admits. “But as I tried to sleep I was listening to Radio 4 and they kept saying it was the most uplifting story of the Games and surely worthy of the Fair Play award. By the time the broadcast was over, Barshim and Tamberi were getting a Nobel peace prize.” There are some who will say that Olympic competition should be about winning and nothing else. But the world of elite sport, which is usually so binary, this was a delightfully non-binary act. And the fact that both men also had shared pain – and rebirth – together only made it resonate deeper. Tamberi had been one of the favourites for the 2016 Olympics only to rupture the ligaments of his left ankle 20 days before Rio while attempting a personal best of 2.41m in Monaco. It was so serious that he had to be carted off on a stretcher. Many times he feared he would never be as good again. Barshim always reassured him he would. “I didn’t want him to be in the silver medal position,” the Qatari explained afterwards. “Because I knew what he had been through physically and mentally.” The injury left such a mark that Tamberi even brought the cast he wore after his 2016 ligament surgery with him to the 2020 Games. On it he wrote: ‘My road to Tokyo’. Incredibly, in 2018, when Barshim suffered exactly the same injury while attempting to break the world record of 2.46m and was out for a year, Tamberi repaid the favour by keeping his spirits up. “I’ve been at his wedding,” explained the Italian. “It’s not just two opponents. It is two friends who can share the best moment of their life together and I think it is magical to have done it. We were good friends before the Olympics. But now it’s like we are blood brothers.” “I will never regret this choice,” he added. “This year they changed the Olympic motto, Higher, Faster, Stronger, Together. They added this new word, Together, after so many years. We just followed the motto.” Barshim concurs. He remembers that when he got back to the Olympic village he couldn’t sleep and so he went for a walk. “Literally we were being stopped by every single person we passed,” he says. “The reaction was insane. I love that we did something that touched everybody’s heart.” That is something Coe, a ruthless competitor in his time, also now acknowledges. “Sometimes those of us in sport are too close, while the outside world has a different perspective,” he says. “And they just thought it was a great piece of humanity. Two athletes from very different backgrounds and very different continents, grasping each other, smiling, and sharing this wonderful moment.”In 2019, when he was living in Berlin, the Irish author Rob Doyle wrote a short weekly column about his favourite books for the Irish Times. The series began with The Unwomanly Face of War, Svetlana Alexievich’s oral history of Soviet war widows, and ended, 51 books later, with The Colossus of Maroussi, Henry Miller’s Greek travel memoir of 1941. In between came, well, everything, from Virginia Woolf to Virginie Despentes, via Carl Jung, Philip K Dick and The Tibetan Book of the Dead, each introduced with unstuffy critical acuity and lapel-grabbing comic hyperbole: “Is it preposterous to suggest that Fyodor Dostoevsky prophesied the election of Donald Trump, Brexit and the seething hate-pits of social media?” Readers of Doyle’s autobiographical novel Threshold won’t be shocked that these columns, collected in his new book, fall hardest for writers mischievously lugubrious in outlook – Michel Houellebecq, say, or the Romanian author EM Cioran. Freud’s Civilization and Its Discontents gets a thumbs-up for its “honest theoretical acknowledgment of the unbridled aggression, depravity and lust for annihilation that constitute the dirtiest secret of the individual in society”, while Nietzsche’s On the Genealogy of Morals “might be one of the greatest horror novels ever written”; Joris-Karl Huysmans’s À rebours, “a kind of 19th-century American Psycho” about a sickly aristocrat’s outré self-help programme, which Doyle read while tripping on psychoactive cacti in Bolivia, is plain “evil”. Inserted between these snippets of high-grade consumer advice are longer, looser reflections written upon Doyle’s return to Ireland early in 2020, a visit that became a long-term stay on account of you know what. Thus does the book morph into a Covid-era tour of Doyle’s psyche, as he reflects while stuck at home on a roving youth spent in druggy squats and house shares in London and Paris, bumming around Asia and Latin America with the cash earned from sorting supermarket coupons on a Dublin industrial estate. Uppermost on his mind is sex, relegated by the pandemic to a memory, save for half-hearted clicks on PornHub (“like a nightmarish roam through an infinite wet market”), to say nothing of a lockdown-breaking “amatory visit” to his girlfriend. Amid moist-eyed recollections of a three-way at a Berlin nightclub or the Vietnamese lover he followed to San Francisco, we’re told how Doyle didn’t attempt to be faithful, even in a serious relationship. In the darkest days of 2020, he lost his nerve while drafting a tongue-in-cheek Facebook post that he feared his friends might take seriously, because it actually wasn’t wholly light-hearted: “If there’s a silver lining to all this, it’s that the new generation won’t get to enjoy the freedoms I made such a beast of myself exploiting.” Doyle’s self-guying impulses make him good company on the page. When he imagines writing a book such as Thomas Bernhard’s My Prizes, in which the Austrian writer recalls his experience of accepting various awards (Doyle’s version would be made up of “acerbic speeches to mark the literary prizes I did not win”), the ensuing rant about “some schmoozing chump win[ning] the latest popularity contest with her bullshit book” is funny, not only bitter, in part because Doyle recognises he’s no outsider. He talks of an ex-lover who is a lauded French novelist and says Geoff Dyer (a heavy influence) still texts him about an epic night out they once shared; Rachel Kushner told him that, inspired by an idea about a Houellebecq scholar he gave up after 10,000 words, she’s going to make the French writer a character in her forthcoming novel. Contradiction, or many-sidedness, is one of the pleasures of this charmingly provocative enterprise, you suspect for the author as much as for us (the catalogue of his drug intake, for one, left me amazed that he had managed to read so much, let alone write). But if the navel-gazing rubs you the wrong way – as Doyle well knows it might, handily providing a preemptive three-page list of objections to his own work – there’s always the consumer advice: Arthur Koestler’s first novel, The Gladiators and Marguerite Duras’s Practicalities are just two of the books I’m itching to get hold of after reading what he says about them and it’s not the least of Doyle’s paradoxes that this self-declared hater should be so infectious an enthusiast. • Autobibliography by Rob Doyle is published by Swift Press (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyI am on the phone to my mother for what feels like the fifth time in as many hours. This time, I am asking her what on earth I am supposed to put in the box asking for the value of my furniture. I am, to clarify, trying to renew my flat’s contents insurance. Mum sighs. Her frustration is understandable. I call her all the time, to ask whether I should switch energy supplier or which flight to book. I panic about whether to file things alphabetically or chronologically (and it ends up being neither), or whether to pay my flat’s service charge monthly or quarterly. On the face of it, the anxiety I have around personal admin is hard to understand. After all, I am perfectly happy to do much more traditionally anxiety-inducing things: public speaking, exams or writing about myself online. The insurance renewal, though, has been bothering me – I’d already put it off until the last possible day. Undoubtedly, part of the problem is that I am an only child who gets on well with her parents; it’s always been very easy to ask them for help. I am happy with the exams and the writing and the public speaking because I feel like I know what I’m doing. With the British Gas engineer, not so much. In an attempt to become a functioning adult, I ask life coach Jo Wheatley to help me step out of my comfort zone. I am determined to become more organised, decisive, independent and capable. Everyone has core values, she explains, that determine how we think and act. Perfectionists tend to value personal achievement and pleasing others, and associate getting something wrong with failure and letting people down. As she tells me this, I nod and laugh – I have been sussed out in under five minutes. Situations that cause stress – say, when your contents insurance deadline is approaching – are an especially effective trigger for perfectionism, Wheatley explains, because at its core, is the belief: “I am only OK if I am right.” The key lies in rewriting that belief and switching it to: “I am OK if I get this done.” It’s also a pretty good rebuff to perfectionism’s close cousin: procrastination. Just do it. “We can start with laughing at ourselves,” Wheatley says. Recognise that your expectations might be ludicrously high; why on earth are you worrying about finding the most efficient way to file old water bills? But there are also practical steps that the admin-averse can take, such as time-blocking, a scheduling technique where even small tasks are given their own space on a calendar. This gives us a defined time period in which to do something. As Wheatley puts it: “We know when we get to the end of that time block, we are going to send that email off.” “Celebrating is also really important,” she says. It’s helpful to “reward ‘good enough’” as much as you would perfection, so your brain gets the message that it’s OK. Last, Wheatley recommends “having an accountability partner”, like a coach or mentor, who can listen to your worries, as well as provide honest feedback. I take the last suggestion as permission to continue calling my mum when I really need to. Then I set myself half an hour to make an informed guess about my furniture. I send the form. In the days after my chat with Wheatley, I time-block doing my expenses, and submit them in one sitting. I send emails when they are “good enough”. I am not quite reformed, but I can see that progress is possible. At the end of the week, I pour myself a glass of wine. I have, after all, been told to celebrate.For dancers, not being able to dance isn’t just a denial of their art, but of their existence. As they practised in their kitchens during lockdown, or staged impromptu performances on outdoor stages, you could sense the pent-up energy, the desire to move waiting to be released. Some choreographers managed to make the most of their skills on film. William Forsythe’s The Barre Project set New York City Ballet’s Tiler Peck and three exceptional male partners spinning and jumping in a tribute to every dancer’s daily ritual. Rambert, under the direction of Benoit Swan Pouffer, turned the company’s London base into a performance space, for experiment and exploration in works that varied from the intriguing (Jo Strømgren’s Rooms) to the frankly bizarre (Wim Vandekeybus’s Drawn from Within). Four intelligent films about international choreographers at work boosted the Edinburgh festival’s dance programme. But you could sense the relief when dancers were finally allowed to return to the stage in May. The Royal Ballet’s exceptional dancers emerged like bullets from a gun in a series of well-judged bills that highlighted both their appetite for the new – a sensational performance of Crystal Pite’s The Statement – and their respect for the past in works by Balanchine (a memorable Apollo) and Jerome Robbins (a lyrical Dances at a Gathering). In its 90th anniversary year, it’s good to see the company in such thrilling form, which also illuminated full-length performances of Romeo and Juliet and Giselle. Wayne McGregor’s long postponed The Dante Project was the premiere of the year, with Thomas Adès’s surging score unlocking depths of emotion. Birmingham Royal Ballet’s dancers look wonderfully honed and ready too, but director Carlos Acosta (who took over the company just as Covid struck) has yet to find a repertory that both redefines them and lets them shine. English National Ballet came back with a dazzling performance at Sadler’s Wells of works it had already showcased on film, including Russell Maliphant’s fine Echoes and Arielle Smith’s exhilarating Jolly Folly. Akram Khan’s long-awaited Creature was a muddled disappointment but Jeffrey Cirio’s agonised definition of the tormented soul at its centre was the performance of the year. Khan’s opaque new work for his own company, Outwitting the Devil, shared Creature’s bleak sense of oppression but contained some sensationally beautiful movement. Matthew Bourne was also in a darker mood than sometimes, with The Midnight Bell using the novels of Patrick Hamilton to create a world flecked with melancholy desires and despair. Ballet Black commissioned two effective new pieces in Will Tuckett’s thoughtful Then or Now and Mthuthuzeli November’s dazzling The Waiting Game. I missed Northern Ballet’s Merlin, choreographed by Drew McOnie, but enjoyed its revival of David Nixon’s Dangerous Liaisons. Scottish Ballet’s film of Gene Kelly’s Starstruck was an exuberant end to that company’s year. In a Covid-related bonus, Dangerous Liaisons, like many of the dance performances I have loved, is still available to watch online – an extension of access that is an undoubted bonus of a difficult time. Technology produced another bonus. The influential dance-maker Robert Cohan died in January at the age of 95, having just completed, over Zoom, a series of solos called Afternoon Conversations With Dancers that were as vital and vivid as anything I saw this year. The top five dance shows of 2021 1. The Dante Project Royal Opera House, London; available to stream until 19 January Wayne McGregor’s bold riff on The Divine Comedy also marked an emotional farewell to the stage from Royal Ballet principal Edward Watson. 2. Rosie Kay: Absolute Solo II UK tour In a moving piece, Kay revealed everything dance means to her and how it has carried her through. 3. Matthew Bourne’s The Midnight Bell Sadler’s Wells, London, and tour Sexy, smouldering and sad, Bourne reached to the dark heart of desire. 4. Yorke Dance Project: Past Present/Connecting to Cohan Linbury theatre, London A breathtakingly beautiful reminder of the significance of dance pioneer Robert Cohan, who died in January. 5. English National Ballet: Jolly Folly; now available to stream Sadler’s Wells, London Arielle Smith’s madly energetic legion of silent clowns summed up the joy of dance. Turkey Dance Umbrella A series of misfires both big and small from the annual international festival.Voters have moved on from Brexit and are now more focused on electing MPs away from the “cheese and wine” Westminster bubble, the new MP for North Shropshire has said after her historic byelection victory. Helen Morgan said the Liberal Democrats’ win, which overturned a Conservative majority of nearly 23,000, was no fluke and that her party is capable of winning over more voters than people expect. Speaking during her first few days in the new job, Morgan said her election builds on the party’s success in the Chesham and Amersham byelection in June, where they also took a former Tory safe seat in a shock result. “We’ve won two big byelections in just over six months. We’ve now proved the Chesham and Amersham result wasn’t a fluke,” she said. “Everyone said that was about HS2, but in North Shropshire it was about issues that affect everyone in the country. I think it proves we can make a difference across a much wider area than people thought we might be able to.” She said the Lib Dems, who campaigned strongly against Brexit, have proved their popularity is no longer confined to parts of the country which voted Remain – Shropshire voted to leave the EU by 56.9%. “The electorate has moved on and it seems to me that they recognise that voting for a Liberal Democrat who’s very rooted in community politics, who is focused on listening, is a massive contrast to this Westminster Conservative bubble where they go to cheese and wine parties after work,” Morgan said. Revelations in the Guardian that Boris Johnson and 17 staff had a gathering in the Downing Street garden during the first pandemic lockdown prompted fury. Now that the dust has settled from the election result, Morgan, a former financial controller and parish councillor who moved to North Shropshire seven years ago, said she has had chance to reflect on the mammoth journey the party embarked on to secure their win against the odds. A key factor was the amount of time and resource they poured into the campaign, and how quickly their activists got on the ground. “Owen Paterson resigned on the Thursday, and we were delivering leaflets on Saturday morning, even though we hadn’t selected a candidate at that point,” she said. “We got 20,000 leaflets out over that first weekend and I think that enabled us to say to the people here: ‘We are the challengers and we really want to take this seriously.’” Although they knew early on that things were moving in their favour, Morgan said she was never quite sure they had done enough to win. “I’m not sure at the beginning we would have expected to turn around a 22,000 Conservative majority but we thought we could get really close,” she said. “I never allowed myself to imagine myself as the next MP, I just kept plugging away at the campaign. When it all came together on the last day, it’s quite overwhelming. Obviously, I was thrilled, but there’s a great sense of responsibility that comes with it.” Much post-election analysis had focused on the impact of the Downing Street Christmas parties scandal, as well as the degree of tactical voting among Labour and Green supporters. While Morgan admits these were key factors, she says it was the Lib Dem offer, and their relentless campaigning, that won the seat. “I think it would be a bit unfair to the voters to say it was all about anger over the parties,” she said. “And there’s a lot of talk about tactical voting, but you can’t win a seat like this that was 60% Conservative last time round unless you persuade traditional conservative voters to switch to you.” She said there were multiple issues, including anger at ambulance waiting times and concerns among the farming community, which helped swing the vote in her favour. “There’s a palpable sense of anger among farmers around the trade deals; they’ve created a real moment of danger for British farming,” she said, adding the industry had also been badly hit by Covid. “We’ve had people pouring milk down the drains, which is completely unsustainable. I think there’s a definite sense that Boris Johnson just really doesn’t care about the farming sector.” In her election speech, Morgan launched a blistering attack on the government, describing Johnson’s rule as a “nightly soap opera of calamity and chaos”. It’s the “absence of leadership from government” that is mainly hurting the Conservatives on the ground, she said. “I think people are crying out for somebody to say: ‘This is what we’re going to do and we’re going to lead from the front,’ and it’s absent.”We couldn’t afford for television to let us down in 2021 and – SPOILER ALERT! – it didn’t. It unleashed a torrent of inspiration, dedication and invention, not to mention defecting royals and deadly children’s games. With Covid uncertainty ever present, the most heartbreaking lockdown drama was Jack Thorne’s care home tragedy Help (Channel 4), starring Jodie Comer and Stephen Graham. In pandemic documentaries, actor David Harewood stood out with the forceful Why Is Covid Killing People of Colour? (BBC One). In a year that saw Channel 4 threatened with privatisation, and the BBC routinely castigated, there were outstanding documentaries, from BBC Two’s compulsive docuseries Blair and Brown: The New Labour Revolution to Channel 4’s harrowing India’s Rape Scandal. Another Observer choice, Uprising (BBC One) forensically outlined seismic shifts in 1980s race relations. Elsewhere, Four Hours at the Capitol (BBC Two) reconstructed the post-Trump defeat invasion of Washington, while Gods of Snooker (BBC Two) delivered the waistcoats, pathos and glory of bygone pot blacking. With so much choice – which channel? What stream? If I sign up for everything, can I still afford to eat? – universal viewing becomes ever rarer. Sporting spectacles got us communing (Euro 2020; the Tokyo Olympics; Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen’s drama-soaked Formula One showdown in Abu Dhabi; British tennis ace Emma Raducanu winning the US Open), while South Korean Netflix smash Squid Game, a fitfully dubbed lethal comment on 21st-century capitalism, was an unlikely global phenomenon. Still, for event TV nonpareil, it has to be ITV’s Oprah With Meghan and Harry. The “Megxit”-ing Sussexes sat on high-end Cali-chic garden furniture to discuss all (race, media, who made whom cry over bridesmaid tights). It was at once subpar TV journalism – Winfrey softballed and gaped like an office gossip on a work break – and undeniable TV history: a torpedoing of the British monarchy for the Zoom generation. Later, Prince Philip’s funeral was conducted without crowds in resonant Covid stillness. Comedy-wise, Aisling Bea’s This Way Up resurfaced on needle-sharp form, and also from Channel 4, there was a fresh newcomer, We Are Lady Parts (all hail female Muslim punk bands!). Amazon Prime, meanwhile, delivered the patchy, innovative Kevin Can F**k Himself. Included in my Top 10 picks, Sterlin Harjo and Taika Waititi’s Reservation Dogs (Disney+) showcased Oklahoman reservation life; Murray Bartlett and Jennifer Coolidge were every kind of glorious in Sky Atlantic’s whip-smart dramedy The White Lotus. And thanks to Sophie Willan’s ingenious, hilarious Alma’s Not Normal (BBC Two), Bolton is now, and for ever more, my cultural capital of the year. In drama, Line of Duty (BBC One) and Succession (Sky Atlantic) returned, weaving a tad, but still landing punches. Standout turns included Celine Buckens and Tracy Ifeachor in Showtrial (BBC One), while Gabrielle Creevy emerged from series two of BBC Three’s magnificent, poignant Wales-based In My Skin as an actor to watch. There were career-best performances from Sean Bean and Stephen Graham (Time), Kate Winslet (Mare of Easttown), Olivia Colman (Landscapers) and Lesley Manville, in I Am… Maria (Channel 4). Tahar Rahim was sinister in BBC One’s exceptional The Serpent, while Colin Farrell exuded paunchy menace in BBC Two’s undervalued The North Water. And, of course, there was our TV pinnacle of 2021, Channel 4’s 1980s Aids-drama It’s a Sin, Russell T Davies’s bruised, sparkling, tragicomic tour de force. What’s left to say, but: Olly Alexander, you are everything. Disappointment? That ending of Netflix’s Behind Her Eyes (no spoilers, but what a swizz!). There was a fond goodbye to Nicola Walker’s DI Cassie Stuart in ITV’s Unforgotten, and a wary hello to GB News, the “TV channel” (recollections may vary) that, last time I checked, appeared to have morphed into an anti-woke snuff movie starring a pint-sinking zombie called Nigel. All in all, a stellar year for television. 2022, it’s game on. The top 10 TV programmes of 2021 1. It’s a Sin Channel 4 Russell T Davies’s devastating, inspirational 1980s Aids epic. 2. Time BBC One Sean Bean and Stephen Graham excelled in Jimmy McGovern’s powerful prison drama. 3. Uprising BBC One Steve McQueen’s rousing docuseries exploring 1980s race relations. 4. Mare of Easttown Sky Atlantic Slow-burn brilliance from Kate Winslet in small-town US mystery. 5. The White Lotus Sky Atlantic Devilish dramedy set in an affluent holiday resort. 6. Alma’s Not Normal BBC Two Sophie Willan’s coruscating comedy about dysfunctional Bolton life. 7. The Serpent BBC One Addictive psychodrama about sociopath Charles Sobhraj (Tahar Rahim) and the 1970s hippy trail. 8. India’s Rape Scandal Channel 4 Jess Kelly and Ramita Navai’s haunting report about rape in India. 9. Reservation Dogs Disney+ Groundbreaking comedy about an indigenous American teen gang. 10. Landscapers Sky Atlantic Olivia Colman and David Thewlis as suburban killers in a radical shake-up of the true crime genre. Turkey GB News Launched claiming to speak for “real Britain”, but even Andrew Neil scarpered.Even when it was official, it didn’t seem real. Even when it was repeated, the president standing there saying so, it didn’t ring true. Even after all those warnings, everyone clung to the hope that there might be some solution. Which there was – right before there wasn’t. At about 9pm on 4 August, Lionel Messi and his family landed in Catalonia on a private flight from Ibiza. He came to sign a new contract with Barcelona, all those worries washed away. The next thing they knew, a statement announced that he was leaving. He had arrived at the club at 13. Now, at 34, having become their everything, he was leaving. No one saw it coming, even if maybe they should have done, and many still didn’t see it then. Messi hadn’t. “We were convinced we were continuing here, at home,” he would eventually say three days later, the delay another reason it felt as if this wasn’t actually happening. The statement was released on 5 August at 7.33pm and soon it was everywhere. “Leo Messi not staying at FC Barcelona,” the headline ran. Wait, what? “Despite FC Barcelona and Lionel Messi having reached an agreement and the clear intention of both parties to sign a new contract today, this cannot happen because of Spanish La Liga regulations on player registrations,” it said. Blame was placed elsewhere, for now. The statement was cold, formulaic and short; it also felt as if it might have been a bluff, one last hand being played. And then there was silence. No grand eulogies, no tearful farewells. No players put messages out and Messi didn’t say anything. As if no one wanted to admit this was over, as if maybe it wasn’t. The next day the president, Joan Laporta, spoke. There was just no room within the league’s salary limits to sign Messi. Even without his salary, the situation was “unsustainable”, his departure insufficient to fix the finances. But even then, it didn’t seem entirely done – the first stage of grief is denial, perhaps – and it was natural to think there must be some way to fix this, something that could be done. Anything. It was only early August and there was still time, even if Laporta said there was little point “prolonging the agony”. What if league officials realised what they would lose and made an exception? What if Messi played for free? The suggestion would recur and, however unfair that suggestion was, imagine the impact if he had. When those ideas were floated Laporta didn’t say “forget it”; he just said he wouldn’t give “false hope”. Which was ironic, really. When Messi finally spoke, he said he was “not prepared for” his departure and nor was anyone else. Yet in a way they had all been prepared. A year before Messi had announced he wanted to leave. The club’s interim president, Carlos Tusquets, had admitted that economically they should have sold him. Laporta had been voted into office in response to a critical situation: they knew they really couldn’t afford Messi. Then there was a basic fact too easily overlooked: Messi did not even belong to Barcelona any more. On 1 July, his contract had expired. But there were other messages. Laporta had campaigned on one basic promise: Messi would stay. Messi ate with Laporta after the elections and an agreement was reached but couldn’t be executed. When his contract expired, a headline in the Catalan daily Sport declared: “Relax! Messi stays at Barcelona.” Although the following morning Laporta admitted: “I would like to announce Messi’s staying but I can’t yet, we’re looking for the best solution,” that seemed ever closer. On 3 July, Laporta ate with the president of the league, Javier Tebas, and left believing a formula had been found. By the middle of July, Barcelona briefed that it was done. But still there was no announcement. When, at last, there was one, it said it was off. Laporta would later admit that he held on to the idea that Messi might rescue them all at the last minute and, until Messi appeared, it was possible to believe in some way out. When he did, there were tears, a hint of recrimination and realisation. It is remarkable how soon people move on. Chants of “Messi” in the 10th minute didn’t even last into the second half of the opening game; his shirt was taken by Ansu Fati, surprisingly fuss‑free; banners protested against his departure on the first day but not beyond; and although his shirt is everywhere still, he has not been a ghost, the permanent presence some feared. Yet there are periodic painful reminders, the loss lingers and what really happened is a recurring question to which Laporta is made to return. Was enough really done? Could Messi’s departure have been avoided? Was it just about the money? What role did Real Madrid and the Super League project play in all this? What part was played by La Liga? Why did Laporta drag it out so long and then suddenly change his mind? Who changed it for him? Why didn’t he wait longer, exhaust every possible avenue? Oh, and did it even help? That one at least is easily answered: no. Barcelona are eighth in the league and out of the Champions League, in which Messi alone has scored more than double their goals. There was pity in seeing him in Paris, knowing that he didn’t even want to be there, wondering if it didn’t even need to come to this. When Messi was asked whether he could have played for free, he dangled the prospect that he might have done had they only asked. Laporta has suggested that Messi could have pushed harder, too, a sad split revealed. When Messi’s dad was asked what happened he shot back: “Ask the club.” “I thought it was all sorted,” Messi said. “It’s still hard to assimilate. There have been many defeats, but there’s always another chance. Not this time; this time it’s not coming back.” For all the warnings, hearing it from him hit home. This time it was real. It was 8 August and it was over.I have a fantasy and it goes like this: a political party is formed, running on an anti-social-media platform. It campaigns on a pledge to ban social media. (“SWITCH IT OFF” is its straightforward, and elegant, slogan.) The party wins a general election and at midnight, on what comes to be known as Social Media Freedom Day, the prime minister pushes a giant button that blocks all access to social media. Crowds cheer. On the anniversary of Social Media Freedom Day – which becomes a bank holiday, of course – children burn effigies of Mark Zuckerberg and dress up as the Twitter bird. I write this as someone who owes her career and her partner to social media. I had no journalism qualifications, connections or experience when I began blogging in the mid-2010s, and through Twitter I was able to get a paid internship that gave me my start in journalism. My boyfriend and I connected through Instagram after years of liking each other’s posts. So much of my personal, and professional happiness has been made possible through social media. But as time has gone on I have become more and more certain that the solution to many of the most pressing issues of our time is simply to switch social media off. I have spent much of 2021 reporting on the pandemic – in particular how the spread of misinformation on social media has pushed people to reject lifesaving vaccinations. I have listened to family members weep as they remember loved ones who would be alive today were it not for social media conspiracy theories. The instinct to dismiss these deaths is a callous one. All of us make bad decisions, not least when you have the weight of the internet pressing upon your cerebral cortex. In October, Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen testified before Congress about her experiences working at the social media giant. There, she saw evidence that its products were making teenagers anxious, depressed and suicidal, and contributing to ethnic violence in countries such as Ethiopia. Facebook, Haugen concluded, was putting “astronomical profits before people”. And yet the response to these allegations was handwringing followed by a collective shrug. No one seems to be prepared to take the brave, but necessary, step, of unplugging the damn thing. On social media I see grifters pushing quack therapies on impressionable people. I see people radicalised into obsessive hatred of communities of people they’ve never even met. I see cases of a condition called “poster’s brain” – in which habitual social media users feel compelled to post offensive, and often career-ending content – so severe I fear there is no cure. (Like the podcaster who announced to the world earlier this year that he refused to feed his hungry child for six hours until she learned how to open a tin of beans, to name one.) I see ministers debasing the offices of state. Democracies subverted and genocides fomented. And you know what the tech overlords are doing while we are fighting on the internet all day? They are getting extremely rich. They’re paddle-boarding in Hawaii. They’re banning their children from using social media while simultaneously planning a version of Instagram for kids, because our children can grow up anxious, depressed and miserable off the back of their algorithms, but not theirs. And of course, I am entirely complicit. I use social media and even though I try hard not to be cruel on it, I’d be lying if I said I didn’t enjoy watching someone I’ve formed a negative opinion about, despite having never met them in real life, get roasted by an internet horde. I’m in the bear pit, eating nuts, enjoying the show. Of course I could delete all my social media accounts. Cancel my season ticket to The Discourse; stop watching as a new villain of the day is crowned on Twitter. You think I don’t want to do that? I Google “lighthouse keeper jobs Orkney” twice a week. But I’m a journalist. The editors who commission me are on social media. I worry about disappearing. And besides, I’m addicted. I’ve checked Twitter eight times writing this piece. I need a responsible adult to do it for me. I’ve had enough of the bad feelings machine. Won’t somebody switch it off? Please? Can we switch it off? Sirin Kale is a Guardian journalistCongressman Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack, has said the panel will open an inquiry into Donald Trump’s phone call seeking to stop Joe Biden’s certification from taking place on 6 January hours before the insurrection. The chairman said the select committee intended to scrutinize the phone call – revealed last month by the Guardian – should they prevail in their legal effort to obtain Trump White House records over the former president’s objections of executive privilege. “That’s right,” Thompson said when asked by the Guardian whether the select committee would look into Trump’s phone call, and suggested House investigators had already started to consider ways to investigate Trump’s demand that Biden not be certified as president on 6 January. Thompson said the select committee could not ask the National Archives for records about specific calls, but noted “if we say we want all White House calls made on January 5 and 6, if he made it on a White House phone, then obviously we would look at it there.” The Guardian reported last month that Trump, according to multiple sources, called lieutenants based at the Willard hotel in Washington DC from the White House in the late hours of 5 January and sought ways to stop Biden’s certification from taking place on 6 January. Trump first told the lieutenants his vice-president, Mike Pence, was reluctant to go along with the plan to commandeer his ceremonial role at the joint session of Congress in a way that would allow Trump to retain the presidency for a second term, the sources said. But as Trump relayed to them the situation with Pence, the sources said, on at least one call, he pressed his lieutenants about how to stop Biden’s certification from taking place on 6 January in a scheme to get alternate slates of electors for Trump sent to Congress. The former president’s remarks came as part of wider discussions he had with the lieutenants at the Willard – a team led by Trump lawyers Rudy Giuliani, John Eastman, Boris Epshteyn and Trump strategist Steve Bannon – about delaying the certification, the sources said. House investigators in recent months have pursued an initial investigation into Trump’s contacts with lieutenants at the Willard, issuing a flurry of subpoenas compelling documents and testimony to crucial witnesses, including Bannon and Eastman. But Thompson said that the select committee would now also investigate both the contents of Trump’s phone calls to the Willard and the White House’s potential involvement, in a move certain to intensify the pressure on the former president’s inner circle. “If we get the information that we requested,” Thompson said of the select committee’s demands for records from the Trump White House and Trump aides, “those calls potentially will be reflected to the Willard hotel and whomever.” A spokesperson for the select committee declined to comment about what else such a line of inquiry might involve. But a subpoena to Giuliani, the lead Trump lawyer at the Willard, is understood to be in the offing, according to a source familiar with the matter. The Guardian reported that the night before the Capitol attack, Trump called the lawyers and non-lawyers at the Willard separately, because Giuliani did not want to have non-lawyers participate on sensitive calls and jeopardize claims to attorney-client privilege. It was not clear whether Giulaini might invoke attorney-client privilege as a way to escape cooperating with the investigation in the event of a subpoena, but Congressman Jamie Raskin, a member of the select committee, noted the protection does not confer broad immunity. “The attorney-client privilege does not operate to shield participants in a crime from an investigation into a crime,” Raskin said. “If it did, then all you would have to do to rob a bank is bring a lawyer with you, and be asking for advice along the way.” The Guardian also reported Trump made several calls the day before the Capitol attack from the White House residence, his preferred place to work, as well as the West Wing, but it was not certain from which location he phoned his top lieutenants at the Willard. The distinction is significant as phone calls placed from the White House residence, even from a landline desk phone, are not automatically memorialized in records sent to the National Archives after the end of an administration. That means even if the select committee succeeds in its litigation to pry free Trump’s call detail records from the National Archives, without testimony from people with knowledge of what was said, House investigators might only learn the target and time of the calls.Tim Clemons has driven nearly 3m miles around the US in his 30 years as a truck driver. “This used to be a great job,” said Clemons. “I provide a valuable service to this country. It would be nice if we weren’t looked down upon like trash.” While the industry says there is a national shortage of drivers and complains regulation is holding back hiring, Florida-based Clemons has another theory: working conditions have deteriorated since he started driving, he said. It’s more difficult to find parking and access to bathrooms. Dispatchers and brokers are pushing harder to deliver loads in a certain amount of time or else drivers face fines or deductions. Drivers earn less. All these factors may explain why annual turnover at big trucking employers averaged 94% between 1995 and 2017. And that’s before Covid upended the supply chain and increased demand for drivers, and the pressures they face. Most facilities Clemons drives to do not provide bathrooms for truck drivers, and many truck stops are backed up with wait times to refuel and use the bathroom. “If you haven’t found a place to park by 2 or 3pm in a truck stop, you’re looking for any place to park, yet we’re fined and towed for just trying to be safe,” Clemons said. “When you have a 300-mile run and six to seven hours to be there, you don’t have time to waste, so either you’re late or you’re on time and refused use of the facilities. As nasty as it may sound, most of us experienced drivers carry garbage bags and a five-gallon bucket, or a potty chair with plastic grocery bags.” According to the American Trucking Associations, the lobbying organization for large trucking employers, the US has a shortage of 80,000 truck drivers that is disrupting the nation’s supply chains, and the shortages are projected to worsen over the next few years. This claim has been repeated consistently over the years and has recently been cited by industry groups in favor of a bill in Congress to lower the commercial driver’s license age requirement from 21 to 18. But truck drivers are quick to highlight the low pay, poor treatment and tough working conditions they endure throughout the industry as prevailing issues for employers who claim to have trouble finding and retaining enough drivers. “The industry has recycled this narrative about every three months for over 20 years. There is no truck driver shortage,” said Desiree Wood, the president of Real Women in Trucking. “It is indeed a pay shortage and work conditions issue.” The Bureau of Labor Statistics published an article in March 2019 discussing the widespread and constant claims of labor shortages in the trucking industry, but found that if wages rise in the industry, any long-term labor shortages would be improved. “As a whole, the market for truck drivers appears to work as well as any other blue-collar labor market,” the report concluded. Darrell Kirkland, a truck driver based in Georgia for 31 years, explained the various ways in which truck drivers are taken advantage of by operators and shipping receivers, such as working several hours a day without pay due to waiting to pick up or drop off loads. He has waited up to 36 hours, with typical wait times of several hours. “Most drivers don’t get paid for the detention times,” said Kirkland. “A trucking company may allow their customers a two- to three-hour time period, before they start charging detention. So that waiting time the driver doesn’t get paid for and it uses up the driver’s available hours to drive for the day.” Truck drivers are often charged lumbar fees by receiving companies to unload freight, and won’t allow drivers to unload trucks themselves, adding more unpaid time to drivers’ schedules. “Most driver pay is pay per mile, but it varies from one company to another,” added Kirkland. “If the wheels aren’t turning, the driver isn’t earning.” Nearly 2 million Americans work as truck drivers, a rate that has steadily increased over the years from about 1.57 million truck drivers in 2000. States issue more than 450,000 commercial driver’s licenses per year. While more Americans are working as truck drivers, wages have drastically declined since the passage of the Motor Carrier Act of 1980, which deregulated the US trucking industry. When adjusted for inflation, median wages for truck drivers in 1980 were about $110,000 annually. In 2020, median annual wages for truck drivers were $47,130. Nearly 40% of US truck drivers were covered by union contracts in 1983, which dropped to 10.1% in 2020. Many trucking companies also misclassify drivers as independent contractors, shifting overhead costs on to workers and burdening them with massive amounts of debt for their vehicles, gas and fees. Billy Randel, a truck driver based in the New York area for decades and chief organizer of Truckers Movement for Justice, explained that most truck drivers work 60 to 70 hours a week without overtime pay, as many of the hours are unpaid wait times, from waiting to load and unload, to department of transportation inspections, or having to clean out trailers before picking up a new load. “We’re fed up and we’re tired of having no voice and we’re the power in the industry. Nothing moves without us,” said Randel. “There are too many drivers out here who are homeless and they stay on the road because they have no place to live. “There are too many drivers that actually qualify for federal food-stamp assistance. We want to end the sharecropping outright, and take back the power drivers once had when we were organized many decades ago.”The Age of Cardboard and String It is a machine for eating oranges. It is a machine for humming new tunes. It is a rocket bound for the moon. It is, whatever string you pull, the same machine. When it breaks we apply more sellotape, and when it breaks again we sulk, mixing our tears Into the glue. When it works we set off for the moon, scattering orange peel on the floor and singing songs not yet written down – hot, fierce songs that almost burn our mouths with their newness. * Faster! Faster! We want to overtake Anna, who is seven. We want gears, automatic transmission, wings, clouds to fly through, flags, fuel injection, solar panels, stabilisers, sometimes just to be left alone. And no, it wasn’t us (with crumbs on our lips) who stole the cookies from the cookie jar. Maybe God Maybe God was hungry. * The moon was OK. There were holes in it, We saw biscuits and things at the bottom. It was raining, the cardboard melted. Tomorrow can we build a boat? Wait! We brought you back a secret, but we’re going to tell it to the zebras first – the black one with stripes painted white, the white one with stripes painted black, who sleep on the landing, leaving just enough room to squeeze by. Published in 2001, The Age of Cardboard and String is the title poem of Charles Boyle’s final collection to date. After what he calls “an amicable separation” from the Muse, he has gone on to be the founder-editor of CB Editions, and continues writing in other genres. A mock voyage narrative adroitly divided into three, the sequence opens with a riddle. Put the various functions of the “machine” together, and what do you get? A cardboard box transformed by a child’s imagination? Or is “it” the “age” of the title, symbolised by the cardboard box with strings attached – in the more ominous sense of that phrase? There’s also the question of the narrator’s identity. While a child-spokesperson is the easy answer, the poem’s diction doesn’t represent a big stylistic departure for the poet. So, to state the rather obvious, this “child’s voice” has adult knowledge. We’re not expected to believe we’re hearing the fully reliable transcription of a real six-year-old’s words. I’ve hit on the idea of a six-year-old male narrator because of the reference to Anna in the second poem of the sequence. The urgent desire to “drive” faster than a seven-year-old girl suggests younger male sibling’s rivalry. Anna surely has her own vehicle, and (although I hardly dare say this) it’s probably one less liable to fall apart than the boy’s. This “machine” is a casual though versatile construction for “eating oranges”, “humming new tunes” and travelling to the moon. To the adult, though not the child, it is “whatever string you pull, the same machine”. There are venial, adult associations with the metaphor “pulling strings” and possibly a suggestion of “leg-pulling”. The functions of the machine, not at all clear-cut, convey a lively muddle of motives and desires. The emphasis seems to fall on creative imagination in the first poem. After the machine’s breakdown comes the failed mending and the sulky tears. The latter perhaps help the glue to hold next time, and soon the lunar rocket is launched. All the possibilities are united: “we set off for the moon, / scattering orange peel on the floor / and singing songs not yet written down – / hot, fierce songs // that almost burn our mouths with their newness”. The excitement is sharply drawn. If it had finished here, we’d conclude (with a glance towards William Carlos Williams) that this was a poem about writing poetry. Social interactions in the second poem emphasise competition, greed, and crafty excuse-making. More than ever, the children’s self-portrait seems a lightly disguised representation of adult behaviour. The portrayal of a deity driven by appetite (“Maybe God was hungry”) is particularly revealing. A light shrug of disappointment accompanies the report on the voyage in the third poem. The longed-for moon was only “OK”. There were holes in it, and at the bottom of the holes merely “biscuits and things” (a perfect expression of consumerist ennui). The moon itself might have been made of cardboard and string. Rain has subsequently “melted” the spaceship, but an eager new desire is born: “tomorrow, can we build a boat?” Since God entered the picture, it’s easy to imagine a reference to Noah’s Ark at this juncture. And perhaps the addition of the two zebras amplifies that thought. The awareness of the zebras’ presence, and especially the awareness of the distinction between them, seems to insulate the child’s consciousness. Their special secret may never be divulged to the adult listener. Generational menace may be implied by the size of the zebras “who sleep on the landing, / leaving just enough room to squeeze by” (room for children only, it seems). At the core of the sequence, too-ingenious humans seem to want too much – “gears, automatic transmission, wings, clouds / to fly through, flags, fuel injection, / solar panels, stabilisers, sometimes just / to be left alone”. Like the children’s voyage-game, the poem is more than playful. It illuminates how fatefully the best and worst of human possibilities are fused. • Charles Boyle’s The Disguise: Poems 1977 – 2001, edited by Christopher Reid, was published by Carcanet earlier this year.From a solar-powered crib that treats jaundiced babies to fibre made from water hyacinth that absorbs oil spills, innovators from nine African countries have been shortlisted for the Royal Academy of Engineering’s 2022 Africa prize. This year half of the shortlist of 16 are women, and for the first time it includes Togolese and Congolese inventors. The entrepreneurs will undergo eight months of business training and mentoring before a winner is chosen, who will receive £25,000, and three runners-up, who win £10,000 each. All the projects are sustainable solutions to issues such as access to healthcare, farming resilience, reducing waste, and energy efficiency. The Guardian spoke to three of the shortlisted candidates. Virtue Oboro, Nigeria Soon after her son, Tonbra, was born in 2015, Virtue Oboro’s mother noticed the baby’s eyes and skin looked yellow and they rushed him to hospital in Yenagoa, in the southern state of Bayelsa. But three of the hospital’s five phototherapy units for jaundiced babies were faulty and the other two were in use. Tonbra was eventually found a place in a phototherapy unit but, when there was a power cut, he developed severe jaundice. “He had to have an emergency blood transfusion, which was traumatising. We had to buy blood from an external source, which made us nervous. It was really tough,” says Oboro, 32, a graphic artist and product designer. Her boy recovered, but the experience inspired Oboro and her husband to form Tiny Hearts Technology, the creators of Crib A’Glow, a solar-powered portable phototherapy crib that treats and monitors jaundiced newborns. So far, about 300,000 babies have been treated directly with the cribs in hospitals and homes in Nigeria and Ghana. Today, the Tiny Hearts team comprises engineers, designers and paediatricians, and also educates health workers and pregnant women about jaundice, which Oboro believes has saved many more babies. “I didn’t spot the symptoms myself,” she says. “Like many new mothers, I didn’t know about jaundice.” Newborns develop jaundice when their levels of bilirubin – a natural substance formed when red blood cells break down – are abnormally high. It can lead to death and also cause brain damage, cerebral palsy and hearing loss. Although it is common – affecting about 60% of newborns worldwide – devices to treat babies with blue-light therapy are expensive and unsuitable for poorly resourced hospitals with unreliable electricity. About 100,000 deaths from jaundice are recorded annually and many more babies suffer permanent injury. It took Oboro five attempts to perfect the design for Crib A’Glow, which runs on solar power, is foldable and costs about a tenth of phototherapy devices used in developed countries. The light rays focus on the baby’s body to ensure maximum efficiency, and using LED lights avoids skin burns, dehydration and rashes that can be common side-effects of such devices, she says. “Not only does the crib provide access to phototherapy, it provides phototherapy that is sustainable and lasts long enough for the baby to recover. This also reduces congestion in hospitals in Nigeria because babies recover more quickly,” says Oboro, adding that the cribs can be moved next to their mothers’ beds during treatment. “Because of Covid, other causes of infant mortality, such as jaundice, have not been given much attention. But Covid didn’t make the other problems go away. “The crib will reduce infant mortality and disabilities in Nigeria, and make the job of healthcare workers easier,” says Oboro, who is developing a solar-powered incubator and hopes to form partnerships with development agencies and donors to take her innovations across the continent. The crib is already used in 70 hospitals across Nigeria. “We import a high proportion of medical devices – but it is important to have homegrown solutions that are accessible and affordable for every community here. Healthcare providers can quickly provide feedback on homegrown devices,” she says. “The hardest part for us was acceptability. At first, it was difficult to convince people the crib would be effective,” Oboro says, “partly because I’m not from a medical background. But it’s as if a battle was fought and won – now my son and I feel like winners every day.” Divin Kouebatouka, Republic of the Congo So destructive is the water hyacinth plant to lakes and rivers in Africa that fishermen call it “the curse”, says Divin Kouebatouka, a 32-year-old engineer who is the first Congolese innovator on the shortlist. “When I returned to my mother’s village on the banks of Lake Djoue after studying engineering abroad, I saw an invasive plant that had literally invaded the lake, blocked marine navigation and asphyxiated the fish,” he says. “It had halted fishing activity, which is the main economic resource of the village.” Kouebatouka, a Colorado State University graduate who says he is motivated by protecting the environment after being struck by the impact of the climate crisis on the Congo at a young age, began to think about possible benefits of the water hyacinth plant, which is native to the Amazon basin but now found across the world and whose rapid spread has been intensified by global heating. “We studied the properties of hyacinth and found it is rich in nitrate, which is good for compost; rich in protein, which is good for animal feed; and it has a high absorbency,” he says. “It could also solve another environmental problem: the leakage of oil – the main cause of marine pollution in the Congo. So we decided to create a ‘bridge’ between two environmental problems – each one should be a solution to the other.” His team at Green Tech Africa developed a way to turn the plant’s stems into highly absorbent fibre that can suck up oil from the ground or water, or plug an oil leak in a container. Today more than 10 companies buy the product, called Kukia, which can hold up to 17 times its weight in hydrocarbons, the compounds that form the basis of crude oil. In 2018 the idea was nominated for the African entrepreneurship award. The Republic of the Congo has large reserves of crude oil and natural gas. Oil spills are common in industrial processes and the automotive and shipping industries. Kukia is sold to petrochemical and pollution control companies and the public through fuel stations and wholesalers. The project has also provided employment for local people who collect the plant and produce the fibre, earning more than the average agricultural wage. There are almost 900 collectors, 80% of whom are women. “We collected more than 5,000 cubic metres of water hyacinth – equivalent to two football stadiums of water hyacinth – on the banks of the Congo River, which made it possible to restore the waterways, promote the resumption of fishing and restore economic activities for a population of more than 100,000 people,” says Kouebatouka. “Parts of the plant that aren’t useful for the fibre are used elsewhere – roots are composted and leaves turned into animal feed. Once the stem fibre has been used on an oil spill or leak, it can be repurposed as a fuel source by cement factories,” he says. For Green Tech Africa, the next step is to establish a biorefinery to produce energy and a range of products from the invasive plants. “We’ve turned a botanical problem into a solution for an environmental problem, creating employment and skills development along the way. Kukia is simple, scalable and effective, and can make an enormous difference in Congo and worldwide.” Norah Magero, Kenya “I get emotional when I think about how many children missed out on vaccinations because of Covid,” says Norah Magero, a mechanical engineer. “The pandemic put huge pressure on hospitals and healthcare workers. In Africa, 23 million children [under the age of one] did not get vaccinated because of Covid.” In Kenya, the pandemic highlighted the lack of “cold-chain” infrastructure for storing vaccines, which 33-year-old Magero experienced. “Soon after I had my child in 2018, I moved from Nairobi to a rural area. I realised it was really hard to get her vaccinated. There were so many blackouts and ice-packs melted, so vaccines were no longer viable. “Digging deeper, I realised the problem was not just the lack of reliable power, but also that women who had gone once or twice to get the vaccines might not go back a third time. It might be expensive or difficult to travel and so they just gave up. I might have had the same thought myself – this is just too difficult. “I am an engineer and an energy manager and so I asked myself: why isn’t there an engineering solution to this problem. I am passionate about bringing up technology because it plays a huge role in closing the gaps. But it has to be affordable.” The organisation Magero founded, Drop Access, hopes to close the gap with VacciBox, a mobile solar-powered fridge that safely stores and delivers temperature-sensitive vaccines to communities and hospitals where there is a lack of cold-chain infrastructure. “Hospitals are in a race against time with vaccines and that is the case in most rural communities,” she says. “We need a solution to stop thousands of people missing out on life-saving vaccines.” The solar fridge has a data-monitoring facility and battery backup so it does not run out of power. Costing €800 (£680) to produce, the 40-litre box can be carried on motorbikes, bicycles and boats. “So far, we have piloted the fridge at two rural healthcare facilities. The first is at Merrueshi village health centre in Kajiado county in Kenya, located in a Maasai conservancy. The facility faces frequent power outages and used to use a soda fridge to store vaccines. It is the nearest health centre for a population of at least 400,000. “Every Wednesday, Maasai women would walk for miles to bring their children to be vaccinated. Currently, with VacciBox, the health centre can conduct field-based and door-to-door vaccinations, which has increased their monthly vaccination numbers by 150%.” The second trial is at the Usungu dispensary in Makueni county, 14 miles (22km) from the nearest electricity grid. The health worker used to transport vaccines twice a week from the nearest hospitals and return what was left at the end of the day or when ice-packs began to melt. With VacciBox, the dispensary can stock up to 1,000 vaccines a week without worrying about the vaccines spoiling. Magero says so far the team has carried out 2,100 vaccinations, mostly of children, and intends to expand into Covid vaccinations. “The AstraZeneca vaccine operates within that 2C to 8C [35.6F-46.4F] temperature range we cover,” she says. By 2024, she hopes to have produced 1,500 units and to have vaccinated 3 million children. The box can also be used to transport blood and tissue and can be monitored remotely before deciding to send out a technician if it stops working. An app helps keep track of the condition of the unit as well as the stock and distribution. “Throughout this process, I have been through a range of emotions – from frustration to scepticism to pride,” says Magero. “I had the feeling that I cannot just vaccinate my daughter – she needs classmates and friends. So this is for the mothers – and for all of Kenya.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Chronicling what was supposed to be the final chapter of Joseph Kabila’s presidency in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, this is a stark and gripping portrait of a country in the throes of a major political crisis. At the centre of these monumental events are Christian, Jean-Marie and Ben, three young Congolese men who are passionately fighting for democracy, yet in their differing ideologies also embody the fractures that exist inside the resistance movement against Kabila’s unconstitutional clutch on power. Jean-Marie, who like Ben was once jailed and tortured by the police, has faith in UDPS, the opposition party led by Étienne Tshisekedi, and trusts them to call for a fair and legal election once Kabila’s term comes to an end. In contrast, Christian considers the UDPS’ peaceful approach to be ineffective compared with direct protests, which sometimes end in deadly clashes with the armed forces. Much of the film captures the raw energy of these demonstrations: choking tear gas; shaky, frenzied cinematography; the threatening sound of bullets. The frantic breathing of the cameraman is audible as he too runs away from the police. Rising above the chaos and ideological differences is a movingly collective belief in a democratic Congo; something eloquently expressed through the young men’s T-shirt slogans which speak of “One Congo” and “Congo Love”. Nevertheless, the film could have included more insights from a female perspective; women are mostly seen here as mourning or concerned relatives. Still, this remains a courageous and absorbing documentary, highlighting a new Congolese generation that dares to make their voices heard. • Kinshasa Makambo is available on 31 December on True Story.The terrorism threat to the UK may have been made worse by Covid lockdowns, a security minister has suggested. Damian Hinds, the MP for East Hampshire who became security minister in August, told the Daily Telegraph that people spending long periods of time in their bedrooms during the restrictions could have pushed them towards radicalisation. His remarks echo similar warnings from the police and the UN’s counter-terrorism committee executive directorate (CTED). “Clearly, logically, when you have more people who are spending more time in their bedrooms at their computer … you are going to get a growth in that tiny proportion of people for whom that is a dark journey,” Hinds told the Telegraph. “And as you know, on the internet, if you start to make those kind of downward spirals, you can quickly accelerate with the material that you come across and the other people that you can come into contact with.” Since Hinds took on the brief, there have been two alleged terrorist attacks, the killing of the MP Sir David Amess and the attack outside Liverpool Women’s hospital. Counter Terrorism Policing said this month they had foiled seven “late-stage” terror attacks since the start of the coronavirus pandemic. It took the total number of foiled terrorism plots in the UK in the past four years to 32. But Hinds said it would be wrong to just assume this was Islamic terrorism. “There has been a growth in extreme rightwing terrorism,” he said. “Islamist extremism terrorism, though, remains a potent threat. And we also have quite a few people who you might describe as having a sort of mixed or unclear or unstable mindset. “Sometimes [they are] looking at flirting with different ideologies, different groups, sometimes apparently mutually exclusive, very, very different types of ideology.” A CTED report this month warned extremists had “sought to exploit pandemic-related sociocultural restrictions that have led people around the world to spend increasing time online, by strengthening their efforts to spread propaganda, recruit, and radicalise via virtual platforms”.Jean-Marc Vallée, the Canadian director best known for his work on Matthew McConaughey drama Dallas Buyers Club, has died aged 58. Vallée’s representative, Bumble Ward, said he died suddenly over the weekend in his cabin outside Quebec City. His two sons survive him. Vallée was a director who attracted high-profile stars, seeking projects in which they could demonstrate their unvarnished acting chops – which often paid dividends during awards seasons. He frequently shot his films using exclusively natural light and on hand-held cameras, allowing his cast unusual freedom to block a scene as they chose. “They can move anywhere they want,” he said of his actors in 2014. “It’s giving the importance to storytelling, emotion, characters. I try not to interfere too much.” Dallas Buyers Club was nominated for six Oscars in 2014, winning three, including best actor for McConaughey – who played a rodeo cowboy with Aids who smuggles an unlicensed drug into the US that can help patients live longer – and for supporting actor Jared Leto. Vallée followed that film with Wild, based on Cheryl Strayed’s 2012 backpacking memoir and starring Reese Witherspoon, with whom he reteamed on the first season of Big Little Lies in 2017. Other films include The Young Victoria, a royal biopic starring Emily Blunt, from 2009; Demolition, a study in grief with Jake Gyllenhaal, from 2015; and the TV series Sharp Objects, starring Amy Adams, from 2018. Vallée won a Director’s Guild of America award for Sharp Objects, as well as for his work on Big Little Lies. On Twitter, McConaughey posted a picture of them both smiling, saying: “With a gentle hand and a heart Jean-Marc was a true receiver - he didn’t romanticize life so much as he saw life romantic - from the struggle to the pain to the wink and the whisper, love stories were everywhere in his eye.” Ward expressed her shock on Twitter, calling the director “sweet and kind, full of gratitude. [He] remembered birthdays and sent awesome mixtapes, while still being a creative genius. Rest In Peace.” Vallée’s producing partner Nathan Ross wrote: “Jean-Marc stood for creativity, authenticity and trying things differently. He was a true artist and a generous, loving guy. Everyone who worked with him couldn’t help but see the talent and vision he possessed. “He was a friend, creative partner and an older brother to me. The maestro will sorely be missed but it comforts knowing his beautiful style and impactful work he shared with the world will live on.”Nearly two years ago, the dawn of Covid lockdowns forced us to contend with the prospect of solitude and self-reflection. Naturally, we rushed to find other stuff to do. Alongside the endless walks and compulsive baking, the early months of 2020 saw the blossoming of an array of tech trends: virtual gathering apps like Houseparty and Clubhouse, online events from trivia nights to Zoom weddings, livestreamed performances and art exhibitions. Some of these trends have faded. But through all the Zoom fatigue and screen-time overdoses, the pandemic has forced us to find new ways to relate to each other – and that has meant creative opportunities and connections we’d otherwise have missed. As we enter a new year, with the faintest glimmer of hope that someday, maybe, the pandemic will end, we spoke to those who say their lockdown-born activities are worth keeping – Covid or no Covid. The film buffs: ‘It came naturally to me’ When lockdown began, 29-year-old gym trainer Stevie Rock began to feel isolated from friends and family as she hunkered in her Oakland, California, apartment. So she started up a new tradition: a weekly movie night with a friend in Seattle. The two used Netflix Party (now called Teleparty) – a popular app that allows users to coordinate their streaming and watch together, remotely, and Zoom to chat during the films. They shared a meticulous spreadsheet of the movies they watched, rating them with different criteria and emojis. “It was a really good way to feel connected to somebody who felt very far away and have a shared experience,” she said. And while strict lockdowns have lifted and Rock has gone back to working in person and spending time with friends in real life, the movie nights have persisted. “I am very comfortable forming bonds with people online, so it came very naturally to me,” she said. “In some ways I feel like the pandemic has normalized something I would like to be doing more of anyway.” The virtual trivia master: ‘It’s fun to see people quibble’ For Casey Morell, a journalist at NPR, lockdown isolation led to a similar effort to connect online in a unique way. In May 2020, the now 31 year old began hosting Jeopardy!-like trivia for friends, joining a wave of trivia nights gone virtual during lockdown. Every couple of months, he gathers contestants in Google Meet rooms for a set of head-to-head competitions. Groups of three or four contestants race to answer trivia questions for points. Winners then play against each other. Morell has used the events as an opportunity to bring together people who haven’t met in person. “It’s pretty fun to see people who don’t know each other get together and quibble over who buzzed in first,” he said. As Covid restrictions have come and gone, Morell’s games have continued online – just as popular pub quiz companies such as Geeks Who Drink continue to offer virtual events alongside real-life ones. Morell expects them to live on even if and when the pandemic fades. “Part of the fun is having everything virtual,” he said. “You don’t have to go out and you don’t have to spend any money.” The role players: ‘Dungeons and Dragons helped us meet people’ Role-playing games like Dungeons and Dragons have also thrived during the pandemic, with Zoom and digital gaming platforms such as Roll20 allowing players to convene online. Wizards of the Coast, owner of the D&amp;D brand, reported sales jumped 33% in 2020, and the game’s popularity doesn’t seem to be fading, with Fandom, maker of a digital tool used to track players’ progress, reporting a 16% increase in users this year. John Mansfield, 31, and Winona Hendrick, 30, who are music teachers in San Francisco, played role-playing games in person before shifting online early in the pandemic. Playing virtually has brought a range of benefits. “Through D&amp;D, we actually met people in the pandemic having never met in person and then became good friends,” Mansfield said. It has also enabled easier scheduling. “It’s really convenient to play on Zoom because half of us are in San Francisco and the other half are in the East Bay,” Hendrick said. Another player moved to Puerto Rico during the pandemic, and meeting virtually has allowed the group to continue playing together. “We’ve said this so many times to each other: role-playing games have just really helped with the pandemic,” Mansfield said. Particularly during lockdown, Hendrick added, “having anything to look forward to during the week was really major.” The Animal Crossing gamer: ‘Sometimes you just want to hear something nice from a stranger’ Early in the pandemic, Malea Sary, 25 – a union organizer who’d just moved across the country – went on a quest. “All my friends were tweeting about Animal Crossing and how they were able to connect and bond over it – and that is what I really wanted, as someone who was now 2,000 miles away from all of my friends and loved ones,” she said. But to play the video game, she’d need a Nintendo Switch – nearly impossible to find at the time amid soaring demand and going for hundreds of dollars over retail price. Sary wasn’t going to be ripped off – so she made a 16-hour round-trip journey to Montana, where a seller was offering the console at a reasonable price. It was worth the trip. Animal Crossing: New Horizons, which lets players interact as they develop virtual islands, offered a much-needed outlet for an extrovert like Sary. “I’ve been able to hang out with my friends back home,” she said. “Because you’re sharing this moment together, the distance doesn’t seem real.” And it had an added perk. She soon met someone on Tinder who also happened to have the game. “We met once, socially distanced, at the beach, and I was like, ‘We should be creative with how we hang out,’” she said. They spent their next several dates playing Animal Crossing. “We’d send [in-game] gifts to each other and visit each other’s islands,” she said. More than a year later, they’re still together – and still playing the game. “I just really missed going to a coffee shop and being able to talk to someone for a few minutes,” Sary said of the early pandemic. In-game interactions provided something akin to that feeling, she said: “Sometimes you just want to hear something nice from a stranger.” The support group user: ‘I’ve heard impactful stories in my online 12-step program’ While some have used tech to connect with old friends in the pandemic, others have found new communities they otherwise had not been able to access. Tara, a 30-year-old writer, said she started attending 12-step meetings for the first time when they migrated to Zoom during the pandemic. She said the accessibility of online meetings and extra level of anonymity provided by video-free chatting made the barrier to entry lower. Though she lives in New Jersey she spent time connecting with fellows in New York City meetings. “It was great to be able to find meetings that align with my needs, like for young people and non-religious people,” she said. “I got to see people share some really impactful stories that I would not have been able to hear if we were attending meetings in our respective states in person.” The never-ending Zoom chat: ‘A lifeline that I didn’t know I needed’ By May 2020, a sense of isolation was settling in among those working from home. Cache Bunny, a Los Angeles-based video director, had an idea: a Zoom chat for anyone and everyone who wanted some company while working from home. She described it as “the quarantine version of going to work in a coffee shop” – participants could silently work while others did the same on their cameras, interacting through the chat feature. Nineteen months later, the Zoom chat, called Edit Party, hasn’t stopped. Administrators restart it every 24 hours, making for a single endless Zoom call that has gathered participants from around the world. “For me it’s kind of like a co-working space without any of them being your real co-workers,” said Monica Valdez, 27, who joined in October from San Antonio, Texas, hours away from her real colleagues. For Valdez, Edit Party has brought new friends – regular users who meet on Zoom often gather in real life – as well as collaborators. “We have meetups. We play games together. The other night we did a cookie baking video session, so everyone who was on in America was baking cookies together,” she said. And as a developer and programmer, “I’m able to go in there and be like, ‘Hey, can somebody look at this code, it’s giving me a hard time’ – everybody’s just willing to help.” Meanwhile, she’s been learning Spanish in order to talk to users in Central and South America. “There are some days when I’m on it all day,” she said, watching as people in different time zones log on and off. “These people have become practically a community to me, who I talk to on a regular basis,” she said. “It was a lifeline I didn’t know I needed.”A mortgage lender is letting homebuyers borrow up to seven times their income – well above the traditional maximum – which it says will allow some to buy a property they might have assumed was well out of their price range. Habito’s new formula for calculating how much people can borrow is considerably higher than the industry’s typical maximum of between four and five times salary, and while it could allow some buyers to scale up their property-buying ambitions, it could also revive debate about responsible lending practices. However, these more generous terms are only available to people who take out one of the company’s “fixed-for-life” mortgages launched this year, which let borrowers lock their monthly repayments at the same level for up to 40 years. Banks and building societies look at various aspects of people’s finances when deciding how big a mortgage they will let someone take out. Traditionally the typical maximum “income multiple” available in the UK is about 4.5 times salary, though in 2021 a number of big lenders including Halifax and HSBC have lifted their caps to 5.5 times for certain borrowers. Habito’s new terms apply to its Habito One mortgage. To qualify to borrow seven times their income, applicants have to work in one of a number of professions, including firefighters, police officers, NHS clinicians, such as nurses and paramedics, as well as teachers in the public sector – and earn a minimum basic salary of £25,000 a year. Higher-income earners on a minimum £75,000 basic salary are also eligible. Borrowers will need a deposit of at least 10%. In a joint application only one person will be accepted for up to seven times salary, while the other will have their salary multiplied by five. Interest rates on the mortgages start at 2.99% Daniel Hegarty, the founder and CEO of Habito, says, “Longer, fixed-rate mortgages mean that customers are completely protected against any threat of fluctuating interest rates, in a way that shorter fixes of two or five years mortgage deals don’t allow for. “As a lender that considers every applicant’s case individually, we’re confident that with suitable criteria in place, in the right circumstances, eligible customers can safely and securely boost their borrowing to buy the home that truly suits their needs and their life plans.” Nick Mendes, a mortgage technical manager at the broker John Charcol, said the home loans market was changing – this month the Bank of England announced plans to ease mortgage lending rules – and he expected more of these types of deals. However, he suggested this could lead to higher prices. “If more people know they can stretch their income multiple and borrow more, that will have knock-on effects on the housing market – a bit like with the stamp duty holiday,” he said. • This article was amended on 28 December 2021 because an earlier version included an incorrect byline.Twenty-four hours after I gave birth to my second child, my employer called to ask when I planned to return to work. It had been a high-risk pregnancy and a complicated, precarious delivery involving a breech birth. I should have remained in the hospital for several days. But my oldest child – then just a year old – needed major surgery that couldn’t be delayed. So we brought our newborn home and rushed to prepare to leave for a hospital two hours away where our oldest child would have surgery while our newborn was at home being cared for by relatives. As we gathered our things, the phone rang. It was someone from the HR office at the paper bag factory where I worked. After briefly making the obligatory inquiry as to how my new baby was doing, the HR rep got to the real reason for her call. “So, we know you were planning to take a few weeks off, but I just wanted to make sure you knew that you can come back anytime now. I could even get you back on the schedule this weekend, if you wanted.” After a brief pause, she added, “I figured, you know, you might want to start getting paid again.” I got the message loud and clear. My employer provided no paid maternity leave, so the longer I was off from work, the longer I would go without income. With two young children to support and medical bills piling up, this was money I desperately needed. By dangling a paycheck in front of me, the HR rep knew she was making it very tempting for me to return to work sooner than I had planned – and way sooner than I should. That was in the early 1990s, in a rural area in the coal region of Pennsylvania, where I live. I doubt much has changed since then. The version of the Build Back Better plan passed by the House on 19 November includes a provision for paid family leave. While it would mandate only four weeks of paid time off – much less than the 12 weeks in the original plan – it is being heralded as a big victory, which is depressing. Even worse: there’s a good chance that even that minimal amount of paid family leave won’t survive in the final version of the bill. At least, not if Joe Manchin has his way. The West Virginia senator has voiced his opposition to any paid family leave in the bill, and the Democrats need his critical vote to pass the package in the Senate. It’s incomprehensible that one individual could single-handedly decide the fate of something that affects so many American families. Manchin has never had to endure the physical and mental agony of returning to work before you’ve recovered from childbirth. His family is wealthy and has likely benefited from the support of nannies, assistants and paid daycare. I’m guessing he has never known the panic of worrying you might lose your job – or not have enough in your paycheck to pay essential bills – because you need to miss work to care for a sick child or handle a family emergency. It’s stunning that one man who has never needed paid leave has the ability to keep it from millions of parents who do. Manchin seems to be enjoying the power trip, relishing the attention his cat-and-mouse game has attracted. But for many people – particularly postpartum mothers – this is no game. The ability to take even just a few precious weeks at home without fear of financial losses could literally be a matter of life and death. Like many industrial employers (at least at that time), the factory where I worked used a point system to track and regulate employee absences. When you took a day off – unpaid, of course – it didn’t matter if you were sick, taking a vacation, or attending to a sick relative or family emergency. It was all treated the same way. You were given a point for each absence. After five points, you were given a warning. At six points, a one-day suspension without pay. If you reached seven points, you were fired. I received a point after absences for each of my appointments for prenatal care, and another for the time I missed while having the baby. It’s inexcusable that American companies are allowed to operate like this. Among the handful of countries without any form of national paid leave, the United States is by far the largest and richest. Forcing people to choose between their paycheck and their families or their own physical health is heartless. In the case of someone who has just given birth, it is particularly cruel – and dangerous. I suffered serious (and potentially life-threatening) complications during and after each of my pregnancies. I am far from unusual. The US has one of the highest maternal mortality rates in the world among developed countries – and the risk is especially high for black and Native American women and women in poor rural areas. Workers in these communities are also more likely to receive little or no paid leave from their employers. Only roughly one in five workers in the US has access to paid family leave. The rest are forced to make impossible and risky choices. One in four new mothers returns to work within two weeks of giving birth. I know firsthand that is not nearly long enough to recover. Even looking at it purely from an economic and labor standpoint, a national paid leave policy makes sense. Paid leave actually keeps people in their jobs in the long run. When parents don’t have even the bare minimum of paid leave available for emergencies, they may be forced to quit their job – or end up getting fired. While paid family leave could make a big difference to new parents, they aren’t the only ones who benefit. Paid leave can also be extremely beneficial to people in the “sandwich generation” situation – which is exactly where I am now. About 44 million Americans provide care to parents or other adult relatives or friends, representing 37bn hours of unpaid labor each year. Providing a basic minimum of paid family leave to all Americans shouldn’t be controversial – and definitely shouldn’t seem like such an impossible goal. Bobbi Dempsey is a freelance writer specializing in topics related to poverty, a reporting fellow at the Economic Hardship Reporting Project, and an economic justice fellow at Community ChangeAsad Rehman, who emerged as a key figure among the coalition of activists who took to the streets during last month’s climate summit in Glasgow, admits to being “somewhat of a reluctant environmentalist”. Tucking into his lunch in a cafe in east London, Rehman – the director of the charity War on Want – says having cut his teeth as a young, working-class man fighting the National Front in his home town of Burnley during the 70s and 80s, he initially saw the environment movement as remote and largely irrelevant to the causes he was championing. “It was framed as about saving polar bears or whatever, and of really only being a concern to white, middle class environmentalists.” But as his political work expanded – from the miners’ strike to the Stephen Lawrence campaign, the police shooting of Jean Charles de Menezes to various social justice campaigns in the global south – his view changed. He began to realise that far from being a distant, technical problem for others to worry about, the climate crisis – and the injustice it created – were central to everything he was fighting for. “I was really struck … on racial justice, on economic and social justice, [the climate and ecological crisis] was an epitome of all of those issues. At the same time, it was also clear to me that it was something that would exacerbate these things ... it was not rocket science, you just needed to join the dots.” Rehman said he was influenced by social justice movements in the global south, which often saw the climate crisis in different terms to the mainstream environmental NGOs in the UK, Europe and North America. “They had a very different way of talking about climate – they saw it as part and parcel of the bigger anti-colonial fight.” In Glasgow, at the UN climate summit, Rehman was at the forefront of a global network of indigenous activists, civil society campaigners, trade unionists, anti racists and youth climate strikers that put that perspective at the heart of the debate. Under the banner of the Cop26 coalition, the activists ensured climate justice, rather than straightforward environmentalism, was centre stage, with activists, delegates and many politicians recognising that the climate emergency could not be solved without addressing the underlying economic system that produces it. “We have spent years and years building the movement,” said Rehman. “Making the argument that this is a systemic crisis, that it is about racialised capitalism, making the case that you cannot understand the climate crisis without understanding that there is an arch from slavery to colonialism and imperialism to the climate crisis ... Now we are seeing those arguments cut through.” The origins of this climate justice movement go back more than a decade. In 2007, Rehman remembers sitting under a tree in Bali, where that year’s UN climate summit was being held, discussing what to do next with dozens of justice campaigners from around the world. The activists had become increasingly disillusioned with an approach that – as they saw it – had become dominated by powerful western countries, global corporations and mainstream NGOs. “We decided then to launch a network that would take the struggle forward not just in the climate talks, but on the ground and in the streets,” said Rehman. “We wanted to build a diverse movement to put justice – social, ecological, racial and gender – at its heart, and be a powerful voice to hold rich countries to account for causing the crisis.” Rehman says a key moment for this embryonic movement came two years later at the Copenhagen climate summit, with climate justice campaigners calling for a 1C warming target lined up against richer countries pushing for a goal of 2C. As the gathering closed in turmoil Lumumba Di-Aping, the then chair of the G77 group of 130 developing countries, made a tearful appeal, saying: “2C is a death sentence for Africa.” Rehman says that moment revealed that rich governments were “calculating that sacrificing black, brown and indigenous people was more acceptable than anything that threatened their economic interests”. Fast-forward 14 years, and although the notion of climate justice that came to prominence at the ad hoc meeting in Bali was central to this year’s Cop26, Rehman is clear-eyed about the scale of the challenges and opportunities that still lie ahead. “This is an epoch moment in human history … as profound and far reaching as the industrial revolution. What people need to realise is that fundamental change is happening – the real question is what kind of transformation we are going to get and who will it serve.” This overt politicisation of the climate emergency has ruffled feathers within the mainstream environment movement and with politicians. Critics argue that by saying the climate crisis cannot be solved without addressing and rewiring the global economy you are setting yourself up to fail, with catastrophic consequences. But Rehman is unrepentant. He argues that “fossil fuels and the logic of extraction and exploitation” are woven into the fabric of the economic order and therefore to tackle emissions you need to address the system of capitalism that creates them and other crises simultaneously, putting “justice and equity” at the heart of the campaign. “[I would say to critics] demonstrate to me in 26 years of your strategy to tackle this crisis how your theory has worked ... You have tried your way again and again and again, and it has not delivered, because how do you transition the global economy when at the same time you are signing trade deals locking in the power of fossil fuel multinationals and corporations, when you have financial institutions at a global level continuing to bank on fossil fuels and the food and energy systems that go with that?” He says the only way to “make that equation work” would be to “consign three-quarters of the world’s population to genuine disaster” and the global north to chaos, inequality and militarism. “If that is not the future you want, if you are not willing to accept that for yourself and your children, we have to ask how are we going to transition an economy that is geared to growth and extraction of profit from materials and labour in a meaningful way?” Despite the scale of the task, Rehman says the growing recognition of the systemic nature of the crisis and the links being built between movements in the global south and those in the north, means the climate justice movement has never been stronger. The key in the coming months, he argues, will be to make the climate crisis relevant to the lives of ordinary people – about warm homes, free public transport and clean air – and to build solidarity. “Winning on the climate is never going to be possible with environmentalists alone; we need to build social licence for the change that is needed and that means bringing in other movements – the labour movement, people working on economic justice and poverty, you have to bring in the energy of Black Lives Matter, migrant rights groups.” Finishing his lunch as the rain beats down, Rehman recalls the Marshall plan to rebuild Europe after the second world war. “This is what the trade union movement did 100 years ago when it convinced people that something better is possible, that things can and do change,” he said. “That is the task facing us now … Building power is about collective action, about solidarity and it can be done.”A screening programme for prostate cancer could be created in the next three to five years, an expert at the Institute of Cancer Research in London has said. Prostate cancer is the most common type of cancer in men, with one in eight white men diagnosed in their lifetime. It affects black men disproportionately, with one in four diagnosed. There are about 50,000 new cases of prostate cancer in the UK each year and about 11,000 men will die as a result. Despite this there is no totally effective screening programme because a blood test showing levels of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is only a guide. It does not accurately distinguish between dangerous cancers and harmless ones. Prof Ros Eeles, of the Institute of Cancer Research, told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme that if a PSA test was carried out now on every man in the UK over the age of 55 it would lead to over-treatment. “We will end up treating at least 12 men for every one man that you should really find disease which is going to impact on that man’s life. In the breast screening programme, it’s three to one,” she said. But Eeles said she was optimistic that would change. “With the advances in genetics and also imaging, particularly MRI, realistically we do need some more data but we’re probably looking at getting close to a tailored screening programme in the next three to five years,” she said. “We might need to use all of them together … so we can find those who have significant disease.” Prostate cancer featured heavily on the programme at the behest of the guest editor Michael Dobbs, the writer and Conservative peer who was diagnosed and treated for prostate cancer this year. It killed his father and one of his brothers. The programme heard that many men do not get tested and do not seek help despite the outcomes of being treated being good. The presenter Bill Turnbull told Dobbs that he had ignored possible symptoms for months before finally going to see his GP. “Maybe if I’d seen my GP earlier, I wouldn’t be in quite the mess I am in now. But men do that. ‘I’ll be all right, there’s nothing wrong with me’, and it’s embarrassing.” Turnbull has prostate cancer that is treatable but not curable. He said, laughing, that his hope in life “was to stay alive as long as possible”. Prof Peter Johnson, the national clinical director for cancer at NHS England, told the programme that, because of the pandemic, there were several thousand fewer men starting treatment than in a normal year. “It isn’t that there’s a big backlog in the system of people waiting to be diagnosed, it’s literally we haven’t even met them yet and that’s what we’re anxious to reverse.” He urged men to use the risk checker on the Prostate Cancer UK website.Never confuse fantasy and “realty”. It’s a sentence that has floated, jokingly, around my family ever since my father’s colleague uttered the bungle to him years ago. We New Yorkers, of course, never confuse fantasy and realty. But in our house we happily confuse the two all the time. For months last year, when we were making our way through Laura Ingalls Wilder’s Little House on the Prairie series, my kindergartner would stride around the apartment in a full pioneer girl’s getup, complete with bonnet, asking me how best to break the oxen or till the land. She committed, deeply, to the role, cut from the same cloth as Jeremy Strong and other method actors, insisting her pajamas were made of calico and roasting in the dress throughout the summer, even as she pretended a blizzard was swirling outside and she could see her breath in the air. “You want some ice cream?” This, my preschooler asks from various perches as her imaginary ice cream stand roams the living room, the sadistic vendor offering flavors that are, often, suddenly sold out. On rare occasions, she’ll morph into a doctor, offering shots with her scoops, though she’s highly specialized, treating but one ailment: jumping so high on the trampoline that you hurt your arm. It’s some botched version of what happened to her older sister, who fractured her elbow last year after a fall from some monkey bars, but remains seared in her mind as something very bad that can be fixed with a quick injection. And in the last few weeks, her pretend play has gotten even more intense, with nightly demands for trampoline accident– related bedtime stories. “At two and a half, three years old, the fuzziness between reality and fantasy is blurred,” Kathy Hirsh-Pasek told me when I reached her by phone. “And I think fantasy is very powerful for kids – it’s a safe place.” Hirsh-Pasek is a professor of psychology at Temple University, where she studies child development, and a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. I called her in the hopes that she could put my children’s amped-up pretend play into the context of our chaotic year. Was it a plea for help, an indication that our new normal, with its constantly moving lines in the sand – you can see Nana and Papa indoors, but with masks, or maybe only outside, but at a distance; here’s a Zoom kit sent home from school before winter break, which we may have to use, but probably not – was taking its toll? When Hirsh-Pasek’s children were in that liminal reality-fantasy age, she told me, there were real monsters in their closet. “So we did a whole ceremony with dream catchers, we turned the mattress around, we grabbed the monsters and threw them down the toilet,” she remembered. “We were letting the kids know that they have the power to control something, even if they don’t. It’s a really powerful message.” And it may be particularly important now, when children, however sheltered from the specifics of this rolling uncertainty, are internalizing more than we know. “They pick up on every little thing we do, they model it, they understand it, they watch us like they are sociologists,” Hirsh-Pasek said. “And we’ve been a wreck.” I may not be wearing a calico dress and doling out shots for hyper-specific trampoline accidents, but haven’t we all been living, a little bit, in fantasy land over the past year and a half? Every time I make and then cancel dinner plans; every time I convince myself that by this or that date, I won’t have to affix a tiny surgical mask on to my pint-sized urban doctor and send her off to preschool; every night I think I’ll forego that handful, or three, of leftover Halloween candy to take the edge off – it’s all fantasy. But, for a few moments, I live in that safe space. Kids just do it for way longer, finding real comfort in their imagination. The kindergartner and I just finished reading The BFG, which I found to be both a particularly enjoyable way to suspend reality, but also a wonderful allegory for parenting during the pandemic. For the four people out there who have not yet read this Roald Dahl classic (spoilers ahead), it’s about a Big Friendly Giant and an orphan, Sophie, who catches sight of him one dark night from the orphanage window, as he’s blowing something into a child’s room across the way. He sees her looking, scoops her up, and whisks her off to Giant Country, where she learns that while the BFG catches dreams and blows them into children’s rooms at night, there are other evil giants who roam the world, snatching people from their beds and eating them. The plot turns when Sophie and the BFG decide to do something about it. In the end, the bad giants get captured, and, as in so much of Dahl’s fiction, the child triumphs. “It’s offering a way to say yeah, there are some monsters out there, but guess what, we have the power to deal with them,” Hirsh-Pasek told me. “Fantasy can make things that are scary not so scary, help kids cope just a little bit better, and show them that with us, they have the power to change anything.” She paused. “Maybe that’s not 1,000% honest. I get that. But I’m down with fantasy.” (She later sent me a study concluding that young children often learn real-world information better if it’s presented in a fantastical story that violates real world paradigms.) The other night, hoping to prolong my nightly escapes with Dahl, I looked up the name on The BFG’s inscription page: Olivia. A quick Google search heaved the moment on its axis, refocusing everything like a Hitchcockian dolly zoom shot. Olivia was Dahl’s daughter, who died suddenly in 1962, at age seven, of encephalitis brought on by the measles. “As the illness took its usual course, I can remember reading to her often in bed and not feeling particularly alarmed about it,” he wrote in a widely distributed open letter urging parents to vaccinate their children, published during a measles outbreak in 1986. “Then one morning, when she was well on the road to recovery, I was sitting on her bed showing her how to fashion little animals out of coloured pipe-cleaners, and when it came to her turn to make one herself, I noticed that her fingers and her mind were not working together … In an hour, she was unconscious. In twelve hours she was dead.” He dedicated James and the Giant Peach to Olivia when she was still alive. Twenty years after her death, he published The BFG with her name at its front. As Dahl knew so well, in fantasy, you can do anything: make rivers of chocolate, fly inside giant peaches, even bring daughters back to life. The conceit of the book, which you learn in the last few pages, is that the BFG actually wrote the thing, and just published it under another name. The night we finished, my kindergartner looked at the cover for a while. “I don’t think that’s actually true,” she said. My heart sank, imagining her passing over that invisible boundary, from fantasy-believer to hardened realist, a transition I feared might be accelerated by the last few years. Then, as she closed her eyes and started to drift off, she mumbled, “I think what actually happened is that Sophie told the story to Roald Dahl, and he wrote it down.” And of course, in a way, she’s right. Sophie Brickman is a contributor to the New Yorker, the New York Times and other publications, and the author of Baby, Unplugged: One Mother’s Search for Balance, Reason, and Sanity in the Digital AgeA dog has undergone life-saving surgery after scoffing six packets of potentially deadly Christmas chocolate coins. Hugo, a six-year-old Staffordshire bull terrier, helped himself to the chocolate treats – poisonous to dogs – when owner Amie popped to the shops. She returned to her home in Plymouth, Devon, to find the coins gone and wrappers strewn across the floor, before rushing Hugo to a nearby PDSA pet hospital. “I’d only been to the shops briefly and came back to find torn-up packets and bits of foil all over the floor, with the chocolate gone,” she said. “At first Hugo seemed fine, but I felt sick with worry when he began vomiting blood. He then had a seizure, which was terrifying, so I called PDSA immediately.” Hugo was assessed, sedated and had an X-ray, which revealed his stomach was full of foil, needing surgery to remove it. Donna Southwould, a PDSA vet nurse, said: “Hugo was kept in overnight after his major surgery. He needed an intravenous fluid drip, medication and intensive nursing care to aid his recovery. “He was very lucky, and could have died if he had not been treated in time. While he’s not completely out of the woods yet, thankfully Hugo is now at home on strict rest, and on the road to recovery.” Advising owners to be aware of the dangers of festive treats for their pets, she added: “Many of us have treats, sweets and chocolates aplenty in the house, and while the festive period can be a time for indulgence, it’s important to remember that some of these foods are very harmful to our pets. “Foods including chocolate, mince pies, onions, raisins, grapes, some nuts, sage-and-onion stuffing and Christmas cake can all be harmful and should be kept safely out of paws’ reach.” Amie added: “I don’t know what I would have done without the incredibly kind and caring staff at PDSA – they were amazing. I honestly don’t think Hugo would be here without them. “They went above and beyond for him and I will be forever grateful. There were a number of times I thought we were going to lose him, so to have him home for Christmas is a miracle.” A PDSA spokesperson said: “If you think your pet might have eaten something they shouldn’t, call your vet immediately as they might need urgent treatment.”Ministers have been warned that their efforts to tackle Britain’s obesity crisis are likely to fail because the public are constantly “bombarded” by unhealthy food options. Britain has one of the highest obesity rates in Europe, with two in three adults overweight or obese and the NHS spending £6bn a year treating obesity-related ill-health, a figure that is forecast to rise to £10bn a year by 2050. The government has announced plans to introduce a 9pm watershed on TV and a ban on paid-for advertising online for unhealthy food and drink, plus new restrictions on the promotion of unhealthy food and drink in retail outlets and online. However, a damning 28-page report, commissioned by the government’s own obesity research unit and seen by the Guardian, warns that these efforts will fail unless much wider action is urgently taken to transform the entire food environment. The review, by the Centre for Food Policy at London’s City University, found that easy access to and availability of unhealthy food 24 hours a day across the UK makes losing weight “difficult” for millions of people who are trying. “People engaging in weight management reported eating more, simply because food was always easily available and this close and constant exposure triggered them to want food more often,” the review found. “People also reported that being met everywhere with promotions made it very difficult not to think about food or make unplanned purchases of HFSS [high in fat, salt or sugar] food.” Even Britons who are “trying really hard” to lose weight are being “thwarted in their efforts” because of the amount of unhealthy food they encounter each day. City University’s experts undertook the review for the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) obesity policy research unit, which commissions independent research to inform ministers. The review concludes that even well-designed weight management services will only have a “limited impact” on Britain’s long-term efforts to promote and maintain weight loss if ministers fail to improve the food environment at the same time. Kimberley Neve, the lead author of the review, said: “This review highlights not only how difficult it is to lose weight in Britain, and keep it off, but also that it’s not just about willpower or self-control: even people trying really hard are thwarted in their efforts by unhealthy food options that are everywhere – they’re easy to find, cheap to buy, quick and appealing.” The review found that the relatively lower cost of unhealthy food options made weight management “particularly difficult” for people on a low income, with unhealthy food more likely to be promoted and on offer in shops and supermarkets. “With Christmas treats in abundance in the supermarkets, and new year resolutions around the corner, the narrative needs to shift so that instead of going on the usual January diet, people ask for a food environment that supports them to be healthy,” said Neve, a research assistant for the food systems and policy analysis workstream of the NIHR Obesity Policy Research Unit at City University’s Centre for Food Policy. “For that, you need policy to level the playing field for industry to start making changes.” Experts not involved with the review said its findings were incredibly stark. Jane DeVille-Almond, the chair of the British Obesity Society, said: “Pretty much every activity we encounter, outside our homes today, involves our senses being bombarded with food aromas. The sad fact is many of these foods are considered bad food choices, especially if we are trying to lose weight or eat more healthily.” Britain must “steer changes” in the food environment if it is to become healthier, she said. “Cinemas, leisure and activity centres, hospitals, work spaces, supermarkets and food outlets all need to work on offering and promoting tasty healthier choices.” Caroline Cerny, the alliance lead at the Obesity Health Alliance (OHA), said the review showed Britain’s obesity crisis was “far less a problem of individual behaviour and lack of willpower” and “far more about the environments around us”. She added: “The UK’s health problems reflect an environment that is flooded with unhealthy food and drinks.” A separate report by the OHA published earlier this year said Britons are exposed to an “obesogenic environment” from birth, “one in which calorie-dense, nutrient-poor food is accessible, abundant, affordable and normalised and where physical activity opportunities are not built into everyday life.” The new review found that people often come up with diet plans, but shops, supermarkets, advertising on public transport and workplaces can make it almost impossible for them to stick to their routine. “The ubiquity and appeal of unhealthy foods means that people actively trying to lose weight or keep it off must avoid parts of the food environment – a certain aisle in the supermarket, the work canteen or a friend’s party – to be able to adhere to healthy eating plans,” it said. “Government attempts to address this with new restrictions on junk food marketing in 2022 are a positive first step,” said Cerny. “But we need much more, including levies on the food industry to incentivise them to produce healthier products.” Ministers are being urged to accept seven policy recommendations. These include shifting the balance in the UK food environment so there are more discounts on healthier foods such as fruit and vegetables. Businesses should also be helped “to provide healthier options in the workplace” for employees, and fast food outlets should be incentivised to sell healthy options, the review urges. Tam Fry, the chair of the National Obesity Forum, said similar measures were urged a decade ago, but ministers failed to act. “The government’s responsibility deal launched in 2011 was an attempt to tackle all the issues around HFSS food and was accepted by food companies as long as it was free from regulation. The government declined to legislate and the deal unravelled. The researchers’ demands must now be mandated – no ifs and no buts.” A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “As part of our obesity strategy to get the nation fit and healthy, we are introducing mandatory calorie labelling in large restaurants, cafes and takeaways, restricting advertising of foods high in fat, salt and sugar being shown on TV before 9pm and in paid-for advertising online, as well as restricting less healthy food promotions in stores and online. “Additionally we have invested £70m into adult weight management services made available through the NHS and councils, so that people living with obesity have access to support that can help them to lose weight. “The Office for Health Improvement and Disparities will build on our national efforts to tackle obesity, improve mental health and promote physical activity.”When my older brother died, the first thing I thought about was work. I had just moved to New York from London, so my family had to break the news over the phone, grappling with my grief while still sucker-punched by their own. But if you had asked me at that moment, I would have told you there was no grief. Instead, I immediately began thinking about which editors I was going to have to let down. What work might fall by the wayside for ever? I quickly calculated the upsides of my “time off”. At least I would have more time to spend on that long article that was due. Then I thought about going for a run. Or shouting at somebody. Mostly, I thought about getting off the phone. It was all an inconvenience. Had my family – always so keen to remind me of where I had come from and who I was never going to get to be – just passed on this news to ruin my day? I should probably have been thinking about how my brother and I fought relentlessly, but how he always thought he was trying to protect me. How he would turn up at every family celebration with three dozen Ferrero Rochers in hand. How he was the life and soul of every party I had. But these leaps and twists of my mind, to escape a horrible truth, reflected a mental agility I had learned in childhood. When I ended up estranged from my parents and homeless at 16, I reframed it as “moving out”. When I worked multiple jobs to cover rent in London in my 20s, I told people: “It’s so crazy how having less time makes you more organised! It’s like you have more time!” Dad taught me an exceptional work ethic – he still works six‑day weeks and 16-hour days – something I now realise is due to generational trauma. He fled Bangladesh with his family in the 60s searching for prosperity, only to arrive in a UK that was rife with racism. Yet he never gave up the dream, telling us every day that if we wanted to escape poverty, we needed to work hard. For me, that mantra turned into a compulsion. I started to believe that if I didn’t work hard enough, bad things would happen and I would have only myself to blame. During high school exams, I prepared obsessively for every possible essay question, sticking revision notes on the walls of my homeless shelter, as if they were posters of boybands. I finished that year with near-perfect grades. I had conditioned my body to believe that I could work myself into the ground to escape every trauma, upset and obstacle life threw at me. Then came my brother’s death. In the hours after I received the news, reality set in. I held on to the kitchen counter, walking like a cat, low to the ground from fear. I felt the world unsteady beneath my feet. I called my friends to tell them I didn’t know if I was sitting or standing. “I don’t know, I don’t know, I don’t know,” I responded to every question. I was in shock. I howled in pain at the life-shattering confusion that came from realising that the big brother I knew would now exist only in photographs – aged five, wearing a Mickey Mouse T-shirt – and in a video on my phone, surprising his best friend with a fridge full of sweets and chocolate. Yet still I tried, after one day in bed, to “snap out of it”. I went out for a bagel. I met a new person in the city and apologised when, less than an hour in, I started to cry uncontrollably. I flew back to London to see my family, screamed at my boyfriend, went to the funeral, then returned to work two weeks later. I was told to take as much time as I needed. But the job in New York was a dream job. Walking through a farmers’ market the day after I had first landed, picking out fresh vegetables and lamb sausages, I had felt as if I had finally escaped. So, when the life-upending phone call came the next day, it felt like a premonition: my old life was trying to catch me again. I felt a familiar compulsion to outpace it. Bosses don’t wait for you to get back on your feet, my dad told me. This time, however, my tank was empty. No matter how much I willed myself to get up and carry on as normal, my body and my mind resisted. I walked out of meetings to cry in the bathroom. Some days I came in and turned around as soon as I got to work. Sometimes I couldn’t get out of my bed at all. One day, standing outside our office in Manhattan, telling my boss I didn’t need to go home when clearly I did, I confessed. “I just don’t want it to defeat me,” I told her. “Well,” she said. “It’s going to beat the shit out of you if you don’t confront it.” When I finally went to a therapist, she confirmed the worst. There was no running from this one. Of course, I tried to argue. I tried to explain a black hole had been chasing me my whole life, that it had chased me out of my home and then across the Atlantic. I told her how it waited around after bad events, promising to suck me back to my old life if I let my guard down. If I didn’t run now, I would soon be homeless again, living on 3p noodles and washing in a bucket in my bedroom. She suggested, gently, that perhaps the reason I couldn’t run any more was because I didn’t have to. What if my body was letting me stay still because I was finally safe, because I had a job that would grant me the time off I desperately needed, a liveable wage that would pay my bills, a partner on whom I could rely? Maybe, she said, I was no longer the 16-year-old living in hostels who would lose everything if she didn’t stop running. I didn’t believe her, but what choice did I have? The sadness was there, my therapist told me; I was just choosing not to look at it. So I tried. I still worked obsessively – old habits die hard – but on days when I was stricken with grief I asked to work from home, or to take a few hours off. I stopped filling my social calendar with events that helped me avoid having to think about what haunted me. I stopped drinking so much and spent more time alone. When I was homeless, I used to avoid the hostel’s TV room. I hated trying to relax in a communal space full of people I didn’t know, pretending it was a home. I didn’t like the attention, or the idea of having to fight over a remote with a fake family. But in my mind, I had reframed this: I told myself that I was so busy that if I watched TV, I would never get anything else done. Now, in the hours when I could no longer force on a happy face, the TV became my best friend. I became acquainted with shows I had never watched: Breaking Bad, The Wire, Girls and The Sopranos. I watched films – and learned that many include a scene in which a brother dies. I cried a lot. I learned that my disposition to run away was a result of trauma, that it left some people feeling like passengers in my life, rather than people invited along for the ride. I learned I was destructible. Finally unable to find a silver lining, I learned that the bad things that happened in my life were neither a test nor a triumph, just unpleasant things that I wished had never happened. With that, I grew around my grief. I learned that no amount of work would prepare me for, nor relieve me from, difficult things – including my brother not being here. I learned that, on some days, I would still find myself blindsided by a memory of him while doing the shopping, or in the middle of a meeting, or during a conversation not related to him at all. In those moments, I learned, I didn’t need to run from the memory. I could just stay still. The mental health charity Mind can be contacted on 0300 123 3393 or by visiting mind.org.ukIt seems like only yesterday that we were all enjoying the memes and videos parodying the decline and fall of Matt Hancock. The incredible brevity of his time in exile seems to strain the laws of PR physics, and suggests that the fallen minister still enjoys support at the highest levels of government. A hasty press call, a mea culpa in front of a bush: his resignation speech was haphazardly choreographed. The time-compressed media age seems to have eaten away our powers of recall. Public figures are sacrificed daily to the gods of Twitter. News items that, at their peak, command the collective consciousness quickly disappear (Remember wallpaper-gate? I don’t). The idea of penance – time spent away from ordinary life in repentance for one’s sins – exists in all major religions. The Indian spiritual leader Meher Baba said: “When penance is carefully practised, it inevitably results in the revocation of undesirable modes of thought and conduct, and makes one amenable to a life of service.” Different faiths prescribe differing levels of self-sacrifice according to the seriousness of the sin. Hancock, for his part, has spent a mere six months as a backbencher, and is reported to have also stayed in an £87-per-night hotel in Montreux. Is this enough time to atone for the grope that shook the cabinet? The great expenses scandal of 2009 for ever eroded the idea of politicians as highly credible public servants, replacing it with the image of Sir Peter Viggers’ duck house. We are far from the days of the John Profumo affair, when scandal could truly bring down a politician. Hancock would never be content tending a market garden in Norfolk. The world has changed a great deal. Paradoxically, though online platforms are where he received the most ridicule, it is the range of tools that social media makes available that will enable Hancock to ascertain his best route forward. Having conviction, staying fast and loose with messaging, and saturating the media with his rehabilitated smile will – in my honest opinion – be enough to bring him back into the fold of mainstream politics. Hancock’s affair may soon be a dimly remembered peccadillo in the Tory annals. Gone are the days when a high-profile public figure outed by a red top could buy time in the Priory. Sentiment analysis can help decide between a social media post of toad-licking and a beautiful desert sunset, to see which resonates with the public and best says “I’ve rebooted my life via an out-of-body hallucinogenic experience”. Carefully measured clicks will decide Hancock’s fate. But who is behind this resurrection? Given the current cabinet’s churn, it would not be surprising if Boris Johnson were trying to expedite the rehabilitation of one of his loyal generals. Even with the prime minister as backer, full recovery will require Hancock to believe unflinchingly in his own fitness and purpose. The swiftness and intensity of Hancock’s comeback demonstrates he has the self-belief necessary. Today’s “dispersed” media will give Hancock’s camp one great benefit: it will allow him to stress-test a number of options. Part of this exercise will be gauging the strength of the hostility against him; the response will shape his strategy. Already you see different tones being trialled, the triumphant, the grovelling (apologetic tones on the BBC and Times Radio) and the scrappily indignant (tense and defensive on Peston on 1 December). The right cocktail – in combination with a charity campaign, such as that he is running on dyslexia awareness – will suffice to ensure no path is barred to him. He could even become prime minister. For the plucky media strategist, success has the potential to become the story itself; if there is one thing comms folk love, it’s a challenge of Hancockian proportions. Yet, they won’t necessarily do it for free. Whoever is supporting the return of Hancock will anticipate future rewards. Success depends on whether Hancock can still play ball. For all the PR advice one can buy (or source from party ranks), the success or failure of his rehabilitation will ultimately depend on whether he can regain his footing and project effectiveness as a politician. In all faiths, penance is meant to result in a personality reset, returning the individual from a life of arrogance and sin to one characterised by humility. Public servants stumble. Whether they recover or not is more than just a matter of convincing others they have changed – it is about taking what you learned in the desert to heart. Mark Borkowski is a crisis PR consultant and authorThe actor Paul Bettany has spoken for the first time about having the text messages exchanged between himself and Johnny Depp concerning Amber Heard read out at Depp’s libel trial. Bettany, who is currently promoting A Very British Scandal, told the Independent it was “a really difficult subject to talk about” and said he was concerned doing so would “just pour fuel on the fire”. “Can you imagine what it would be like, honestly, to have a bunch of lawyers go through every one of your emails and texts for 10 years? All I can tell you is that it was an unpleasant feeling.” A series of aggressive and unpleasant texts exchanged between Bettany and Depp, his friend and sometime co-star, were read aloud in court in 2020 by barristers for News Group International, which Depp was suing after a column by Dan Wootton in the Sun referred to him as a “wife beater”. One message, sent in 2013, made lewd reference to Heard’s “beaver”, and discussed her murder by “burning” or “drowning”. “I’m not sure we should burn Amber,” wrote Bettany. “She is delightful company and pleasing on the eye. We could of course do the English course of action and perform a drowning test. Thoughts? You have a swimming pool.” Depp replied: “Let’s drown her before we burn her!!! I will fuck her burnt corpse afterwards to make sure she’s dead.” To which Bettany apparently wrote back: “My thoughts entirely. Let’s be certain before we pronounce her a witch.” Depp was asked in court whether Bettany was one of his “drug buddies”, and he said that the pair had taken drugs together and drunk alcohol. Depp lost the libel case and was replaced by Mads Mikkelsen in the forthcoming third instalment of JK Rowling’s Fantastic Beasts movie franchise. Bettany has won plaudits for his performance as the Duke of Argyll in A Very British Scandal, as well as in Marvel spin-off WandaVision.This New Year’s Eve could be the mildest on record with temperatures as high as 15C, the Met Office has said. The prediction comes after parts of the UK had a white Christmas, with snowfall in Yorkshire and Scotland. Low pressure systems moving across the Atlantic were driving the change, bringing in milder air and wet weather, the Met Office said. Forecasters had said the previous New Year’s Eve record of 14.8C (58.6F) in 2011 could be matched or even surpassed in parts of the UK. Met Office meteorologist Greg Dewhurst said: “The record is 14.8C on New Year’s Eve and that was in 2011, temperatures look like they’ll be 14C to 15C (57.2F-59F) so it is possible that temperatures could be that value,” he said. Dewhurst said the weather throughout the week will be “on the mild side”. “We’re going to see across the whole of the country, through the rest of this week, temperatures that are above average for this time of year,” Dewhurst said. “The average temperature in the UK around this time of year should be around 7C-8C (44.6F-46.4F). “Going forward, we’re looking at highs of around 12C-14C (53.6-57.2F), possibly locally 15C in one or two spots, so it’s going to be well above average.” “It isn’t going to be blue skies all week,” Dewhurst added. “There’s going to be cloud at times as well as strong winds and heavy rain, particularly across the north and the west of the UK.” He said there were no weather warnings in place, but parts of the UK would be hit by gale force winds later in the week. “Gales are possible at times in the south and the west as we move through the week,” he said.An Afghan former BBC journalist who managed to flee the Taliban has been stranded in a refugee camp for months because of delays to a resettlement scheme promised by the UK government. Mudassar Kadir* is the only one of 14 former BBC employees to have escaped Afghanistan since the Taliban took over in August. The other 13 remain in hiding in fear of their lives. Kadir, who also spent time working for the World Bank and the former Afghan government, had hoped he and his family could begin a new life after leaving Afghanistan, but since escaping in early October with the help of a US charity, Kadir and his wife and two young sons have been stuck in a refugee centre on the outskirts of Dubai. The Kadirs are grateful to the United Arab Emirates for the safe haven and are being well looked afte, but they are prevented from straying more than 100m from the building and the UAE will not accept asylum applications. Kadir is exasperated by the UK government’s repeated refusals in response to his request for help, and he still lives in fear of being sent back to Afghanistan where his work for the BBC has made him a target for the Taliban. “The UK should have a duty of care to me and my family. My life is at risk because I have worked for the BBC. The UK government knows this but they have done nothing to help me,” he said. “In the beginning we hoped that the UK would give me a visa, but now with each passing day my frustration grows.” Campaigners say the family’s predicament highlights the plight of thousands of Afghan immigrants caught in limbo, unable to return home for fear of persecution and prevented from travelling anywhere willing to grant them refugee status. The UK government has promised an Afghan citizens’ resettlement scheme (ACRS) to help as many as 5,000 people a year starting in January, alongside the existing more restrictive Afghanistan relocation and assistance policy (Arap). Kadir does not qualify for Arap, which has helped fewer than 400 people so far, and he is unable apply for ACRS because it is yet to open and when it does will only accept referrals for resettlements from NGOs. Campaigners fear the UK government is deliberately delaying the implementation of the scheme in an effort to reduce numbers. The Home Office denies this. “The ACRS is one of the most generous schemes in our country’s history and will give up to 20,000 further people at risk a new life in the UK,” a spokesperson said. “We continue to work at pace to open the scheme amid a complex and changing picture, working across government and with partners such as UNHCR to design the scheme.” It refuses to discuss individual cases. When asked to explain the delay, the Home Office said it was working on a system of “biometric enrolment” and eligibility checks to ensure those accepted did not pose a threat to national security. The Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, which is representing Kadir and many others in the same predicament, says time is running out. Its interim chief executive, Minnie Rahman, said: “Three months ago, our government promised a ‘warm welcome’ to Afghan refugees but increasingly it seems that there’s precious little welcome to be found. “Like Kadir, many Afghans appear to have been shamefully abandoned by the British government, despite clear links to the UK. The resettlement scheme is still not open, family reunion routes are still extremely limited and our government seems unable to offer many who risked their lives working with us the refuge they so urgently need.” The National Union of Journalists has been lobbying the government to help secure visas for all Afghan former BBC staff, including one who survived an armed attack on a relative’s home in October. Its general secretary, Michelle Stanistreet, said: “Whilst progress on the resettlement process happens at a snail’s pace, journalists affected are living in fear and being forced into hiding. We need urgent and robust measures put in place to secure safe passage to the UK for all those Afghans at such high risk.” A spokesperson for the BBC said: “We have every sympathy with former staff, but we regret we are not in a position to extend our direct support to them.” Kadir said: “My hope is that the UK government will fulfil their commitment towards me and my family. But right now it seems no one is paying attention to my case. Since arriving in the UAE two months ago there has been zero progress.” * His name has been changedNursing a hot chocolate in a coffee shop in his home town of Brighton, Riley Davies exudes ebullient excitement, the same ebullience you hear when he raps as ArrDee. Almost uniquely among the current crop of British rappers, the 19-year-old invariably sounds like someone who is having the time of his life, as if he’s grinning from ear to ear whenever he gets on the mic. He says he’s always been like that, ever since he was a kid, when his relatives nicknamed him Smiley Riley, and what he calls “the whole cheeky chappie thing” helped at least a bit in what sounds like a turbulent adolescence. At one point, he says, the police were at the door of his mum’s house so often that “the landlord started moving a bit funny” and they were forced to relocate to a different town. “But then, as I got older,” he says, “I think I realised that life gets a bit easier if you’re not a prick to everyone.” Even if it wasn’t in his nature, you couldn’t blame him for having a spring in his step. When we meet, his single Flowers (Say My Name) has just entered the charts at No 5. It’s his fourth Top 10 hit in 12 months – two solo, two as a guest rapper, including his meme-inducing appearance on the remix to Tion Wayne and Russ Millions’ Body, the first drill track to reach No 1. The other week, he says, he posted his Fifa Ultimate Team on his Instagram story, “and Ian Wright DMed me! I had him in centre-mid and obviously he’s not a centre-mid, but he’s like: ‘For you, I’ll play midfield.’ I lost my mind, and then Rio Ferdinand DMed me! He’s like: ‘Why haven’t I made the cut, I can’t be a defender?’ Rio Ferdinand! I was calling everyone, bruv. This is mental!” This time last year, he was working the night shift in an Amazon warehouse. “Ten pm to 10am. I barely saw sunlight,” he nods. “I’d get home, sleep all day, obviously, wake up and have to go back there. On the days off I had, I was bunking the train to London to go to the studio.” In fairness, he already had a small online following – “about 8,000 people” – thanks to the videos he’d been posting online since he was an Eminem and Lil Wayne-obsessed 12-year-old, rapping in the local park after school. In the early days, he thinks, “people were sharing them mainly to take the piss”. He’d also met his manager, who had helped hatch what he calls “a two-year plan” with him: the first step was to release a new freestyle, called Cheeky Bars, with a video shot on the bandstand on Brighton seafront for £100. The problem, if you can call it that, was that the plan kept going completely awry. “Cheeky Bars went mad, had to change the plan,” he smiles (it has had 5.8m views on YouTube, and 6.5m plays on Spotify). He released another freestyle, 6am in Brighton, “and that went mad, had to change the plan again”. And then the plan had to be ripped up entirely, thanks to the remix of Body, a collaboration that didn’t begin in the most auspicious circumstances. Having decided to celebrate signing a record deal in the wake of his freestyles’ success by hiring an aparthotel in London and throwing a party for his friends, Davies nipped outside for a cigarette and couldn’t remember the door code to get back in. “So I’m trying to type the code, and these two G-Wagons pulled up, loads of massive boys jumped out and they’ve all got balaclavas on. I’m five foot nothing, from Brighton, at one in the morning, I’ve just got a record deal so I’ve got this little Gucci bag I’d bought. I’m like: oh my God, it’s going to go mad. And one of these boys, who’s like six foot six, starts giggling and goes: ‘You’re ArrDee, right?’ He takes the bally off and it’s fucking Tion Wayne, staying in the same aparthotel as me. “When Cheeky Bars came out, he’d liked my post, which was mental. So I went to his room and he’s showing me the original of Body and saying: ‘I see you’re popping, I want to do something with you, I like your style.’ A lot of people advised him against putting me on that song: he’d had Aitch on [previous hit] Keisha &amp; Becky, who had a bit more music out and buzz behind him. I was two freestyles deep and he didn’t know whether I could do a viral verse or anything. But he took that risk.” Thanks to a rather blue punchline about condoms, ArrDee’s guest verse did indeed go viral, helping propel the single to platinum status and fast-tracking Davies to fame: his first mixtape, out in January, is hotly anticipated. It all took off so quickly, he says, some people thought he was “an industry plant”, until “the Brighton lot started saying: ‘No, he’s been rapping for five years.’ In my head, rap-wise, there’s no such thing as an industry plant, because if London doesn’t fuck with you [appreciate you], it doesn’t matter how much money labels pump into artists, it still don’t work.” You can see why he has taken off: Davies is an extremely dextrous and talented rapper. His singles have a perfect musical balance – heavy on hooks, they function as pop music without ever sounding cheesy or craven – and his Daily Duppy freestyle showed he could do more socially conscious material and kitchen sink drama. Moreover, he cuts a unique figure: UK rap isn’t exactly groaning with diminutive rappers with a belief in the power of crystals and witchcraft. “My mum practises witchcraft, not in the sense of magic spells but charging crystals, what crystals mean, which is why I have this,” he says, showing me a black ring on his finger. “Black sapphires, my birthstone, are protective and grounding. Some people might think it’s bullshit, but it works for me the same way as being a Christian or a Muslim or whatever – that’s what they believe and it works for them. I talk quite heavily about manifesting and believing in the universe doing things for you if you believe. My mum showed me that. When she was 15 she left the country, came back, got her GCSEs, went to college, became as high as she could in special needs teaching, then she got a black belt in kick-boxing, done two amateur fights, went back to university … all of that, as a single mum, raising two kids, my big brother with autism. It was monkey see, monkey do.” Nor is it exactly usual to find a rapper repping Brighton, both the pleasures of life in “the ocean city” and its tougher side (“if you come down for the weekend from London, you’re not going to [famously deprived suburb] Whitehawk”). “I definitely had more to prove coming from Brighton. When we did the freestyle, 6am in Brighton, a lot of people advised against calling it that. They were like: ‘Brighton has got a bit of a stigma.’ I was like: no, you know what, it’s bigger than me, so if I can shine a light on the town … because my whole personality, me being comfortable in my skin comes from Brighton, because there are crazy characters out here, but no one gets judged, so I wouldn’t be me without being born and raised here, and I want to be telling it like it is.” No, he says, he has no urge to leave the city for London now success has come calling. “I think it’s what keeps me so sane when everything’s moved so fast. I get humbled here. I go to certain bars and they ID me, and if I don’t have my ID they won’t let me in, because they know I used to try and hang outside of there when I was 15, 16. They don’t give a fuck what I’m doing in my life at the moment.”The Pfizer/BioNTech jab is having an unexpected side-effect on the German municipality where scientists first developed it: for the first time in three decades the city of Mainz expects to become debt-free thanks to the tax revenues generated by the company’s global success. Mainz’s decision to use its financial windfall to also slash corporate tax rates in the hope of attracting industry, especially biotech companies, however, is drawing criticism from neighbouring cities and economists. The city of about 217,000 inhabitants in the western state of Rhineland-Palatinate, has been carrying a crippling debt burden since the early 90s when authorities took out a loan that grew to €1.3bn (£1.1bn). Over the first year of the pandemic, the Rhine river city’s debt pile accrued a further €30m in interest alone. But the success of BioNTech, whose founders Uğur Şahin and ‎Özlem Türeci worked with the pharmaceutical giant Pfizer for trials and manufacturing of their Comirnaty vaccine in 2020, has transformed Mainz’s fortunes. Instead of an expected 2021 budgetary overspend of €36m, the city senate this winter announced a budget surplus of €1.09bn. With another surplus of €490.8m expected in 2022, Mainz hopes to clear its remaining debt within a year. Owing to German tax secrecy laws, BioNTech has not been officially named as the source of what Mainz’s senate calls the city’s “Cinderella story”. But the handsome wealth of the company that created the first vaccine authorised in the west is no secret. In January-September 2021, BioNTech made €10.3bn in pre-tax profits, of which it paid €3.2bn in tax – though the company has several sites in Germany and has not said to which municipalities the money went. Before the Covid-19 pandemic, Mainz’s main gift to the world was the printing press, whose inventor, Johannes Gutenberg, developed a method of printing from movable type in the city in about 1440. Mainz’s mayor, Michael Ebling, said the game-changing development of BioNTech’s mRNA vaccine was of equally outstanding importance. He told the Guardian he wanted to use the tax money to settle his city’s debts, rather than invest in spectacular infrastructure projects. “Christmas may be upon us, but for the city of Mainz now is not the time to draw up long wishlists,” Ebling said. “The tax windfall will certainly make it easier to honour the other achievements that our city has given to the world.” As well as promoting Mainz’s role in the printing revolution, the mayor said he would nourish its reputation as an innovator in football: the Liverpool coach Jürgen Klopp and Chelsea’s Thomas Tuchel first made their names managing the local Bundesliga club Mainz 05. “We can renovate the Gutenberg museum of printing, and our football pitches will remain in such a state that every player can play a clean pass,” he said. Ebling’s biggest plan, however, is to build on the vaccine makers’ success and turn Mainz into a global biotech hub: a 12-hectare (30-acre) plot near BioNTech’s headquarters, the university clinic and the German Cancer Research Centre has been earmarked for development. Over the next 10 years, the city hopes to create 5,000 new jobs, in part by luring companies through much lower corporate tax rates, which German municipalities are able to set themselves as a multiplier on top of the federal corporate tax rate of 3.5%. Mainz plans to cut its corporate tax rate from 440 to 310 percentage points, by far the lowest among German cities with more than 50,000 inhabitants. The senate says the cut is a gift not only to science startups looking for a new home, but to smaller companies that have suffered in the pandemic. A spokesperson denied the reduced tax rate was designed to stop BioNTech relocating to other low-tax regions. But in Wiesbaden, notionally Mainz’s richer brother across the Rhine, local politicians have criticised Mainz as “extremely lacking in solidarity”, while economists predicted the move could trigger a race to the bottom among German cities. “It’s understandable that Mainz has lowered the tax rate, but I would share local politicians’ criticism of the extent to which they are slashing the rate,” said René Geissler, a professor of public management at the Technical University of Applied Sciences in Wildau. “It’s a bit of a bombshell.” “It will create enormous pressure on other cities to follow suit,” he added, questioning whether the plan would necessarily pay dividends. For startups, he said, a low tax rate was often far less important when choosing their headquarters than proximity to research institutions or companies working in the same field, conditions Mainz already offers. • This article was amended on 29 December 2021 to clarify a reference to corporate taxes set by German cities; the rate indicates the amount by which the federal tax (3.5% at the time of publication) will be multiplied.Severe staff shortages could undermine the government’s efforts to keep pupils in schools, with headteachers in England saying that they may be forced to send some children home if they cannot muster enough staff. Despite a pledge by Boris Johnson to avoid a repeat of January 2021, when the government insisted schools would remain open only for them to be closed after an abrupt U-turn, school leaders are warning that the rapid spread of the Omicron variant could lead to mass absences for teachers and other members of staff when schools reopen for the new year. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, told the BBC that staff absences had been at “unsustainable” levels at some schools, with up to 25% of staff off in the week leading up to the Christmas break. “We don’t know what next week will look like. We’re not catastrophising that but we are saying we must have a sense of realism around this,” he said. Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said it would be “naive” to think Omicron would not have an impact on schools when they reopen. “It does seem as though choppy waters lie ahead and that some form of disruption at the start of next term is looking sadly inevitable.” Barton said he “absolutely agrees” with the government’s guidance allowing schools to restrict attendance only as a last resort, but argued that school leaders would need to make difficult choices if there were widespread staff absences. “The problem is that if you are running a primary school, and you have got 20 staff and seven of them can’t come in next week, and the pool of supply teachers that you would normally call upon – that is, people have got a relationship with your school and therefore will come and step in at the last minute or a supply agency that will charge you money for doing that at a higher rate – that pool is limited,” Barton said. “You will find yourself in a very difficult position of perhaps trying to teach two classes at once in the hall, stuff which will not be good for the quality of education, or you will be in the position of making a decision about whether some year groups should be in school while some aren’t.” Barton said secondary school leaders could be faced with the dilemma of prioritising classroom teaching for year groups taking exams ahead of teaching for others, “because GCSEs and A-levels really need to go ahead if possible this year”. Last week the Department for Education launched a public relations campaign to encourage former teachers in England to sign up with supply agencies, with the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, urging people “to come forward if they are available to temporarily fill absences in schools and colleges in the new year.” The Daily Telegraph reported that DfE sources were unable to confirm how many had actually signed up with agencies so far, but that it was “at least hundreds”.Worsening shortages of materials and labour combined with planning delays will hamper efforts to increase housebuilding in Britain in the next 12 months, according to an industry report. Planning remains a major barrier to increasing the supply of new homes over the next year, according to a survey conducted by the industry body the Home Builders Federation, the construction finance provider Close Brothers Property Finance and the builders merchant Travis Perkins. Delays in securing planning permission were cited as a problem by 94% of small to medium-sized developers. Boris Johnson’s government has pledged to increase housebuilding to 300,000 new homes a year by the mid-2020s to tackle Britain’s chronic housing shortage. The 243,000 homes built last year was the highest number in 30 years, but the report casts doubt on the target being met. Seventy-eight per cent of housebuilders said the supply and cost of materials such as bricks, timber and cement, posed a huge problem, compared with just 20% this time last year. “In March we were paying £9 a sheet for 9mm oriented strand board [a type of engineered wood], and up until recently we were paying £32 a sheet. Every single product has gone up,” said one firm that took part in the survey. Another said that in order to secure materials in short supply they have to be bought in bulk in advance, using cash that could be used elsewhere in the business. Worker shortages and rising wages were cited by 59% of builders as a major issue, compared with 19% last year. The coronavirus pandemic has sparked a global supply chain crisis that has led to ships being stuck at ports and shortages of goods ranging from cars to bricks. The UK construction industry has grappled with shortages of skilled workers for years as a result of ageing workforces, but the double shocks of Brexit and Covid have exacerbated these problems. Many firms highlighted the lack of eastern European workers at the lower end of the trades. The labour shortages have resulted in considerable wage inflation, something that smaller firms are less able to absorb than larger builders. An estimated 800,000 people are employed in the UK’s homebuilding industry either directly or indirectly in planning, design and construction of new properties. The report did contain one bit of good news: an increase in the number of apprentices employed by housebuilders. Almost 60% said they employed apprentices in their business, compared with just a third last year. Firms in the north were leading the way, with 88% hiring apprentices, compared to 59% in the Midlands and 52% in southern England. Stewart Baseley, executive chairman of the Home Builders Federation said: “SMEs [small and medium enterprises] are literally having to put their businesses on hold whilst local authorities delay the start of construction as their planning departments don’t have adequate capacity to process applications effectively. Allied to concerns on materials and staff, planning delays threatens the demise of even more SME builders.” Many of those surveyed felt that the planning process disadvantaged smaller firms in particular, partly because larger builders have the financial clout to absorb the costs of long and complex planning processes, and because councils make the planning process smoother for large housebuilders, as larger schemes enable local housing targets to be met more easily. Frank Pennal, the chief executive of Close Brothers Property Finance, said: “The combined challenge of both labour and material shortages, rising costs and planning delays are a serious risk to the delivery of new homes across the UK. “Developing homes takes months and years and while some of these issues might only be short term, they risk leaving a lasting legacy on the provision of new homes.”Editor’s note: the King William’s College quiz has appeared in the Guardian since 1951. These days, the quiz is no longer sat formally; instead it is sent to the schoolchildren and their families to tackle over the Christmas holiday. In other words, you are allowed to Google! However, the questions are constructed to make that a less than straightforward strategy. Good luck! General knowledge paper, 2021-22, No 117, sat by the pupils of King William’s College, Isle of Man “Scire ubi aliquid invenire possis ea demum maxima pars eruditionis est” 1 During 1921: 1 what was Coco’s debut launch? 2 what was controversially opened at 61 Marlborough Road? 3 in what were we able to share Rupert’s sadness at Gerald’s death? 4 whose true Gallic temperament was recognised by the Swedish Academy? 5 who, following a heart attack in Algiers, was honoured with a state funeral at La Madeleine? 6 where did the trials of 12 alleged war criminals result either in acquittals or very lenient sentences? 7 who contrived to bowl two overs in succession in an abbreviated match at Old Trafford? 8 who released a triple citrous concoction at 50 East Ida B, Wells Drive? 9 where was Gandon’s masterpiece subjected to an arson attack? 10 where were Silvestre’s troops humiliated? 2 Where: 1 was the ketch Racundra built? 2 was Devintas Fortas, scene of a Nazi massacre? 3 was Karl’s success reversed four years later by Peter? 4 did Horatio watch Madame Nicolas in the gala performance of the ballet? 5 did Joffe renounce for ever Russian claims over the nation’s people and territory? 6 did Louis reside at the invitation of Paul following the execution of his elder brother? 7 did a revolt against the French administration lead to a peaceful annexation? 8 does a hexagonal tower commemorate the city’s founder? 9 did Hámundarson obtain his atgeir from Hallgrímur? 10 does an Eiffel tower oversee the seals? 3. 1 who advocates auricular consideration? 2 who claimed that a foolish wit was inferior to a witty fool? 3 whose tomb bears an inscription composed by Lord Berkeley’s chaplain? 4 who stood quiet as any water-sodden log during the twangling of the harp? 5 who was depicted aside from a royal family gathering with a clothed monkey on his shoulder? 6 who lampooned the archbishop when pronouncing the grace “Great praise to God and little laud to the devil”? 7 who made a fateful discovery on hearing the duke singing about the fickleness of women? 8 and on which failed 16th-century French regicide was his character based? 9 who followed Gilbert to Smithfield, where a leper sat with his woman? 10 what moves off diagonally from his place next to tour? 4. 1 for what is Glossina to blame? 2 where is there no place for a street fighting man? 3 who lay for ages, battening on huge sea worms in his sleep? 4 who was brought quince and other fruit on 20 January while she slept? 5 who claimed to go the way that Providence dictated with the assurance of a sleepwalker? 6 who justified going to bed at 9.45pm by claiming that he hadn’t been to sleep for over a year? 7 which group fled to a cave on Mount Celion where they were incarcerated? 8 who, following a repast of peas, fell asleep in a wicker hamper? 9 who sang “Oh! Come lieto è il popolo” while sleepwalking? 10 who spoke of sleep as nature’s soft nurse? 5. Where: 1 did Horatio marry the Doctor’s widow? 2 did Quarrel rescue Solitaire and her companion? 3 did Harry fix the trafficker and maroon twelve of his compatriots? 4 influenced by the pundit’s publication, did Man-man attempt auto-crucifixion? 5 did “Major” Jones leave Medea in a combination of Spanish and Dutch female attire? 6 did Captain Hume bombard the pirate ships, but fail to prevent their captain from escaping? 7 did Jack unite with his son, the product of an indiscretion in Laurenço Marques? 8 did a serious disturbance at St Rupert’s lead to Major Gordon’s Court Martial? 9 did an “episcopal” execution stimulate a Regan response? 10 was Estrella sabotaged on Sir Thomas’s orders? 6. Who: 1 championed the one-armed Sid? 2 went head-to-head with Beaumont? 3 remounted after the 30th to finish second, but also last? 4 was schooled at Eton and would beat Fletcher’s record by 14 seconds? 5 started with Wall Street and finished, incredibly, on the Crest of a wave? 6 achieved a remarkable 17/18 with a character recalling the loss of an ear in Venice? 7 was rewarded by Santa at the Downs a little over six months too early? 8 had an unrivalled record run, interrupted by the Head Waiter? 9 followed Giggs and preceded Cavendish? 10 gave Etti her first Derby success? 7. Which title by which author refers to: 1 Illingworth’s sometime lover? 2 Yvonne, a Nantaise noblewoman? 3 the look-alike revealed as Laura’s half-sister? 4 the pretty daughter of a St Johnstoun glove-maker? 5 the hay-trusser who sold his wife and daughter to a sailor? 6 the former governess, who once had a liaison with a Gallic Officer? 7 the ace who played about with the Gladas single-seater? 8 the unmarried lady from St Athelstan’s Rectory? 9 the MP residing in Chesterfield Gardens? 10 the politician sitting for Mikewa? 8. 1 for what was there a reason? 2 what was the yield of the rod given to Aaron? 3 what, taken without vinegar, would relish the beer? 4 what is the presumed diet of the alternatively-named Vulturine Fish Eagle? 5 how did Stephen translate Kesegaran mawar, bunga budi bahasa, hiburan buah pala? 6 which native antipodean was named after a colleague by an émigré botany graduate from Kiel University? 7 what ill-conceived cultivation in Tanganyika was a hugely expensive failure? 8 for what did a hag-born freckled whelp dig with his long nails? 9 what is the major source of element number 34? 10 what was the chariot of the fairies’ midwife? 9. 1 whence the souters? 2 where does the swan float double? 3 where did Mary sit to watch her love’s returning? 4 where did the butcher reduce the pack from eight to three? 5 where may the altar stone be associated with Mungo’s conversion of Merlin? 6 whence did the Queen undertake a remarkable ride to see the severely wounded Hepburn? 7 which three eminences inspired the naming of a 1st century fort? 8 where did the town produce TT winners 50 years apart? 9 where do shilfas sing, and cushats croon? 10 where are twin vipers conjoined? 10. Who: 1 succeeded his younger brother? 2 fittingly, was buried beside the Unknown Soldier? 3 failed to finish his tale involving the Buddhist, Kusinara? 4 on his deathbed allegedly expressed a desire to eat a specific meat pie? 5 likened negotiating with the future Taoiseach to trying to pick up mercury with a fork? 6 claimed that he had been taller, but was worn away by the anxieties and struggles of the Reform bill? 7 responded to an insult by suggesting that his opponent was the 14th Mr …? 8 ended PM, CH and OM, an earl and a knight of the garter? 9 was obliged to travel on the Sud Express on taking office? 10 preceded Hemingway in Stockholm? 11. 1 as whom did Babbs masquerade? 2 who obliged her nephew to imbibe lavender water tinged with pink? 3 who died with her husband at the hands of the albino vicar of Altarnun? 4 who washed down warm sausages with draught Guinness at The Cricketers? 5 who was the Abbess who accommodated Brigid and her guardian in the Castilian convent? 6 which unwelcome guest insisted on “babysitting” for Ruth and Margaret during their mother’s Scandinavian cruise? 7 whose searching eyes were likened to a Saracen’s head in a Dutch clock? 8 who assisted in the extraction of her son, Alexander from the pig trough? 9 whose Provençal chef was regarded as God’s gift to the gastric juices? 10 who was obsessed about something nasty in the woodshed? 12. 1 who gave his name to a spirochaetal form of rat fever? 2 whose name is applied to a disorder of copper metabolism? 3 who was the English Hippocrates after whom St Vitus’ Dance is named? 4 after which aristocratic surgeon at Hôtel-Dieu is a palmar nodular disorder named? 5 who, working at Mount Sinai, described “regional ileitis”, a disorder which now bears his name? 6 which distinguished Kilkenny man is associated with a traumatic dinner fork deformity? 7 which Scottish polymath described a droopiness of the face which bears his name? 8 which fictional nobleman’s name is associated with factitious symptoms? 9 which Danish paediatrician gave his name to a congenital megacolon? 10 which infant’s clotting disorder now carries his name? 13. Within a noted urban rail transport system, what: 1 could also be porcine? 2 appears partly chiropteran? 3 name is also represented on the DLR? 4 name is shared with two Bordeaux Châteaux? 5 leader of the Souliotes, in conflict with the Ottomans, is commemorated? 6 recalls Franz Josef’s failure to halt the advance of Napoleon and Victor Emmanuel? 7 is a reminder of a fatal shooting at the Café du Croissant? 8 recalls the surrender of Vercingetorix? 9 commemorates a Soviet victory? 10 has an equivalent in E14? 14. 1 who was educated by Brough? 2 who bewailed his failure to lose weight on bottled beer and chops? 3 who inspired the three club members by recalling the exploits of Jim Tarras? 4 which Army officer made an honest woman of Miss Miller, having first met her at Ugbrooke? 5 who denounced the hanging of a felon as murder and was sent away to run the family seat in the Borders? 6 which widower had supposed his son to be seriously disabled until he was transformed by the magic of the garden? 7 who was considered to have outlived his future by 10 years and his past by more than 20? 8 who was rendered uniocular at Ypres, but went on to achieve Vice-regal status? 9 which Guardian of the Realm led his countrymen to catastrophic defeat? 10 who was the thorn in the seat of Wolfe’s chair? 15. 1 what masqueraded as Culverdale? 2 which viaduct boasts eight Italianate pavilions? 3 where did Compo and Co struggle with Norah’s mangle? 4 which great viaduct was described by Jonathan’s fiancée, Mina? 5 where was a separate rail viaduct erected beside two parallel road viaducts? 6 on which viaduct was a freight train, drawn by V2 class, No 4771 depicted for BR? 7 where did Her Majesty’s acrophobia compromise the plan for the opening? 8 which viaduct was appropriately completed on 28 June 1838? 9 where are 82 arches required to cross the river valley? 10 which viaduct was depicted by L S Lowry? 16. 1 where does the round tower predate its church? 2 where are mortgage seekers confronted by two strong men? 3 which polymath is commemorated by Pegram’s statue in the Haymarket? 4 where did Aumann and colleagues fail to overcome their earlier disadvantage? 5 how did Warwick succeed following the failure of Sheffield and Northampton? 6 with what avian introduction were the invited escapees from catholic persecution credited? 7 where is the martyred nurse vividly and repeatedly commemorated by Whelan? 8 where did Marian take Leo for lunch following a shopping session in the city? 9 where did the Callums first encounter Tom, the doctor’s son? 10 what was known as the devil’s cucumber frame? 17. Who ended which work with: 1 The knife came down, missing him by inches, and he took off? 2 He was soon borne away by the waves and lost in darkness and distance? 3 So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past? 4 Yes, she thought, laying down her brush in extreme fatigue, I have had my vision? 5 He was withered, wrinkled, and loathsome of visage. It was not till they had examined the rings that they recognised who it was? 6 He turned away to give them time to pull themselves together; and waited, allowing his eyes to rest on the trim cruiser in the distance? 7 He remembered the days when you could get 13 Royal Natives for a shilling? 8 They used to hang men at Four Turnings in the old days. Not any more though? 9 “But on the whole we have had a pleasant time, and are sorry when ’tis over”? 10 Very lightly she slipped up into bed, and very soon she was asleep? 18. During 2021: 1 where did Ingenuity reach fresh heights? 2 which residents of Welsh salt marshes have acquired PDO status? 3 which Cotswold town received a visitor reminiscent of Murchison? 4 how was a trip from Timbuktu to Casablanca rewarded nine times over? 5 which city witnessed a head-on collision between two Bombardiers, one of which was driverless? 6 unless we are very much mistaken, we have said “Goodbye” to which master’s “crash, bang wallop” approach? 7 who, despite a final bogey at Holly, earned the right to don a green blazer? 8 whose passing has recalled Shankly’s greatest moment at Wembley? 9 in what has Frederick Brown’s unkind nickname been abandoned? 10 who has stimulated our taste buds with his life history?Brendan Rodgers says it is “ridiculous” that Leicester have to play Manchester City and Liverpool in 48 hours as he battles an ever-deepening injury crisis. Ryan Bertrand is the latest Leicester player to become unavailable after he was injured during the warmup before Sunday’s 6-3 defeat at City, with Rodgers having to remove him from the substitutes’ list. The Leicester manager had been forced to name Jamie Vardy and Wilfred Ndidi on the bench despite the forward’s tight hamstring and midfielder’s accumulation of minutes. Rodgers was already without four of his first-choice defence – Jonny Evans, Caglar Soyuncu, Ricardo Pereira and James Justin – after recent injuries, plus the forwards Harvey Barnes and Patson Daka. After the loss at the Etihad Stadium against the leaders, Rodgers must gather his depleted resources for the home game against second-placed Liverpool. “It’s a ridiculous schedule,” said Rodgers. “We all know that players aren’t fully recovered for 72 hours after a game, so for us to be playing on a Tuesday against Liverpool it is ridiculous. However, we have to play the game so there will be virtually no physical work, just recovery and then we’ll look at video images and prepare.” Rodgers also pointed to how Liverpool will not have played for six days – since knocking Leicester out of the Carabao Cup last Wednesday – because their game against Leeds was called off due to a Covid outbreak at the Yorkshire club, while City had a clear week before facing them. He said: “This period [off for both teams] clearly is a big advantage and it is just coincidence the context of these two games is probably one of the first weeks Manchester City have had off so they were fresh and ready, and Liverpool haven’t played since our cup game so they’ll be able to bring players back in. That’s what we have to deal with. It’s a huge challenge for us but it’s a challenge we’re up for. We keep fighting and we keep working. “We’ll train a little bit later [on Monday], we’ll have a meal together. It’s a very quick turnaround and to play Manchester City and Liverpool in quick succession is a big challenge, especially with the squads they have. We’ll do what we’ve done in this period – our very best – and that’s what we’re prepared to do on Tuesday.” Vardy and Ndidi may be able to start at Anfield. “Wilf has played a lot of football for us so he hasn’t had a chance to rest,” said Rodgers. “To put him into [the City] game would have been really tough. Hopefully they’ll be fine for Tuesday’s game.” Of Bertrand, Rodgers said: “It looks highly unlikely [for Liverpool], he couldn’t bend his leg. Especially with the quick turnaround he may struggle. Jonny [Evans] will be another three weeks so he’s still out for a period and Harvey [Barnes] isn’t due back until about the 29th.”Sarah Weddington, an attorney who argued and won the Roe v Wade supreme court case which established the right to abortion in the US, has died. She was 76. Susan Hays, a Democratic candidate for Texas agriculture commissioner, announced the news on Twitter on Sunday. The Dallas Morning News confirmed it. “Sarah Weddington died this morning after a series of health issues,” Hays wrote. “With Linda Coffee, she filed the first case of her legal career, Roe v Wade, fresh out of law school. She was my professor … the best writing instructor I ever had, and a great mentor. “At 27 she argued Roe to [the supreme court] (a fact that always made me feel like a gross underachiever). Ironically, she worked on the case because law firms would not hire women in the early 70s, leaving her with lots of time for good trouble.” The court ruled on Roe v Wade in 1973. Nearly 50 years later, under a supreme court packed with hardline conservatives, the right Roe established is under threat in part thanks to a Texas law that drastically restricts access and offers incentives for reporting women to authorities. In 2017, speaking to the Guardian, Weddington predicted such a turn of events. “If [Neil] Gorsuch’s nomination is approved, will abortion be illegal the next day? No. One new judge won’t necessarily make much difference. But two or three might.” After steering Gorsuch on to the court, Donald Trump installed Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett. Barrett replaced the late Ruth Bader Ginsburg, a champion of women’s rights. Weddington found her way to Roe v Wade soon after graduating from the University of Texas. Represented by Weddington and Coffee, Norma McCorvey became the plaintiff known as “Jane Roe” in Roe v Wade. McCorvey became an evangelical Christian and opponent of abortion. She died in 2017. In a posthumous confession, she said anti-abortion groups paid her to take such a stance. In her Guardian interview, Weddington said arguing the case in federal court “was like going down a street with no street lights. But there was no other way to go and I didn’t have any preconceived notions that I would not win.” She did win, but the case continued. “Henry Wade, the district attorney, unwittingly helped us,” she said. “At a press conference, he said, ‘I don’t care what any court says; I am going to continue to prosecute doctors who carry out abortion.’ There was a procedural rule that said if local elected officials continue to prosecute after a federal court had declared a law unconstitutional, there would be a right to appeal to the supreme court.” Before the court in Washington, Weddington said, “it was impossible to read the justices’ faces. The attorney on the other side started by saying something inappropriate about arguing a case against a beautiful woman. He thought the judges would snicker. But their faces didn’t change a bit. “I had to argue it twice in the supreme court: in 1971 and again in 1972. On 22 January 1973 I was at the Texas legislature when the phone rang. It was a reporter from the New York Times. ‘Does Miss Weddington have a comment today about Roe v Wade?’ my assistant was asked. ‘Why?’ she said. ‘Should she?’ “It was beginning to be very exciting. Then we got a telegram from the supreme court saying that I had won 7-2 and that they were going to air-mail a copy of the ruling. Nowadays, of course, you’d just go online. “I was ecstatic, and more than 44 years later we’re still talking about it.” Weddington later revealed that she had an abortion herself, in 1967. “Just before the anaesthesia hit,” she said, “I thought: ‘I hope no one ever knows about this.’ For a lot of years, that was exactly the way I felt. Now there’s a major push to encourage women to tell their stories so people will realise that it is not a shameful thing. One out of every five women will have an abortion.” Weddington predicted: “Whatever else I do in my life, the headline on my obituary is always going to be ‘Roe v Wade attorney dies’.” In fact she achieved much more, as Hays detailed. Weddington was “elected as the first woman from Travis county in the [Texas legislature] in 1972 (along with four other women: Kay Bailey, Chris Miller, Betty Andujar and Senfronia Thompson). “She was general counsel of the United States Department of Agriculture under [Jimmy] Carter and enjoyed her stint in DC. Federal judicial nominations for Texas were run by her as a high-ranking Texan in the administration. “A Dallas lawyer she knew sought a bench. She had interviewed with him while at UT law. He’d asked her, ‘What will we tell our wives if we hire you?’ She told him he was wasting their time and hers and walked out of the interview. He did not get the judgeship. “Ever the proper preacher’s daughter, she would never tell me who the lawyer was. People don’t know that about Sarah. She was such a proper Methodist minister’s daughter. One of the few people I couldn’t cuss in front of.” Hays also paid tribute to Weddington as a member of a “Great Austin Matriarchy” including the former Texas governor Ann Richards and the columnist Molly Ivins. Among other tributes, the University of Texas law professor Steve Vladeck said Weddington was “a remarkable woman [who had] a remarkable career and a remarkable life. May her memory be a blessing”. Sherrilyn Ifill, president of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, said simply: “Rest in power.” Weddington indicated she was at peace with being remembered for Roe v Wade. “I think most women of my generation can recall our feelings about the fight,” she told the Guardian. “It’s like young love. You may not feel exactly the same, but you remember it.” • This article was updated on 27 December 2021 to include tributes to Sarah Weddington from Steve Vladeck and Sherrilyn Ifill. Reference was also added to Norma McCorvey’s statement shortly before her death, but revealed only afterwards, that she changed her stance on abortion because she had been paid to do so by opposition groups.A British cheesemaker who predicted Brexit would cost him hundreds of thousands of pounds in exports has called the UK’s departure from the EU single market a disaster, after losing his entire wholesale and retail business in the bloc over the past year. Simon Spurrell, the co-founder of the Cheshire Cheese Company, said personal advice from a government minister to pursue non-EU markets to compensate for his losses had proved to be “an expensive joke”. “It turns out our greatest competitor on the planet is the UK government because every time they do a fantastic deal, they kick us out of that market – starting with the Brexit deal,” he said. Spurrell predicted in January that Brexit would cost him £250,000 in sales. “We lost £270,000, so I got one thing right,” he said, describing the post-Brexit EU trade deal as the “biggest disaster that any government has ever negotiated in the history of trade negotiations”. His online retail business was hit immediately after the Brexit negotiator David Frost failed to secure a frictionless trade deal addressing sales to individual customers in the EU. Spurrell said he had lost 20% of sales overnight after discovering he needed to provide a £180 health certificate on each order, including gift packs costing £25 or £30. He said the viability of his online retail had come to a “dead stop”. After he embarked on a personal crusade to draw attention to the plight of UK exporters involving almost 200 media interviews around the world, he was invited to an online meeting with Victoria Prentis, a minister at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. She suggested that emerging markets could compensate for the Brexit-related hole in the Cheshire Cheese Company’s finances. Spurrell said he had pursued new business in Norway and Canada but post-Brexit trade deals sealed by the government had put barriers in place. “We no longer have any ability to deal with the EU as our three distributors in Germany, France and Italy have said we have become too expensive because of the new checks and paperwork. “And now we’ve also lost Norway since the trade deal, as duty for wholesale is 273%. Then we tried Canada but what the government didn’t tell us is that duty of 244% is applied on any consignment over $20 [£15].” That meant Canadian customers who ordered a gift pack worth £50, including transport fees, were asked to pay £178 extra in duty when the courier arrived at their door, Spurrell said. “As you can imagine, customers were saying: ‘You can take that back, we don’t want it anymore’.” Norwegian duty on a £30 cheese pack amounted to £190 extra, he said. Spurrell is now pursuing the domestic market with greater vigour but says the cost of marketing has gone “through the roof” because all his competitors are having to do the same. “Before we could sell across the EU, now we are all fishing in the same pond. We used to be the biggest online sellers but now we are absolutely bombarded with attacks by all our cheese rivals because they are buying all the ads on Google to try to beat us. These are competitors who would never have bothered us before,” he said. The “sad” thing, Spurrell said, is that it is the small to medium-sized companies such as his, important employers up and down the country, have been hammered by Brexit and other trade deals struck by the government, rather than giant rivals. He noted that the Canadian company Saputo, with a market capital of more than C$14bn (£8.3bn), had done well out of the Norwegian deal as producers of three of the four “premier” cheeses singled out for “significantly reduced tariffs”.As a mechanical engineer with a background in aerosol science, I often wondered why months into the pandemic we were still using cloth masks. People used similar coverings during the Spanish flu pandemic in 1919, more than 100 years ago. I knew better mask technology existed, and people needed to know about it. So I embarked on a year-long mission to test, document, and review the best masks I could find. This eventually entailed building a mini aerosol laboratory in my bathroom, with scientific instruments capable of measuring particles 1/50,000th the width of a human hair. I have a public database for my results. And a Youtube channel. Over time I began to be known as the Mask Nerd. With the Omicron variant spreading around the world, the most common question I get is still the most basic: what kind of mask should I be wearing? If possible, not a cloth or surgical one. These masks are moderately effective at capturing particles coming out of your own mouth – what we engineering nerds call “source control”. But they offer little protection against incoming particles. We call this part – how well the mask protects the wearer – respiratory protection. A typical cloth mask, while better than nothing, only provides around 30-60% protection to the wearer. Surgical masks, while better at 40-80%, lack a tight fit to the face, resulting in large amounts of leakage around the mask. Much, much better masks exist. These are sometimes called high-filtration masks, or by the technical name of a filtering facepiece respirator. Such high-performance masks provide significant protection to the wearer at levels that are between five and 10 times that of a cloth mask, while also providing significant protection to others. In fact, simply wearing a high-filtration mask can buy you significant time if exposed to infectious individuals. Analysis and studies suggest that with cloth or surgical masks, the risk of infection may increase within minutes of being around others with either no mask or low-performing masks. However with the use of well fitting, high-filtration masks, this same level of exposure would now take hours to become dangerous. However, it should be noted that being around a contagious person always carries some risk. Beyond the actual increased protection from potential exposure, these masks provide a psychological improvement in day-to-day life, as you no longer need to concern yourself with the fact that those around you may prefer to wear their cloth masks under their chin. One might assume based on the technical name, “respirator”, that these would be some Darth Vader-style headpiece – cumbersome and difficult to breathe in. However it’s quite the opposite. These masks feature a high-tech material called electrostatically charged meltblown polypropylene (quite a mouthful). It features tightly spaced micron-sized fibres – about 1/50th the diameter of a human hair – that have an electrostatic charge applied to them to catch even smaller particles. This material can filter particles that are a just a few nanometres in size. The most amazing thing, though, is that while providing nearly 99% protection from typical Covid respiratory aerosols, these materials also provide breathability that surpasses that of a typical three-layer cloth mask. When picking a mask you want to look at three criteria: filtration, comfort and fit. Respirators provide not only the filtration, but comfort from highly breathable materials, and a tight sealing to the face by the design of the mask. This is what makes respirators such an easy option: you need not worry about anything other than finding one that fits your face. This ensures that all the air flows through the mask, not around it. In the EU and UK, the FFP2 standard is my recommendation for the general public. It features both ear-loop and headband varieties, comes in a variety of colours, and typically costs less than a pound. Regulator oversight by various EU and UK government bodies helps to ensure a quality product. In the US, the common NIOSH N95 is a great option, but it is limited to headbands only. Ear-loop masks are available via other international respirator standards, such as the KF94 (in South Korea) or KN95 (China). However it should be noted that the KN95 is a self-reported test standard, and lacks strict government regulation by China, resulting in many underperforming and often flat-out fake masks. The KF94 is less affected by this, as it is regulated by the Korean equivalent of the FDA. In my year of testing nearly 100 different masks, I have found over and over again that there are high-performing masks that outperform cloth masks, while still featuring many things people like about their cloth masks. Mask makers such as Masklab and Posh have created highly decorative designed masks, with bright colours and intricate patterns. Many KF94 masks feature built-in ear-loop adjusters, making for a comfortable, but tight fit. Other mask makers such as 3M – with the 9152 (9105 in the US), a mask that helps the wearer breathe as if there were none on their face, while also providing a full range of motion for the jaw – provide great options for singers and choruses. With ample supplies of these masks available and a more transmissible variant on our doorstep, there has never been a better time to up your mask game. I encourage people to go out and try a few different varieties, find what they like and what fits their face. With ample supplies of these masks available and a more transmissible variant on our doorstep, there has never been a better time to up your mask game. I encourage people to go out and try a few different varieties, find what they like and what fits their face. However, masks with exhalation valves should be avoided; these allow unfiltered air to escape and don’t provide the high levels of protection to others that non-valved masks do. Aside from helping individuals choose the best mask for themselves, I would also encourage governments to increase the domestic production of masks, which would not only create jobs, but also allow regulatory oversight and a supply of effective, safe masks for their citizens. And good masks should be provided free of charge to the many that may not be able to afford them. Not all masks are created equal, so it’s time to make sure everyone knows about high-filtration masks. These simple, inexpensive and super-effective masks can make a significant difference in our fight against Covid. If you wear a mask, you might as well make it count by wearing the best. Aaron Collins is a mechanical engineer with a background in aerosol science who tests and reviews masks on his YouTube channel This article was updated on 31 December 2021 to include guidance on avoiding – in the context of public mask wearing during the Covid pandemic – masks that have valves.Officials in the Balearic Islands will seek to limit cruise ships to a maximum of three vessels a day at its largest port, in a deal described as the first of its kind in Spain. The regional government said in a statement that arrivals at Palma in Mallorca would be limited when possible to three cruise ships a day, one of the vessels allowed to be a mega-cruise liner carrying more than 5,000 people, starting in 2022. Calling the deal historic, officials estimated it would result in a 13% drop in arrivals at one of the busiest cruise ports in the Mediterranean compared with 2019. The procession of cruise ships passing through Palma has been a source of friction for years, pitting environmental concerns against the economic benefits of a sector in which as many as eight ships arrive on the same day, disgorging more than 22,000 people into the maze of narrow streets in Palma’s old town. In 2019, when more than 2.6 million cruise-ship tourists visited the Balearic Islands, more than 25 organisations joined forces to call for the vessels to be limited to one arrival a day with a maximum of 4,000 tourists. “The mega-cruise ship tourism arriving in Palma has grown in a way that is unsustainable and undesirable for our city, leading to serious environmental impact and increasing social protest,” they said in a joint manifesto. “Tourist overcrowding devalues our historical and cultural heritage, converting urban space into a theme park for visitors only and degrading the tourist experience for others.” The regional government said the deal had been more than two years in the making. “It means setting, for the first time, a real limit to the arrival of cruise ship passengers to Palma, something that would not have been possible without the will of the sector,” Iago Negueruela, the regional official in charge of economy and tourism, said. Similar deals have been struck for Dubrovnik in Croatia and Aalborg in Denmark, Negueruela told the Spanish newspaper El País. “We’re the first to do so in a port as large as Palma.” As cruise ship arrivals were often scheduled months in advance, the new daily limits would include fewer than 20 exemption days in order to honour previously signed contracts, the government said. On these days the limit for cruise ship arrivals would be increased to four, though the number of total passengers would be capped at 59,500 a week. The five-year deal was criticised by critics and proponents of cruise ship tourism. Some, such as the Platform Against MegaCruises, said little would seemingly change. “Three cruise ships a day – one of them with a capacity of more than 5,000 passengers – still seems to us a very high figure for what the city can bear,” it said. “The regional government has missed out on the opportunity to make a courageous decision to safeguard residents of the Balearic Islands, their environment, their health and their right to the city.” The competing platform Yes to Cruises described the push to limit the sector as an “error” that could have grave repercussions for an economy, after a 2015 study by the port authority estimated that tourism linked to cruises supported more than 5,500 jobs and contributed €256m in direct and indirect revenues to the region. The spokesperson for the platform, the local tour guide Álex Fraile, suggested this would set a precedent: “Is the next step to restrict the arrival of aircraft at [Mallorca’s] Son Sant Joan airport?” .Germans across large parts of the country face a tightening of rules governing both private and public spaces in an effort to slow down a wave of coronavirus infections triggered by the Omicron variant. Gatherings both indoors and outdoors are to be restricted in size from Monday, with leisure facilities – from gyms to swimming pools and nightclubs to cinemas – shutting in several states and restaurants facing earlier closing times. New-year fireworks displays, typically carried out by private households and held on the majority of German streets, have been cancelled for a second year in a row. Tighter protection measures will apply to those who have so far not taken up the offer to be vaccinated, or those who for medical reasons are not able to do so, but the vaccinated and those who have recovered from Covid-19 will also face a new range of limitations. Private gatherings are being restricted in areas which had not already introduced the rule in the run-up to Christmas to a maximum of 10 people, for those who are vaccinated or recovered. In the case of unvaccinated people, up to two other external people per household are allowed to come together. Children under 14 are excluded from the quota. A requirement to wear a medical mask, introduced almost a year ago, remains in place in shops and on public transport, as does the need to show a vaccine certificate in those venues where access is only possible for those who are vaccinated. Policymakers say the plan is to dampen the spread of the far more infectious Omicron variant, and to use the time gained from slowing it down, to deliver booster shots to as many Germans as possible. Just under 71% of Germans have so far received two doses of vaccine, and just under 36% have received a booster jab. Before Christmas, the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, set a target for vaccines to have been delivered to 80% of the population by 7 January. But the government admitted on Monday it was behind schedule and would have to extend the deadline to the end of January. Germany’s health minister, Karl Lauterbach, has repeatedly said he is closely observing events in the UK and speaking to his counterpart there, where Omicron is thought to be around two to three weeks ahead of where it is in Germany. Omicron has so far been detected in all 16 German states but has not yet got the upper hand over the Delta variant, which remains dominant but is expected to be overtaken in the coming days. Experts say Germany could have up to 700,000 cases a day leading to mass quarantines. Emergency measures have been put in place to allow the army and the federal agency for technical relief to step in and ensure vital services are upheld such as refuse collection and energy provision. Resistance to the protective measures led to new demonstrations on Sunday, most visibly in Berlin and the city of Schweinfurt in Bavaria, where police were attacked as protesters turned violent. More protests are scheduled across the country in the coming days. Politicians have been reluctant to talk of introducing a further nationwide lockdown, hoping instead that the current wave of measures will suffice. Christian Drosten, head virologist at the Charité hospital in Berlin, said it “remained to be seen when and whether” the measures would work. If not, he suggested introducing restrictions that would only allow those who had been boosted with a third injection and therefore had far greater protection than those who were double-jabbed, to enjoy wider freedom. Markus Söder, the leader of Bavaria, led the call by politicians to reduce the length of time for which people had to go into quarantine, to just five days if they were symptom free, arguing that otherwise large parts of German life would be in danger of grounding to a halt as Omicron took hold.Boris Johnson is not expected to announce further restrictions on Monday after he is briefed on the impact Christmas had on Covid infections and hospital pressures. The prime minister delayed any new cabinet summit on restrictions until after his regular data briefing with England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty – expected to be knighted in the new year honours – and the government’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance. Key evidence that the government will examine on Monday includes data on the length of stay in hospitals, the transition rates to ICU and new death figures. There is concern among some government figures about undeclared positive cases, including those who are asymptomatic but also those isolating after a lateral flow test whose results are not recorded by the NHS because they do not take a PCR test. Before Christmas, Johnson’s cabinet pushed back against new curbs, with key opponents including the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng. However, cabinet sources said minds could change if there were compelling changes in the data. A source close to Shapps said: “Grant is pretty optimistic that we will not have to enter a full-blown lockdown post-Christmas but he is not dogmatic on the subject. “Some in the cabinet take their cue from him because he has no axe to grind and will opt for lighter or tougher measures purely on the available data.” A separate cabinet source said the positive data on the Omicron variant’s severity proved they had been right to hold out. A UK Health Security Agency analysis found those catching Omicron were 50-70% less likely to need hospital care compared with previous variants. “It was right that we didn’t rush last time given positive early data,” they said. A third cabinet minister said: “The data so far is still struggling to be persuasive of legal changes to be required.” Government sources have ruled out some of the most controversial restrictions, including school closures. The Times reported on Monday that weddings and funerals would also be exempt from any further curbs on large gatherings. Conservative MPs are expected to be fiercely resistant to any changes. One Tory MP, Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, said the prime minister should “wait and see” what happens with Omicron in the coming days before taking a decision on further measures. The treasurer of the 1922 Committee of backbench Conservatives told Times Radio: “I think unless the data is very different to that which it was before Christmas, the prime minister would do well just to wait and see what happens in the next few days, because by next week we will have a very clear idea of whether these large number of infections are going to translate into hospital cases. “But, at the moment, I would urge caution because of the damage to the economy and the damage to individuals by locking them down unnecessarily.” Asked whether he was concerned that England was “out of step” with the rest of the UK in terms of Omicron restrictions, the Cotswolds MP replied: “I think it is the other way round. “I think the principalities are out of step with England. I think they have been overly cautious. I think they are doing more damage to their economies than they need to. I think they are doing more damage to people’s liberties than they need to – I just don’t think the evidence, unless the data coming out today looks very different, is there for any further measures.” He said should Johnson choose to strengthen the measures required to tackle Omicron, it would “not be a cop-out at all” to introduce them as guidance rather than written into law, adding: “I think that would be a very sensible way to go forward.”Jimmy Anderson walked into the indoor nets at the Melbourne Cricket Ground and slumped into the first available chair. His eyes were weary. His boots were scuffed. His trousers were soaked in blood, a fielding injury from Adelaide two Tests earlier which had never been allowed to heal. The fourth Ashes Test of 2017-18 had just ended in an excruciating draw, Anderson had just bowled 59 thankless overs and only a lunatic would have entertained the notion that he would be back at this very ground in four years’ time for more of the same. A lunatic such as Jimmy Anderson, in other words. For in the last week of 2021, here he was: a fresh set of whites, a fresh set of stumps, a fresh set of edges, a fresh haul of victims. And even if England’s latest batting collapse extinguished any faint hope that his four for 33 might prove an Ashes-saving effort, then in many ways this is to capture the very essence of late-career Anderson: a bowler steadily getting better and better, even as his team gets worse and worse. Certainly it looks less enjoyable than it once did. Anderson with the ball in his hand always had a certain sullenness to him, the knack of making professional sport look like hard labour. But something has changed, too. The catches go down with increasing frequency. So too the amount of time he gets to spend in the dressing room putting his feet up. And whereas peak Anderson was once one of the primary attacking weapons in the game, for the last few years he has been more often deployed in defence: chasing lost causes, bailing out failing batters. To watch Anderson these days is a curiously draining experience. The wickets are met with a snarl, the plays-and-misses with a grimace. There was a moment on the second evening when Jonny Bairstow ran round from deep midwicket to save a second run, but made the mistake of returning the ball on the half-volley instead of on the bounce. Anderson was still glaring at him a full 10 seconds later. The scars of battle may be largely psychological, but still visible for that. This will be his 60th Test defeat. Only Brian Lara and Shivnarine Chanderpaul have lost more. Only Allan Border and Kim Hughes – both Australians, you will note – will have lost more Tests in Australia. Only Muttiah Muralitharan and Courtney Walsh have taken more wickets in defeat. If we accept the modern pro’s maxim that personal accomplishments are largely irrelevant and only team success matters, then it turns out Anderson has done a lot of running and bowling and glowering and bleeding in a pointless cause. What, then, was the point? Perhaps, at heart, it really is just a numbers game. Not milestones or statistics – Anderson never paid much heed to those – but the singular, fiscal pursuit of the highest number of wickets for the fewest possible runs. Some of his recent analyses – 23-10-33-4, 10-6-8-1 – have an antediluvian, black-and-white feel to them. You need to go back 24 innings to find the last time he went at more than three runs an over. Anderson is 39 now, and no longer the sort of bowler who runs through a team or blazes his way through an entire summer. It is more than three years since he played a full five-Test series. His moments are rarer now. But when conditions are good and the ball is doing a bit, there are still few bowlers you would rather watch. The Lord’s Test against India was one such occasion. Now, on an unseasonably green MCG wicket, he stepped up again. The dangerous Steve Smith was dismissed with barely a flicker of resistance. Marcus Harris was bewitched and tortured from around the wicket before inevitably offering up a catch to slip. And though Pat Cummins tried to cut loose against the second new ball, Anderson ended up getting him too: a rare short delivery that Cummins could only skew to point. But, of course, Anderson can only do it in England. Never mind that he now averages fractionally better (a shade over 33) in away Ashes Tests than he does at home. Or that he averages 12 in away Tests this decade. The caricature of Anderson as a green-wicket phenomenon remains a stubbornly persistent myth, even within his own camp. Certainly you suspect it contributed to his omission in Brisbane and subsequent rustiness in Adelaide. By the time Anderson was finally up to speed, the Ashes had all but gone. After play, Anderson was asked if he was enjoying the tour. “I’ve got the opportunity to put an England shirt on,” he replied, and you realised that for all the pain, for all the bubbles, for all the despair and the defeat, none of this has been in vain. As the Covid scare in the England camp illustrated, Test cricket itself feels like an exceptionally fragile gift at the moment, and more fragile still in the hands of a 39-year-old fast bowler who may have only another two or three tours of Australia in him. The feel of a new ball in his fingers; the thrill of a plan in fruition; the blood on his trousers at the end of a long hard day; for Anderson, cricket itself was the point all along.Their classroom has no roof, no seats, no desks; most of the 50 small children sitting on the rubble-strewn floor have no pens or paper. But the students in this makeshift school in Hays, a village in Yemen’s Hodeidah province, are still among the luckiest in the country simply for having a teacher and a place to learn. Seven years into a catastrophic war that sparked the world’s worst humanitarian crisis, Yemen’s conflict shows no signs of ending soon, and the future of an entire generation is at risk of being destroyed. About 3 million children are unable to attend school, according to the Red Cross, with 8.1 million needing urgent educational assistance. “There is a huge pressure to leave school to work to support the family,” says Yemeni Agence France-Presse photographer, Khaled Ziad, who took the picture in September. “Some children in Yemen are now 10 years old and they’ve never had the chance to enrol in any school. If families don’t have money for food or medicine and hospital fees, how can they afford education expenses?” The UN has yet to make an official declaration of famine in Yemen because there is not enough reliable data to meet the technical definition. But 16.2 million people – around half the population – are food insecure, and fluctuating pockets of famine-like conditions have left nearly 2.3 million children under the age of five acutely malnourished. Weakened immune systems also make infants susceptible to Yemen’s devastating outbreaks of cholera and dengue fever: most people say Covid-19 is the least of their concerns. Yemeni childhoods are ending earlier and earlier. The average age of marriage for girls in some rural areas was just 14, even before the conflict broke out, and has only dropped since, while boys as young as 11 are recruited to fight by parties on all sides of the complex conflict. Most of the children getting basic literacy and numeracy lessons in Hays had already been displaced from other areas, Ziad says, as families attempt to flee the fighting between the Iranian-backed Houthi rebels, who control most of the region, and the Saudi- and Emirati-led coalition fighting to restore Yemen’s internationally-recognised government. According to Unicef, the warring parties have attacked schools at least 231 times since March 2015, when the coalition intervened. In 2018, a coalition airstrike dropped a US-made missile on a school bus of boys in the Houthi heartland of Saada, killing 44. “Students do not feel safe while they get lessons. They can’t afford supplies. Schools are destroyed, homes are destroyed … years go by, and there is still no chance to get a proper education,” Ziad says. Civil servant salaries in some areas have not been paid in several years, meaning many teachers and doctors effectively continue to work for free. While Yemen has about 170,000 teachers across primary and secondary schools, about two-thirds do not receive regular salaries. “The teachers say that, even though they don’t have salaries and the conditions are harsh, they feel there is a responsibility to keep working. If they leave education, they know the disaster would be even greater,” Ziad says. “They continue to perform an important duty.” Ziad, who lives in the nearby city of Hodeidah, says that he hopes his work as a photographer will help the world understand Yemen’s tragedy. He worries constantly about what the future holds for his two-year-old son. “If the war continues, I do not think that my child or the rest of the children in Hodeidah will be able to have a better future. It has to end,” he says. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Years ago I collected my new prescription glasses and walked home staring up like a person who had time-travelled from a pre-aeroplane era: I had no idea trees had individual leaves that could be seen from the ground. Before 2020, I had never noticed gardens, either: they were things that old people liked and neighbourhood dads mowed constantly. The garden attached to my flat became interesting only if a fox was standing in it. Then lockdown happened, and the people who usually kept the vines and trees from eating the building stopped coming. I tried to sort it out myself, pathetically Googling to figure out what was supposed to be there and what was an alien plant invasion. Somehow, I ended up watching Gardeners’ World. I can’t remember the first episode I saw, nor the first time I heard Monty Don talk about elephant garlic. I’d never heard of a “sweet pea” outside of Popeye cartoons, but I remember Monty telling us that their fragrance was intoxicating. I learned that flowers that looked like living spirographs were called dahlias and that tulips and daffodils, the welcome sights of spring and harbingers of warmth, only come alive if they’ve been left out in the cold all winter. Over the year, my interest, well, grew. My boyfriend gave me Monty Don’s back catalogue of books for my birthday, including one from the 90s where he’s still going by Montagu. Very soon I became entirely unavailable on Friday nights, mentally or physically; if Monty was in the pond with his waders on, even the cat was ignored. Whatever horrors were happening in the news, the birds were chirping at Longmeadow and Monty was there among them, a calming presence when everything else was on fire. “The BBC made a decision to carry on filming Gardeners’ World, and I always see it rather like wartime,” says Monty, when I call to tell him about the creepy shrine I have erected in his honour (I’m joking. I would never tell him). “They had to entertain the troops. So I was the Vera Lynn of Covid.” There’s a pause and he laughs. “I’m going to regret saying that.” At Longmeadow, where Gardeners’ World is filmed, the BBC installed five miles of cabling and blocked the drive with four metal containers that served as isolation pods for the cameraman, the sound recordist, the director and the electrician. It stayed like that until July 2021. Monty was alone in his garden – Vera Lynn with a walkie-talkie, remote-controlled cameras and an invisible audience. “I really didn’t enjoy filming during lockdown; there was no fun. When you’re filming with a crew it becomes a collaborative, creative process. But I felt, in a quite old-fashioned way, that I was doing my bit.” I ask what got him through the year if he couldn’t watch Gardeners’ World like the rest of us. “I lapped up Succession. I’ve seen the first two seasons twice.” When the first lockdown began, I didn’t know that for the next 18 months I would think of little else but the garden, that I would one day be a person with a preorder for spring bulbs. I am, statistically speaking, not unusual: my newfound interest stands alongside banana bread and sourdough as one of the great pandemic cliches. According to the HTA (Horticultural Trades Association) Garden Retail Monitor, garden centres at one point reported a rise in sales of 34% compared with pre-pandemic times, and they are still trading at 25% higher than in 2019. Gardeners’ World itself had an influx of new viewers. “I don’t think it came out of nowhere,” says Monty of the surge in interest. “This has been a slow burn; circumstance suddenly gave it a flowering. Over the last five years or so there has been a growing movement in people who are interested. It’s the interface with the natural world that most people have.” At last count, 88% of people in the UK had some kind of access to a garden or an outside space. But prior to the pandemic, many regarded their garden as a bind, something else to be kept tidy. “They didn’t see it as a creative opportunity. I think that that’s what lockdown did,” he says. “It opened up the possibilities of a garden.” Lockdown also opened up the possibilities of what the BBC would broadcast: Monty put out a call for viewers to send in videos of their own gardens – to fill the spaces in the programme where presenters would ordinarily go farther afield. They received 10,000 videos in the first year. Although they still included three an episode right through 2021’s series, the majority have never been shown. The videos are a fascinating, uplifting, sometimes heartbreaking glimpse into people’s shrunken lives. There was the woman in Warsaw who had filled her tiny fourth-floor balcony until you couldn’t see the walls, but had left a window for her dog to look out of, like a mouse-door in the skirting board. There was the 84-year-old woman talking about how for the first time she was starting a garden while being conscious of her own mortality; she wanted mature trees because she didn’t believe she had time to wait and watch them grow. And there were the doctors and nurses on a Covid ward who had discovered that the stuffy environment of the hospital office created the perfect conditions for cultivating the kind of vegetables they remembered from growing up in the Philippines. They had Chinese bitter gourds trained up against the windows, ripening in the sun. “I think what’s come through from all those is people just sharing pleasure,” says Monty. His own favourites include a 90-year-old woman who “didn’t quite say it, but she meant: ‘Fuck it, I’m going to do what I want,’” and the infectious joy of the sisters with Down’s syndrome who wrote him a poem. “You can gloss over them and call them simple pleasures, but they’re not: they’re really deep, rich pleasures, and they’re intensely complicated because they strike so close to where true happiness is.” When Gardeners’ World finished for the year last autumn, I was bereft. I watched old episodes and pretended it was spring. I stared out my window and willed the daffodils to grow. All I wanted was a one-off special where Monty wore a big jumper and showed us his houseplants. I couldn’t handle the fact that the light that had seen me through the horrors of the pandemic was going out, just as the clocks changed and the world got darker. This year, when I watched Monty fill pots with tulip bulbs and prepare the garden for another winter, the only thing that grew was the feeling of dread in my stomach. He was going to go away again. “I don’t think the schedulers really understand gardens, gardening, or the audience,” he says. “They see it as: ‘Well, the season’s over, it’s October and it’s wintry. Obviously no one’s interested in gardening in winter, so therefore we don’t put gardening out.’ What they don’t realise is they are gardeners. Gardening doesn’t leave their life just because Gardeners’ World goes off air, any more than food leaves people’s lives because Bake Off finishes a run.” The loss was obviously not felt by me alone. This year, the BBC is putting out winter specials – something it hasn’t done in a decade. The world is more interesting thanks to Monty. I tell him I can name plants in gardens as I pass them, that I can make an educated guess as to how much tender care goes into their lives. I know that trees are sharing food and possibly spreading information through their root systems to alert others to disease or danger – and now that I know all of this is happening beneath my feet and far above my head, I won’t ever forget. As the poet Mary Oliver wrote: “Attention is the beginning of devotion.” “Ah,” he says, chuckling. “Now you’re the smartarse who knows.”Tributes were paid to Sarah Weddington after the attorney who argued and won the landmark Roe v Wade case at the supreme court, establishing the right to abortion, died aged 76. Susan Hays, a former student of Weddington’s and a Democratic candidate for Texas agriculture commissioner, announced on Twitter that Weddington died on Sunday morning “after a series of health issues”. Alexis McGill Johnson, president and chief executive of Planned Parenthood, the largest US provider of reproductive services including abortions, tweeted: “What a loss. What a tremendous legacy. “Planned Parenthood will continue to honor Sarah Weddington’s work every day – by keeping up the fight to ensure that everyone has access to abortion.” Steve Vladeck, a professor at the University of Texas School of Law, from which Weddington graduated, wrote: “Sarah Weddington was 26 (!) when she first argued Roe before [the supreme court] in December 1971, just over three years after graduating. “A remarkable woman, a remarkable career, and a remarkable life. May her memory be a blessing.” Rabbi Danya Ruttenberg, of the National Council of Jewish Women, tweeted: “May her memory be a blessing that lights our way in our fight for abortion access and equity for all.” Julián Castro, a Texas politician who was housing secretary under Barack Obama and ran for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2020, wrote: “Sarah Weddington was a proud Texan who led the charge to protect reproductive rights under Roe v Wade. “She leaves behind an incredible legacy – one we must defend now more than ever.” He was referring to growing threats to Roe v Wade, including the Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization case, heard at the supreme court earlier this month, which could weaken provisions of the landmark ruling. Colin Allred, a civil rights attorney and Democratic congressman for Texas’s 32nd district, touched on the supreme court’s decision to uphold a Texas abortion law, the most extreme in the US to date, which bans abortions at six weeks and does not make exceptions for incest and rape. “Texas was home to Sarah Weddington who argued Roe, which no longer exists here,” Allred wrote. “Our history provides hope for our future. We must keep fighting for a better Texas.” Celia Israel, a Democratic member of the Texas state legislature, tweeted about studying under Weddington at the University of Texas, Austin. “It was always hard to just call her ‘Sarah’,” Israel wrote. “She commanded respect … she taught a leadership class, held me to high standards and encouraged me to get involved and make my mark. “As is the case with teachers and leaders we look up to, we are their legacy.” In an interview with the Guardian in 2017, Weddington predicted: “Whatever else I do in my life, the headline on my obituary is always going to be ‘Roe v Wade attorney dies’.” She was at peace with that, she said. “I think most women of my generation can recall our feelings about the fight,” she said. “It’s like young love. You may not feel exactly the same, but you remember it.”The DJ Janice Long, who has died aged 66 following a short illness, became a pioneer in broadcasting as the first woman to have her own weekday show on BBC Radio 1 and the first to become a regular presenter of Top of the Pops. Unlike some of the prominent DJs with whom she shared the airwaves during the first part of her career in the 1980s, Long was a genuine music fan, credited with giving a helping hand to a number of artists whom she had championed, including Frankie Goes to Hollywood, Primal Scream, Manic Street Preachers, the Teardrop Explodes, Amy Winehouse and the Coral. She continued to promote new talent after she had left Radio 1 and Top of the Pops in the late 80s, hosting a long-running overnight show on Radio 2, from 2000, and working for a variety of other stations, including Radio 6 Music, XFM and her own co-creation, the Liverpool station Crash FM. Until her death she was broadcasting four nights a week on BBC Radio Wales, as well as on Saturday afternoons on Greatest Hits Radio. Long was born in Liverpool to Margaret (nee Wells) and Colin Chegwin, who encouraged their three children to pursue their interests in stage performance. Keith became a TV presenter and his twin brother, Jeff, went into music promotion. In her teenage years Janice was a member of the Merseyside Youth Drama company, but she began her working life as cabin crew for Laker Airways, followed by stints as a shopworker, insurance clerk and in telesales before marrying Trevor Long in 1977 and moving into broadcasting as a station assistant at BBC Radio Merseyside two years later. Soon she was presenting a Sunday evening show, Streetlife, taking a weekly look at the post-punk scene in Liverpool, and in that role she helped Frankie Goes to Hollywood gain wider attention by offering them their first radio appearance. Long was quickly upgraded to her own afternoon show and it was there that she did an interview with the Radio 1 DJ Paul Gambaccini, who was so impressed by her style and knowledge that he recommended her to his bosses. As a result she joined Radio 1 in late 1982 with a Saturday evening show, and within two years was occupying a much higher profile Monday to Thursday evening slot with the Janice Long programme, on which she presented a mix of new music, interviews and live studio sessions. Radio 1 had been a bastion of the male DJ from its launch in 1967, and although Annie Nightingale had featured on its airwaves since 1970 with a Sunday evening programme, Long’s promotion to a regular midweek berth was groundbreaking. Warm, witty and good company – on radio as in life – she aligned herself more to the studious interests of John Peel and David “Kid” Jensen than the happy-go-lucky “Smashie and Nicey” DJ mainstream. She was often paired with either Peel or Jensen on Top of the Pops, and appeared on the programme more than 60 times as the sole female presenter, paving the way for Jackie Brambles, Anthea Turner, Fearne Cotton and Jayne Middlemiss to come in later. In 1985 she was also chosen as one of the main presenters of the BBC’s coverage of the huge Live Aid concert at Wembley. Long’s successful six-year spell on Radio 1 and Top of the Pops ended in 1988, when she took time off to have a child with her partner, Paul Berry (whom she married in 2017), after a divorce from Trevor in 1982. As was common at the time, no one offered her a way to return. Instead, in 1989 Long moved on to Greater London Radio (now BBC Radio London), where she presented the daily breakfast show before switching to the weekends. While maintaining her presence there she also took on occasional shows for what was then BBC Radio 5 and established an early behind the scenes connection with one of the new batch of commercial radio stations, the indie-focused XFM. By 1995 she had gone back to Liverpool to set up an alternative rock and dance station, Crash FM (later Juice FM and now Capital Liverpool) with backing, among others, from Bob Geldof and Boy George. Although she did some presenting work for the station, once it was properly established she returned to the BBC, where from 1999 she presented a Saturday afternoon show for Radio 2 before becoming a longstanding weekday midnight presenter the following year. While there she also appeared for two years on BBC Radio 6 Music from its launch in 2002, hosting its Dream Ticket programme of live-gig recordings, new music and studio sessions. Long was with Radio 2 for 18 years in all, and eventually left in 2017 to present her own Monday to Thursday evening show on BBC Radio Wales. From 2020 onwards she also fitted in a Saturday afternoon programme on Greatest Hits Radio. Aside from her prolific radio work, Long also featured on a number of light TV programmes over the years, including game shows, and in 2006 she was called back to co-present the final episode of Top of the Pops after it was decided to bring it to an end. In 2018 she received an honorary doctorate from Edge Hill University in recognition of her commitment to music, and the same year was featured in the Royal College of Art’s First Women UK exhibition, celebrating 100 pioneering 21st century British females. She was also a patron of the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts. Long is survived by Paul, their daughter, Blue, and son, Fred, her father and her brother, Jeff. Keith died in 2017. • Janice Long, DJ and broadcaster, born 5 April 1955; died 25 December 2021 • This article was amended on 30 December 2021. An earlier version said mistakenly that Janice Long hosted a Radio 2 weekday breakfast programme, and reduced by several years her time presenting the station’s midnight show.Here’s Tony Paley’s report on the action at Kempton, with Welsh National details to follow. 1. Five Star Getaway 12/1 2. Fortescue 7/2 jf 3. Flegmatik 5/1 Nine ran Paul Nicholls has been talking after Bravemansgame’s win at Kempton, setting out his plans for some of his stable stars. The owners are keen to go to Cheltenham and I think we probably will. Whether we go straight there or give him one run beforehand. I think he’s nearly favourite for what was the (old) RSA and three miles round there would suit him well. Nicholls has also been considering what to do next with his three runners from the King George, Clan Des Obeaux (second), Saint Calvados (third) and Frodon (fourth). Frodon was very tired this morning, but that’s what you’d expect. Minella Indo took him on, he paid the price and ultimately we paid the price as well, Clan Des Obeaux had a lovely run round until Gavin (Sheehan, on Saint Calvados) took him on. If Gavin had ridden his with a bit more patience, he might have finished closer.” I don’t think you could conclusively say Saint Calvados didn’t get three miles. I think if you rode him with a bit of patience on good ground, he’d have every chance of staying three miles. Something like the Ascot Chase might suit him over two-miles-five and make a plan from there. Clan Des Obeaux will almost definitely go to Newbury again for the Denman Chase and with Frodon I’ve always fancied going to Leopardstown (for the Irish Gold Cup), so we might look at something like that. Clan will go Denman Chase, Aintree and Punchestown, like he did last season. With all three of them nothing is set in stone. We’ll see how they come out of the race and then make a plan. Away from that Welsh National, Shishkin and Nicky Henderson were the big news of the day. I was nervous, he was in a bad place for three weeks, and we’ve just got back in time for this. He’s not flashy at home, and Nico says he feels good. He’s proved he’s as good as ever, class is everything. He had a good blow. I’d like to have another run, the Clarence House comes quite soon and Game Spirit comes soon before Cheltenham. He didn’t run in the Tingle Creek because he was all wrong. I couldn’t have run him, I’d have wrecked him. It was great to see him do that. Kauto The King takes an early lead, and Cap Du Nord is up there with Five Star Getaway moving to the front of a well-bunched group. Only eight lengths between them as they pass the stand for the first time and near halfway. Fortescue and Cap Du Nord, the co-favs, are well in touch. Fortescue makes a mighty jump but then loses ground almost immediately, and Morning Vicar is pulled up after catching a fence on his jump. That’s Nico de Boinville done for the day. Fortescue takes the lead with Five Star Getaway giving chase. They go to the last with Five Star Getaway taking it by a head. Another Welsh winner, this one for Christian Williams. Fortescue - 4/1 Cap Du Nord - 4/1 Flegmatik - 5/1 Morning Vicar - 6/1 Canelo - 15/2 Kauto The King - 9/1 Five Star Getaway 12/1 Kittys Light - 14/1 Sussex Ranger - 22/1 Full Oddschecker betting here 1 Iwilldoit (Stan Sheppard) 13-2 2 Highland Hunter (H Cobden) 11-1 3 Truckers Lodge (Lorcan Williams) 28-1 4 Achille (H F Nugent) 16-1 20 ran Stan Sheppard was the winning jockey, a really well-judged ride. They’re off, but Highland Hunter broke away and a restart is required. It’s all a bit indisciplined when the same horse does the same, and it’s back to a third start, a standing start. Ramses De Teillee leads after a couple hit the first fence hard. He’s ridden by Tom Scudamore. Discordantly and Gavin Sheehan are the first to fall. With 18 to jump it’s already a grind, Native River not jumping too fluently. Captain Drake is struggling, too, as is Kimberlite Candy. Potters Corner is up there at the front as they go past the home straight for the first time. The Big Dog pulled by Jonathan Burke after a mistake at the ninth. Kimberlite Candy pulls up at the 12th. Native River already getting heavy reminders, as he is last but one. Ramses De Teillee continues to lead with eight to jump. Native River is pulled up at the 17th, oh well. Iwilldoit takes up the pace as the pack thins out. Secret Reprieve is coming up the field, staying on well. Iwilldoit jumps well at five out. And it’s between him and Highland Hunter with three to jump. They are a mile clear of Achille. Iwilldoit takes the last, and speds to the line, a great win for Sam Thomas, his trainer. Highland Hunter, with Truckers Lodge and Achille battling for third. Secret Reprieve is the only other horse going. It was a hell of grind, and a hell of a training performance from Denman’s Gold Cup-winning jockey. To the Welsh National, where the ground is soft, heavy in places though there have been plenty of soggier renewals of this race. It’s always one for the mudlark, with the old master Native River, the 2016 winner, in the field. No crowd there, due to Welsh Covid restrictions so it will be eerie, and a reminder of having to watch last season’s National Hunt season in front of empty crowds. The Welsh national anthem rings out to give a bit of colour but the choir is prerecorded. Native River leads the field from the parade ring. 1. Shishkin 4/9 f 2. Greaneteen 3/1 Four ran Nicky Henderson is delighted in the stands. Nico de Boinville says Seven Barrows took “a risk” with Shishkin, and says “he sets the standard” ahead of the Champion Chase. Look out, Ireland. Nico de Boinville sits in third over the first fence, with Before Midnight leading, and he sits Shiskkin off Greaneteen, ridden in typical style by Bryony Frost. Shishkin’s jump is big as they go to five out. Greaneteen goes after Before Midnight and Shishkin needs some work but takes the lead in some style, clearing the last after some reminders from De Boinville. That was nice and easy. No panic for the Henderson camp. Nicky Henderson looks very nervous behind his mask at Kempton. Shishkin is his current darling, the new Altior and Sprinter Sacre perhaps though also a little more fragile than those two, who had their knocks but were horses of a lifetime. Greaneteen is the threat. Ken Pitterson, ITV’s paddock expert, says Shishkin seems to be carrying a fair bit of condition and may need the run. And Ken’s a shrewdie. Secret Reprieve 6/1 Iwilldoit 7/1 Hold That Taught 9/1 The Big Dog 9/1 Deise Aba 12/1 Highland Hunter 12/1 Achille 14/1 Mighty Thunder 14/1 Potters Corner 14/1 Hill Sixteen 18/1 Native River 20/1 Ramses De Teillee 22/1 Discordantly 22/1 Elegant Escape 22/1 Evas Oskar 28/1 Kimberlite Candy 28/1 Truckers Lodge 28/1 Captain Drake 33/1 Mac Tottie 33/1 Colorado Doc 50/1 Full Oddschecker betting here Harry Cobden can’t get much of a spin from Take Your Time who pulls up. Kateson leads three greys over the last two as Bells of Peterboro has the lead, and goes well clear. He wins for a second time at Chepstow and by a street. Shiskin - 4/9 Greaneteen - 11/4 Before Midnight - 20/1 Sky Pirate - 28/1 Full Oddschecker betting here Take Your Time 7/4 Kateson 9/2 Al Dancer 11/2 Flashjack 8/1 Bell Of Peterboro 8/1 Geordie Des Champs 11/1 Saint Dalina 14/1 Full Oddschecker betting here From Leopardstown, a big win and a significant one for the Gordon Elliot stable. Arctic Warrior fell at the last but he and Mark Walsh are both up and OK. Get The Appeal leads them into the final circuit, with Coded Message for company. With two to go Coded Message leads a cluster of them, with Tequila Blaze overtaking. Emmpressive Lady takes the lead, and wins under Sean Houlihan by a few lengths. Big win for Sue Gardner the trainer. Alan King on the highly impressive Edwardstone. It’s exciting. It’s going back to the old days when we had Voy Por Ustedes and My Way De Solzen. We haven’t had one as good as this for a bit. The Arkle is his only target (at Cheltenham) - it will be the Arkle or nowhere. A break, the Kingmaker and then if that goes well, hopefully the Arkle. I’m just relived we’ve got today out of the way. 1 Porticello (J E Moore) 10-3 2 Saint Segal (Chester Williams) 13-2 3 Forever William (Thomas Bellamy) 20-1 11 ran A race shorn of hurdles because of unsafe ground, and favourite Forever Blessed almost ships Sean Bowen when four out. Skycutter leads them into the final two hurdles. Plenty of chances behind him. Porticello follows in second. Skycutter makes a mistake as Forever Blessed is pulled up at the last. Porticello, ridden by Jamies Moore, scoots up on a long run home, Saint Segal is second, and Forever William is third. That’s a first Grade One for Jamie Moore and father Gary since the 2015 Tingle Creek. That was a hugely impressive win, and maybe one to make them forget Goshen’s recent slips. This feels like a significant win for Henry de Bromhead and Rachael Blackmore, though there was no Chacun Pour Soi. Envoi Allen has a lot to make up after last season’s Cheltenham and Punchestown misteps. Afternoon, all. Alan King seemed very chirpy on Edwardstone, and compared him favourably to My Way De Solzen and Voy Por Ustedes, two Cheltenham mainstays of years gone by over two miles. High praise indeed. Handing over to John Brewin now who will take you through to end of play today ... enjoy. Coded Message - 7/2 Emmpressive Lady - 7/2 Tequila Blaze - 4/1 Bourbon Beauty - 6/1 Martha Brae - 13/2 Go Millie Go - 11/1 Get The Appeal - 12/1 Full Oddschecker betting here Coded Message has been dropped a couple of pounds since a close fourth at Ascot and could make the most of it in a competitive contest. 1 Edwardstone (Tom Cannon) 8-15 Fav 2 Do Your Job (Richard Patrick) 9-2 3 Solo (Bryony Frost) 9-2 4 ran And they’re off ... Raya Time and Solo are off pretty quick and Raya Time makes a mistake at the first allowing Solo an easy lead under Bryony Frost ... Do Your Job and Edwardstone are in third and fourth in the early stages ... Solo jumps big and well and still leads at the first open ditch ... no change in the order at the seventh fence ... Solo pings the second open ditch and the last fence in the back straight where Raya Time makes another mistake ... Do Your Job and Edwardstone take it up ... Edwardstone then quickens up at the second-last and leaps the final fence to race to an easy victory. Envoi Allen looked in trouble on the home turn in the Paddy Power Rewards Club Chase at Leopardstown (1.10pm) but battled back to hold off Battleoverdoyen and ran away to win in the end. Hardly outstanding for an odds-on shot but the victor did get back to winning ways after finishing only sixth in the John Durkan Chase last time out. 1 Golden Whisky (Adam Wedge) 12-1 2 When You’re Ready (K Brogan) 15-8 Fav 3 Cut The Mustard (H Cobden) 22-1 9 ran Also: 5-1 Paint The Dream 4th Non Runners: 10,11 And they’re off ... Golden Whisky has the early lead from Francky Du Berlais ... with Paint The Dream now coming through to take up the running at the fourth fence ... Pink Legend being ridden along already ... Fragrant Delitiep is amongst the leaders ... Zambezi Fix races in midfield ... One For Rosie is at the back ... One For Rosie looks in trouble at the rear ... When You’re Ready is being pushed along ... Pink Legend now making good progress as Golden Whisky leads on the home turn ... Cut The Mustard travels very well and takes the lead at the last but Golden Whisky fights back to win with When You’re Ready finishing fast and late. Forever Blessed 2/1 Porticello 7/2 Magistrato 13/2 Saint Segal 13/2 Skycutter 13/2 Iroko 18/1 Forever William 18/1 Rocky Man 40/1 Genuflex 50/1 Saint Riquier 50/1 Tease And Seize 80/1 Full Oddschecker betting here A suitably strong field for this Grade One juvenile hurdle, with Skycutter, a front-running winner in a good time at Musselburgh earlier this month, perhaps the value bet at around 6-1 to extend his unbeaten record to three races. Edwardstone - 4/9 Solo - 9/2 Do Your Job - 11/2 Raya Time - 28/1 Full Oddschecker betting Edwardstone has a 5lb penalty for his win in the Grade One Henry VIII Novice Chase at Sandown last time but appears to have significantly more than that in hand of his three opponents here. The Irish Arkle is likely to be next on the agenda for Ferny Hollow after he starred in a double for Cheveley Park Stud on the opening day of the Christmas Festival at Leopardstown. The Willie Mullins-trained six-year-old beat esteemed stablemate Appreciate It in the Champion Bumper and got the better of Bob Olinger in a maiden hurdle in 2020, but missed much of last season through injury. He made a winning on his return to action and chasing debut at Punchestown earlier in the month and followed up in the Grade One Racing Post Novice Chase. Cheveley Park director Richard Thompson said: “As Willie said afterwards, Ferny Hollow was exceptional on the day. To be off the track for over a year, come back and win and then come out three weeks later and win a Grade One - giving 13lb to a very good filly [Riviere D’etel] – was fantastic. “I have to admit I thought he was going to get beaten at one stage, but he really pulled it out. In the short term I think we’ll be looking towards the Irish Arkle at the Dublin Racing Festival.” Thompson was also delighted to see last season’s Champion Bumper hero Sir Gerhard make a successful start to his hurdling career on the same Leopardstown card. He looks set to step up to Grade One level sooner rather than later. “He looked a class act, didn’t he,” Thompson added. “I think we’ll be looking towards the Dublin Racing Festival with him as well.” PA Media When Youre Ready – 15/8 Paint The Dream – 11/2 Zambazi Fix - 13/2 Pink Legend – 8/1 Golden Whisky – 17/2 One For Rosie – 9/1 Flagrant Delitiep – 16/1 Cut The Mustard - 22/1 Francky Du Berlais – 28/1 Full Oddschecker betting here When You’re Ready built on the promise of his chasing debut to win with something to spare over course and distance last time out and a 7lb rise in the weights is unlikely to stop his progress. If you’re having a bet today at Kempton make sure you’re backing horses who like the mud flying. Steve High knows his onions when it comes to times and going analysis. Secret Reprieve at a best-priced 6-1 is still just market leader for the Welsh Grand National (Chepstow 2.50) but only just after an overnight gamble on Iwilldoit, who is 7-1 with just one firm at the time of writing. Elsewhere there are a couple of interesting movers with a BestofBets.com spokesperson stating: “Restitution (12.45 Kempton) is now 9-2 down from 6-1 this morning while the Bryony Frost mount Real Steel (3.10 Kempton) is another that catches the eye, from 15-2 into 6-1.” Dan Skelton has been forced to rule his exciting novice chaser My Drogo out for the remainder of the season due to heat in a tendon. A classy novice hurdler last term, Skelton had huge hopes for the six-year-old, who had been as low as 13-2 for the Turners Novices’ Chase at Cheltenham in March behind only Bob Olinger in the betting. While he slipped up on his chasing debut at the second last at Cheltenham in November, he returned to that track to win over fences at the second time of asking earlier this month. Skelton had been considering a third outing at Cheltenham in the Dipper Novices’ Chase in the new year but all plans have now been placed on hold. Writing on Twitter Skelton said: “Unfortunately My Drogo will miss the remainder of the season. We scanned him this morning after feeling heat in his near fore tendon and whilst it is a very small lesion and will heal it just requires time.” PA Media Chacun Pour Soi was found to be lame on Monday morning leaving only three runners in the Paddy’s Rewards Club Chase (1.10pm) at Leopardstown. The five-time Grade One was all the rage for the Tingle Creek Chase at Sandown, but the Willie Mullins-trained nine-year-old did not jump with his usual fluency and the writing was on the wall for his followers from some way out. Connections had hoped he could put that disappointment behind him but redemption will have to wait for another day. The race now would appear to revolve around Henry de Bromhead’s Envoi Allen. While his superstar status may be starting to wane, it will be fascinating to see if a return to the minimum trip proves to his liking. Battleoverdoyen (trained by Gordon Elliott) runs for the first time since winning at Galway in July, with Hilly Way Chase third Sizing Pottsie (Jessica Harrington) completing the quarter. It has been quite a while – 261 days to be precise – and there have been several false dawns along the way, but the great hope of British jump racing is finally back on a track. Shishkin, unbeaten in nine completed starts over jumps and the favourite for the Queen Mother Champion Chase before his novice season was in the book, will go to post at around 2.25pm this afternoon to line up for the Desert Orchid Chase at Kempton Park. And while there were some who felt that Nicky Henderson was running away from a proper test for Shishkin when he was ruled out of the Tingle Creek earlier this month, the seven-year-old will be up against a dual Grade One winner in Greaneteen – the horse that landed the Tingle Creek in his absence – with the Grand Annual winner from last year’s Cheltenham Festival, Sky Pirate, in the mix as well. Shishkin gets 3lb from Greaneteen and 1lb from Sky Pirate, which according to the estimable Timeform operation’s ratings puts him a stone clear of the former and no less than 19lb in front of the latter. Even if he is a little rusty around the edges after eight months out, that should be enough to ensure that he extends his current winning sequence to nine races (unbroken after the only blip on his record, a fall on his debut over hurdles). But Henderson, of course, has mixed memories of today’s race, having won it with the brilliant two-milers Sprinter Sacre and Altior but also seen both horses beaten when favourite for it too, including the chilly afternoon when Sprinter Sacre’s unbeaten streak over fences was snapped at 10 races in 2013. Having lost My Drogo, one of our brightest novice chasing talents, for the season already today, British jumping could really do with an impressive success from Shishkin, whose Arkle Trophy win in March put the home team 2-1 up after three Festival races, before a green avalanche flattened them on the way to a 23-5 pummelling by the visitors. The big betting race of the day is the Welsh National at Chepstow, where last year’s winner, Secret Reprieve, is just about clinging on to favouritism ahead of Sam Thomas’s Iwilldoit. For the second year running, the highlight of the Welsh jumps season has been forced behind closed doors by Covid, so there will be no Welsh voices to hail a third home-trained winner in a row, following a 54 year gap until Potters Corner – who is also in today’s field – won in 2019. The going at Chepstow is soft after 19mm of rain on Christmas Day, another 4mm on Sunday and then more this morning, although that is expected to clear as the day goes on. Tips for all the races on the ITV schedule are here, while the action gets underway at 12.30 in south Wales and 12.45 in south-west London.They are questions that have cast a shadow over the festive season: will new Covid measures be needed, and if so, when and what form will they take? The Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) has said peak admissions could be comparable with or even greater than previous highs without significant behaviour change or further interventions, but many Tory backbenchers have argued against legal restrictions, saying that the public should be trusted to make their own decisions on the risks they wish to take. Downing Street confirmed on Monday that no further legal restrictions would be introduced before the new year, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, urging the public to remain cautious, take lateral flow tests and keep indoor spaces well ventilated. But will guidance alone be enough to tackle the threat Omicron poses? When Prof Chris Whitty urged the public to exercise caution on 15 December, and cut down on social contacts ahead of Christmas, it appeared to strike a chord with the public: retailers reported a far lower footfall than hoped in the run-up to the festivities, while pubs and restaurants faced a swathe of cancellations. Sage experts have noted that recently the growth rate of infections has slowed, but it is not yet clear if that is down to a reduction in social mixing – or other factors like people choosing not to get tested. While some have argued that people should “be treated like adults” and messaging alone is enough to change behaviour, others have suggested it may not be enough. Prof Stephen Reicher of the University of St Andrews, and a member of Spi-B – the behavioural sub group of Sage, said that whether advice alone works depends on three key factors – the first of which is whether the source is trusted. A recent Savanta poll found 59% of people in Britain distrust Boris Johnson as a source of guidance on Covid, while a YouGov poll suggests less than a third of the public think the government is handling the coronavirus situation “very” or “somewhat” well. Another factor, said Reicher, is whether the message is clear and the reality of the risk set out. “The problem here is that the government have been consistently messaging that there isn’t a serious risk but they would act if the data suggested there were. So the fact they aren’t introducing measures communicates that there still isn’t a risk and all the headlines will be about that,” he said. Finally, Reicher said people need support to self-isolate, make classrooms safe and improve ventilation in public spaces. “The government’s hands-off approach is as much about refusing to provide that support as to avoid any restrictions,” he said.“Giving us our freedom in a storm is akin to abandoning us to our fate.” Prof Susan Michie, director of the UCL Centre for Behaviour Change and also a member of Spi-B, added the impact of legal restrictions versus guidance is highlighted by adherence to mask wearing. “The numbers dipped when there was advice only and then increased again when the legal requirement was reinstated,” she noted. And while some people value personal freedom over and above a collective effort to manage the pandemic, she noted for others a lack of clear rules causes its own problems. “Ambiguity can cause anxiety and strained relationships,” she said. “Rules relieve people of responsibility for deciding what is the best thing to do in situations that are often complex.” Speaking in a personal capacity, Prof John Drury of the University of Sussex, another member of Spi-B, added that messages such as “stay alert” or “be vigilant” are open to multiple interpretations. “Even well-informed people find it hard to keep up with the evidence in this pandemic. We either need clear leadership representing the collective will or properly organised support to equip members of the public with the knowledge they need to make informed decisions,” he said. “Without one or other, we risk a chaotic and dangerous individualism.”There were four moments across the first two days of the third Ashes match when the Melbourne Cricket Ground rose, in movement and in voice, to the hometown bowler Scott Boland on his Test debut. The second time was when he took his first wicket, as Mark Wood’s dismissal was upheld by the video umpire. The third time was when Boland, batting at No 11, scored his first runs with an edge through the slip cordon. Those either side were more important. The first, before the match began, when Aunty Joy Murphy Wandin spoke during the welcome to country, noting the rarity of an Indigenous Australian cricketer representing this team. The guttural vocal affirmation from the stands was spontaneous and moving. The fourth time was right at the end of the second day, in the shadow of stumps, when Boland ripped out two English wickets in the space of three balls, his first major influence on the match. Had England ended the day two wickets down, they would have stayed in the contest. At four down, the calculus had drastically changed. Boland’s story is in many ways representative of the treatment of Indigenous Australians in the nation’s modern incarnation. He did not know of his heritage until he was in his 20s, when his family learned that Boland’s grandfather was descended from the Gulidjan people of western Victoria. For so many people and for so long, that kind of heritage had been hidden or ignored. The Boland family embraced it instead, in a process of learning that is still under way. In 2018 I spoke to Boland about this. “Me and my brother [Nick] are both similar,” he said. “We didn’t know what to think at first, but the more we spoke about it with our family and the more people we got to meet through the [Cricket Australia] Indigenous programme, the more we understood about where we fit in and how we could help out. Me and Dan Christian chatted about it, and Ben Abbatangelo who was captaining the Australian Indigenous side. So the more we spoke about it, the more we felt comfortable about being involved.” There is no way to flatter Australian cricket’s history with Indigenous people. It is a gulf in the game. Unaarrimin and Murrumgunarrimin, often recorded by the colonial names of Johnny Mullagh and Twopenny, played one first-class match apiece for Victoria and New South Wales respectively in the 1800s. Jack Marsh and Alec Henry played a handful of state matches at the turn of the 20th century, as did Eddie Gilbert in the 1930s. The latter three were all pushed out of the game by spurious rejection of their bowling actions by white umpires and administrators. Two more known Aboriginal cricketers played first-class matches between Gilbert’s last in 1936 and Jason Gillespie’s first in 1995. Until Boland, Gillespie was the only Indigenous man to play Test cricket for Australia, while Faith Thomas in 1958 and Ashleigh Gardner starting in 2019 are the only women. Where Australian rules football and rugby league are now rich with Indigenous heroes, cricket still lags behind. The path to changing this remains long and difficult. All of which means that Boland’s appearance in a baggy green cap would have been hugely significant no matter what he did on the field. The extra layer was added with his dramatic final over on the second day. He was picked in this Ashes XI not for symbolism but for his ability to bash the ball into an often unresponsive MCG deck, where he had previously taken 91 first-class wickets at an average of 25 while others have struggled. The England opener Haseeb Hameed had survived a devastating opening burst from Pat Cummins and Mitchell Starc, getting through 30 deliveries and driving Starc down the ground for four. It was a quintessential Boland delivery that knocked him over, a ball slammed into the surface so that it jumped off the seam and took the edge of a haplessly wielded bat. Then England’s use of a nightwatchman came undone, Jack Leach studiously leaving his second delivery on a wider line only to hear it clip his off stump after jagging back in. The spectators lifted in time with Boland’s raised fist. It was a special moment, while one that should not paint a falsely harmonious picture. The MCG is also a ground where Aboriginal champion Adam Goodes was jeered out of Australian rules football after speaking up about the treatment of his people. There remains ugliness aplenty in the relationship between the continent’s original inhabitants and the colonial nation that pushes them to the margins. “You hear the way people talk in the general community, in general conversation, you would hear their remarks and things like that,” Boland said in that interview. “I think the more that people are educated about different cultures, the more they understand. It’s more mainstream now that Indigenous culture is a big part of Australian history and the Australian community.” There is hope in that, and also the reality that each step forward underlines how many are left to take.The father of a man arrested in the grounds of Windsor Castle allegedly in possession of a crossbow has reportedly said “something’s gone horribly wrong with our son”. The Metropolitan police are investigating a video, which has been linked to the 19-year-old suspect, who was arrested on suspicion of breach or trespass of a protected site and possession of an offensive weapon and was subsequently sectioned under the Mental Health Act. The video, obtained by the Sun, appears to show a masked figure in a dark hoodie holding a crossbow and addressing the camera with a distorted voice, saying they want to “assassinate the Queen” in a “revenge” mission for the 1919 Jallianwala Bagh massacre, also known as the Amritsar massacre. MailOnline reported that the man’s father said: “Something’s gone horribly wrong with our son and we are trying to figure out what. “We’ve not had a chance to speak to him but are trying to get him the help he needs. From our perspective, we are going through a difficult time. We are trying to resolve this issue and it’s not easy.” The Queen spent Christmas Day at Windsor Castle and was expected to have lunch with the Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall, and the Earl and Countess of Wessex. Charles, Camilla, Edward and Sophie, the latter couple along with their children Lady Louise and James, Viscount Severn, attended a church service in St George’s Chapel, in the castle grounds, at 10.45 on Christmas morning. A spokesperson from Scotland Yard said: “Security processes were triggered within moments of the man entering the grounds and he did not enter any buildings. Following a search of the man, a crossbow was recovered.” They added: “Inquiries into the full circumstances of this incident are being progressed by Metropolitan police specialist operations.” In the video obtained by the Sun, the voiceover says: “I’m sorry. I’m sorry for what I’ve done and what I will do. I will attempt to assassinate Elizabeth, queen of the royal family. This is revenge for those who have died in the 1919 Jallianwala Bagh massacre.” In the Jallianwala Bagh massacre, 379 protesters were killed and 1,200 wounded by British forces in India. The Met would not comment on who appeared in the video but a spokesperson said: “Following the man’s arrest, detectives are assessing the contents of a video.” In 2003, Aaron Barschak, a former comedian, gatecrashed Prince William’s 21st birthday party in an incident that led to a review and ultimately a tightening of security across royal residences. The review also recommended a new offence of trespass into royal or government premises, under which the 19-year-old was arrested on Saturday.Donald Trump’s loss-making Scottish golf resorts claimed in excess of £3.3m in emergency support from the UK government, to help furlough staff during the Covid pandemic. Company accounts for the former president’s resorts at Turnberry in Ayrshire and Balmedie, north of Aberdeen, show his businesses cut 273 jobs due to the Covid crisis last year, while also claiming £2.8m in furlough support. Other government data shows Trump Turnberry and Trump International Scotland in Aberdeenshire then made further claims this year while the UK government’s job retention scheme was still in force. The BBC reported those claims, not yet included in the Trump companies’ accounts, were worth between £520,000 and £1.3m, leading to a total claim for furlough funding of between £3.3m and £4.1m overall. The resorts reported heavy losses due to their enforced closure during the lockdowns: the headline loss for Turnberry was £3.4m, after a £321,000 profit in 2019, and £1.3m at Balmedie, compared to a loss of £1.1m in 2019. The accounts also show both resorts owe more money to Trump: loans from the former president’s own funds and the holding company he controls to both businesses now total £159m. The accounts report the assets – the land, buildings and equipment – at Turnberry are worth £86m, and £32m for the Aberdeenshire resort. The accounts suggest the family holding company injected £1.1m into the Balmedie business to help with day-to-day cashflow after it was forced to close the resort’s boutique hotel, named after his Scottish mother, Mary MacLeod, for the whole of 2020. It did not reopen until April this year. The accounts show the headcount at Turnberry, which has a five-star hotel, holiday lodges, a spa, ballroom and two championship golf courses, fell from an average of 541 employees in 2019 to 289 in 2020. At the much smaller Aberdeenshire resort, average staffing dropped from 84 posts to 63 last year. In a foreword to the accounts, Trump’s son Eric, who was given day-to-day control of the businesses after his father won the presidency, said the UK government’s cash was helpful because it helped retain staff. Many were later rehired, he said. “Government support was helpful to retain as many jobs as possible, however uncertainty of [sic] the duration of support and the pandemic’s sustained impact meant that redundancies were required to prepare the business for the long-term effects to the hospitality industry,” he said. Global controls on air travel, particularly from the US golfing visitors; the impacts on staffing, supply chains and costs from Brexit; and general inflation, had all hit the Trump businesses, he added. Confirmation that the Trump resorts have had more than £3.3m in furlough support could have implications for a US House of Representatives investigation into whether the former president has broken a clause in the constitution which prohibits US presidents from seeking and receiving financial rewards or benefits from foreign governments. The Guardian reported last year that Trump’s Scottish resorts were expected to receive property tax rebates of nearly £1m because business rate payments for hospitality and tourism businesses had been suspended due to the pandemic. The US Congress passed legislation prohibiting businesses in which Trump holds a stake from receiving any Covid-related bailout funds. Under Scottish and UK legislation, his Scottish resorts were given the same rights to claim as any other comparable business.The government’s religious discrimination law could place “a heavy burden” on already marginalised Muslim communities because it allows discrimination on national security grounds, Islamic organisations have said. Scott Morrison has said the proposed legislation should “give Australians of faith confidence – confidence to be themselves and confidence in the country they belong to”. But three organisations have raised concerns about a section of the bill that says it is not unlawful “for a person to discriminate against another person on the ground of the other person’s religious belief or activity” for national security reasons. The exemption applies if the person discriminating “is performing a function or exercising a power relating to law enforcement, national security or intelligence under a law or program of the commonwealth”. The bill says “the conduct constituting the discrimination” must be “reasonably necessary in performing the function or exercising the power”. The Australian Muslim Advocacy Network (Aman) said the proposal “imposes a heavy burden on Muslim communities who are already marginalised and feel highly vulnerable”. “There is absolutely no legal justification for authorities to discriminate against communities or people based on their faith,” the network said in a submission to the parliamentary joint committee on human rights. “Their work is to assess and prevent the risk of violence.” The government has argued the bill is needed to prohibit direct and indirect discrimination on the grounds of religious belief or activity in work and other areas of public life. Aman argued other parts of the bill provided “a much-needed safeguard” from discrimination, but the exception clause “sends a dangerous signal to law enforcement that religious discrimination against Muslims will continue to be necessary”. It cited an Australian Human Rights Commission survey that found the most common situations in which Australian Muslims reported experiencing unfavourable treatment included when dealing with law enforcement. This was nominated by half of all respondents. Aman said Australia’s definition of terrorism included a motive of religious, political or ideological causes. According to the submission, the idea of a religious cause of terrorism “propagates the lie that Islamic religiosity leads to terrorism” and had also “legitimised Isil movements”. Authorities and the media labelled the activities of Islamic State and other overseas terrorist groups as religiously-motivated, the submission said, “even though their actions would be sufficiently and more appropriately covered under ‘ideological’ or ‘political’ cause”. “This submission notes that authorities do not refer to white supremacists as ‘patriotically motivated’ or ‘patriotic cause’, even though that is how they may refer to themselves,” Aman said. The Islamic Council of Victoria also called for the removal of the exemption, saying it would “enable law enforcement and security agencies to allow biases, stereotypes and unfair procedures to govern their functions and powers”. “Muslims have long been subjected to racial profiling and targeting under the guise of national security,” the council said in its submission. “The introduction of [this section] will only make it clear that the commonwealth government believes that religion is a legitimate basis for discriminating against individuals and religious groups.” The Australian National Imams Council told the committee the exception appeared to be “unduly broad in the protection which it provides”. “If such a provision operates to provide a broad exemption to law enforcement, national security and intelligence functions, it risks alienating Muslims and creating a sense of mistrust given the experiences of coercive and investigative powers being misused,” the council said. The bill says the definition of national security includes the process of granting, revoking or denying Australian government security clearances. A spokesperson for the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, said the exception was “not directed towards any specific religion”. It was “necessary to ensure that nothing in the bill interferes with the ability of bodies that perform law enforcement, national security and intelligence functions, or exercise associated powers, to continue to protect Australia’s national security”. “The exception recognises that, in some circumstances, a person’s religious belief or activity may have a connection to law enforcement, national security or intelligence,” the spokesperson said. “For example, criminal or terrorist acts may be motivated by certain religious beliefs, and so those beliefs would be relevant to a law enforcement investigation.” Cash’s spokesperson said the exception was “subject to limitations that ensure the exception is a reasonable limitation on the rights to equality and non-discrimination”. When the prime minister introduced the bill to parliament in late November, he said: “To deny protection from discrimination for their religious beliefs is to tear at the very fabric of multiculturalism in this country.” But the government was unable to pass the bill before parliament rose for the summer break amid unresolved internal divisions, including over a push from moderate Liberal MPs to protect gay students from discrimination in religious schools. The human rights committee is due to complete its report by 4 February, shortly before the scheduled resumption of parliament. The Senate’s legal and constitutional affairs legislation committee is also conducting an inquiry into the bill with the same deadline. Labor has reserved its position until the inquiries are complete, with leader Anthony Albanese saying he supports religious freedom but also declaring changes should not come at “the expense of discriminating on the basis of other people’s characteristics”.A South Australian doctor who has raised hundreds of thousands of dollars in crowdfunding for a potential Covid-19 vaccine has been given permission to submit clinical data for assessment by Australia’s medicines regulator. Prof Nikolai Petrovsky, who has been publicly critical of Covid-19 vaccines approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration, has raised more than $850,000 on the fundraising website GoFundMe for Covax-19, a vaccine candidate developed by his company, Vaxine Pty Ltd. Petrovsky has previously published many peer-reviewed papers on diabetes, genomics and vaccine development, but he has been criticised for advocating for Covax-19 to be approved for use in Australia without making publicly available substantial peer-reviewed clinical evidence to support its efficacy. Covax-19, also known as Spikogen, is made from synthetically manufactured spike proteins and completed a phase I clinical trial – a small safety study of 40 patients – in Australia last year. To date, no results from Covax-19 human clinical trials have been published in peer-reviewed journals, evidence of which is usually required for regulatory approval in Australia. One study on Covax-19’s effects in mice and ferrets has been published in the peer-reviewed journal Vaccine. Covax-19 has been approved for emergency use in Iran, where phase II and III clinical trials are currently under way. The lack of publicly available data from clinical trials to support statements about Covax-19’s efficacy has raised concerns among experts, particularly while Vaxine is soliciting donations from the public. They are pushing for more transparency around the timeline of clinical trials conducted in Iran, and calling on Petrovsky to publish the results of his research in peer-reviewed journals. As his company raises funds for Covax-19’s development and TGA approval, Petrovsky has criticised competing vaccines already provisionally approved by the regulator, leaving experts concerned confidence in those Covid vaccines may be undermined. His GoFundMe has also sought support for a clinical trial in Australia, describing previous government funding of the vaccine as “hush money”. A later petition has asked the federal government to provide Vaxine with more financial support. Claim ‘categorically rejected’ Petrovsky, an endocrinologist at Flinders Medical Centre in Adelaide, runs Vaxine Pty Ltd with his wife, Sharen Petrovsky, the company’s business manager. Sharen, who also goes by Sharen Pringle, created the GoFundMe in October. The professor has refused to personally receive a TGA-approved vaccine because he says he has been vaccinated with Covax-19. “It has been agreed that I am taking long service leave from Flinders Medical Centre until such time as I can receive a vaccination exemption or the vaccine mandates are withdrawn,” he said in a statement to Guardian Australia in November. SA Health – which runs Flinders Medical Centre – said it was “unable to comment on matters relating to the employment of individuals”. Petrovsky, who also holds an unpaid academic title as a professor at Flinders University, has spoken in recent months against policies imposed to control the pandemic. A viral clip of him speaking at an anti-vaccine mandate event in Adelaide, in which he describes being “extremely uncomfortable” with the TGA-approved vaccines and “not fully confident about what’s happened over the past 18 months”, has been shared widely online including by Craig Kelly, Rod Culleton and apparent vaccine sceptics. In that video, Petrovsky described mRNA vaccines as “very new technologies in their infancy”, and asked “what level of confidence do we have that they have been through the usual process [of rigorous testing]”. Petrovsky’s GoFundMe page is critical of government funding for the biotech firm CSL and the “AstraZeneca vaccine that has been linked to deaths from central venous thrombosis”. In a recent podcast interview, he claimed Australians would be able to import his vaccine from overseas to administer themselves, though he acknowledged this would not qualify people as vaccinated under Australian Covid-19 vaccine policies. “Even in Australia, there are routes that people can get access to unapproved products if they are approved somewhere else, so people can personally import a vaccine for their own use,” Petrovsky said. In that interview, Petrovsky said about 1m doses of Covax-19 had been distributed in Iran, and that a Covid-19 vaccine for cats was in development in Kazakhstan. Guardian Australia has not been able to independently verify the number of doses distributed in Iran. He has also referred to mRNA vaccines as “gene therapy vaccines”, saying the technology was developed “to put new genes inside people”. The TGA told Guardian Australia: “Any suggestion that mRNA vaccines are ‘gene therapy’ is categorically rejected. mRNA vaccines do not interact with DNA to change our genetic code in any way so the assertion is patently false.” Unusual funding route On 15 December the TGA granted “provisional determination” to Covax-19 – a status which lasts for six months and serves as a preliminary step that allows a company to submit clinical data for the regulator to assess. The status is no guarantee that the vaccine will be approved for use. Advice published by the TGA says the regulatory body considers phase III clinical trial data published in a peer-reviewed journal to be “baseline” evidence for a vaccine’s efficacy. In a statement on 14 December, the TGA said: “Comprehensive data demonstrating the safety, quality and effectiveness of COVAX-19 (also known as Spikogen) has not [yet] been submitted to the TGA for assessment.” In announcing Vaxine’s provisional determination status, the TGA said it had considered “factors such as the evidence of a plan to submit comprehensive clinical data”. Associate Prof Paul Griffin, director of infectious diseases at Mater Health Services in Brisbane, said it was unusual that Covax-19’s regulatory approval was being crowdfunded, given the “tremendous” funding opportunities provided to promising Covid vaccines throughout the pandemic. In a Conversation article in June, Griffin described Covax-19 as a “potentially promising” local candidate, but now says he is troubled by the lack of publicly available clinical data to substantiate claims about its effectiveness. “While it’s great to see Australian scientists having a go and trying to develop new vaccines, particularly for Covid at the moment, I’m quite concerned about [the lack of publicly available data about] that vaccine,” Griffin said. “People need to have some confidence … that the claims being made are substantiated with good quality data,” he said. “I would be very confident if that was forthcoming … it would be very easy to go down well-established paths of obtaining more funding,” Griffin added, citing government grants as an example. Griffin is also concerned that Petrovsky’s criticism of other vaccines while promoting his own “could undermine confidence in Covid vaccines that have already been approved”. He said Petrovsky had generated a “very large following of people … who are holding off getting licensed vaccines because they’re hearing that [Covax-19] vaccine is the solution for them”. Australian trial plans A $100m deal to sell Vaxine to biopharmaceutical firm Immuron previously fell through, according to a report in the AFR in September. Petrovsky’s crowdfunding effort initially sought money to apply for TGA approval, and now has a target of $1m to run a “post approval” trial. Initial application and evaluation fees for a new prescription medicine total more than $250,000. An update on the fundraising page said the “Phase 4/post approval Trial [sic]” – also referred to elsewhere as a “Phase 2/3b Study” – was “anticipated to commence mid-to-late January 2022”. Sharen Petrovsky is described as the “clinical trial manager” in letters sent to those interested in participating in any trial, which have been seen by Guardian Australia. In November, people who had registered for the company’s trial received letters on Vaxine letterhead informing them of South Australia’s then policy that participation in a Covid-19 vaccine trial was a valid exemption from South Australia’s vaccine requirements. The letter said: “In order to preserve the integrity of the clinical trial, it is an enrolment criterion that you be Covid-19 vaccine naive at the time of your entry into the trial. Hence receipt of any other Covid-19 vaccine is a key trial exclusion criteria.” SA Health was forced on 27 November to issue a statement clarifying that simply registering for a proposed trial was not grounds for an exemption to vaccine mandates. “South Australia does not just recognise being on a waiting list for a proposed vaccine trial as a reason for exemption from a vaccination requirement,” it said. In a new direction issued on 8 December, SA police said taking part in Covid vaccination trial was no longer a valid reason for vaccination exemption. An update posted to the GoFundMe page on 8 December said the company had submitted an ethics approval application to conduct the study. But as of 22 December, SA Health said it had not received an application for ethics approval. “At this stage, the Southern Adelaide Clinical Human Research Ethics Committee (SAC-HREC) has received no submission for Vaxine’s Covax-19 vaccine Phase 4 trial,” it said in a statement. Petrovsky did not respond to requests for comment to clarify what ethics committee the company had submitted an application to. In a statement, the National Health and Medical Research Council said: “An informal registration process, or providing information about a future trial to generate interest in it, does not necessarily require ethics approval.” All human research in Australia is expected to conform to the requirements of a national statement on ethical research conduct, it added. ‘No obligation’ to publish all clinical data Dr Kyle Sheldrick, a medical doctor and researcher, would like Petrovsky to make the results of the clinical trials in Iran publicly available. Petrovsky’s GoFundMe describes Covax-19 as “showing protection against the Delta virus variant in a Phase 3 clinical trial in 16,876 subjects in Iran”, but that trial is not set to be completed until March 2022. No peer-reviewed interim results have been published. Sheldrick was critical of the timeline of the phase III trial, telling Guardian Australia it was unusual for a vaccine to be approved so rapidly in any country. The trial is listed on the US ClinicalTrials.gov registry as having started on 7 August 2021 – the date on which the first participant was enrolled. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning According to listed information, it has an estimated primary completion date of 1 March 2022. This is when all participants have been monitored for six months after receiving their second dose – corresponding to 201 days from the last patient receiving their first dose. Working backwards, 201 days before 1 March gives a date of 12 August. “[That] would then imply they were planning to recruit their entire population base in five days,” Sheldrick said. The trial defined the vaccine’s efficacy based on the number of Covid infections between 35 and 201 days after people received their first dose. Assuming the first enrolled participant was on 7 August, an infection would count only if it occurred after September 11. Covax-19 was approved in Iran on 6 October. Based on that date, Sheldrick estimated the maximum time participants were followed up after their second jab was 25 days. “We’re talking about an incredibly short period of follow up,” he said. Griffin said: “There’s a reason we have a process in terms of sharing results and publishing in peer-reviewed journals, so we can be assured of the quality of the content and see for ourselves that this vaccine is potentially safe and effective.” “That just hasn’t been forthcoming,” he said. “There was lots of talk … that there would be some good data coming through. Six months down the track, while there’s lots of claims of higher levels of safety and efficacy, we still haven’t seen good data to actually verify any of that.” Petrovsky told Guardian Australia in November that publishing clinical trial results in scientific journals had “no bearing on whether a product is approved or not”. “Despite being under no obligation to do so, we do of course plan to publish all the clinical data on our vaccine in a high profile scientific journal but … of course such papers take time to write.” Petrovsky also said claims Covax-19’s efficacy were unsubstantiated was “an outrageous claim”. He said the Iranian FDA had “independently peer-reviewed all the phase 3 outcome data”. An official document Petrovsky provided to Guardian Australia did confirm the Iranian FDA had given emergency approval for the vaccine but it did not contain information to verify this statement. According to GoFundMe’s website, money can be withdrawn from a campaign at any time. Vaxine was last year awarded $1m – the same amount as the crowdfunding target – to develop Covax-19 by the Australian government’s Biomedical Translation Bridge initiative. A previous version of Petrovsky’s fundraising page described the grant as “a single small token grant provided by the govt [sic] as hush money when we complained of their complete lack of support”. “We initially refused this funding as we saw it as too little, too late and just an excuse to fob us off and be able to claim they had in fact ‘supported’ our program,” Petrovsky told Guardian Australia in November. Accepting the funding was “a decision we regret to this day,” he said. On December 21, Vaxine sent an email to its supporters with the subject “A call to action”, asking people to sign an e-petition to the parliament of Australia. That petition, which closed for signatures on 22 December, called on the federal government to provide “necessary financial support and advance purchase commitments” to Vaxine for Covax-19. Meanwhile, experts continue to push for transparency in clinical data. “I am always suspicious of companies talking about their science without publishing their science, while actively fundraising based on that science,” Sheldrick said. Griffin said: “We don’t know this vaccine is safe and effective yet. It might prove to be in the future, but we have insufficient [publicly available] evidence at this point in time.”The Covid positive test rate in New South Wales has risen to 6.5%, the highest since the pandemic began. The positivity rate is up from 1.73% a week ago and 0.71% a fortnight ago, a figure some epidemiologists say is likely to mean a proportion of cases are going undetected. In the 24-hour period to 8pm on Sunday, 97,241 tests were conducted, with 6,324 cases detected, resulting in a positive test rate of 6.5%. Prof Alexandra Martiniuk, an epidemiologist at the University of Sydney, said: “Early in the pandemic, the World Health Organization set 5% test positivity and below as the marker of having infections and transmission relatively under control.” After the easing of restrictions in mid-October, the positive test rate hovered at 0.5% or below while testing numbers remained relatively high. “Around 15 December our test positivity started to depart from the [roughly] 1% which we typically have in NSW,” Martiniuk said. The timing of the uptick in test positivity corresponded with the lifting of restrictions in conjunction with the arrival of the Omicron variant and holiday socialising. “When there is a high test positive rate, the number of confirmed cases is likely to be only capturing some of the true number of cases.” Provided testing turnouts are consistent, the higher the positive test rate climbs, the greater the extent of undetected spread of Covid. While the state has recorded its highest positive test rates since the start of the pandemic, Martiniuk said it was important to keep in mind the slightly lower testing numbers over the Christmas weekend. Head of the University of Melbourne’s school of population and global health, prof Nancy Baxter, said while the increased positive test rate did indicate a level of undetected viral spread, it was difficult to know the extent. “It does however mean people are using the service appropriately. The increase in positivity is not consistent with the narrative that inappropriate or unnecessary testing is what’s driving the long lines,” Baxter said. Baxter also said an increase in the positive test rate could be due in part to rapid antigen tests having detected asymptomatic cases, which were then confirmed by PCR tests. Testing facilities across the state have been overwhelmed in the face of the outbreak; patients are routinely waiting 72 hours to receive results, with some reporting waiting times of well over 100 hours. On Sunday it was revealed that more than 400 patients who had been swabbed from 22 to 23 December had been mistakenly sent negative test results. St Vincent’s hospital in Sydney was forced to issue an apology; the medical director of SydPath, the hospital’s pathology service, prof Anthony Dodds, attributed the mistakes to human error. On Monday the pathology lab announced another 995 people had been prematurely sent negative test results while the actual results were yet to be determined. The hospital said the additional results would be delivered by Monday night. Despite the increased positivity rate, Martiniuk says NSW’s testing levels are “very good”. In Malawi, where Martiniuk has worked, test positivity has remained “comparatively high” due to lower testing levels. In Ontario, Canada, with a population double that of NSW, about 70,000 tests are being carried out a day, or roughly half of NSW’s tests before Christmas Day. There, the positive test rate is 18.7%. Martiniuk emphasised the ongoing importance of testing in slowing and reducing the spread of Covid infections. “Testing will help us understand the potential load on hospitals and primary care.”There have never been more ways to ask for money on the internet. For rightwing extremists looking to monetise hate, that can be a big opportunity – and the earning potential of these digital assets hasn’t gone unnoticed in Australia. Earlier this year, I traced funding networks associated with a sample of Australian channels that share rightwing extremist content on the chat app Telegram, and found links to at least 22 online funding tools. These included donation requests via wallet addresses for cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin, monero, ethereum and litecoin. Of course an interest in cryptocurrencies is not on its own indicative of racism or extremism, but a recent analysis by the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) found a cohort of white supremacists largely originating from North America has likely generated “a substantial profit” from bitcoin by getting in early, giving them access to funds “that would almost certainly be unavailable to them without cryptocurrency”. Controversial Canadian “alt-right” figure Stefan Molyneux, who denies being a white supremacist but was pushed off YouTube for his commentary about women and “scientific racism”, has received at least 1,250 bitcoin from supporters according to the SPLC (one Bitcoin was worth A$68,647 at the time of writing). Australia’s far right takes notice As was posted in March on a Telegram channel associated with Blair Cottrell, who was convicted by a Victorian court of inciting hatred of Muslims in 2017: “crypto is actually making a lot of our guys rich.” While bitcoin may have created eye watering profits for “early-adopter” rightwing extremists, privacy coins like monero – which attempt to obscure the origin and destination of transactions – also appear to be increasingly embraced by far-right groups. After the National Socialist Network’s Thomas Sewell was charged with a number of offences this year in connection with an alleged assault and an alleged armed robbery, there was a donation drive to cover the Australian’s legal fees. In December alone, support requests for both bitcoin and monero donations were shared into Telegram channels associated with US and Australian far-right livestreamers with tens of thousands of followers, as well as accounts linked to Australia’s anti-lockdown movement. Sewell is pleading not guilty to the charges. Donation requests by the Australian far right – albeit for legal fees as well as content creation or lifestyle needs – can serve to solidify ties with followers as well as provide the chance to engage with international networks. ‘It’s easier for Joe Blow to donate’ While this activity isn’t illegal, the president of Insight Threat Intelligence and an expert on terrorism financing, Jessica Davis, says that in other cases regulators are challenged by the blurry line between fundraising that supports activities such as the creation of propaganda and the risk that some extremists may use it to support acts of terror. One of the most prominent terrorist attacks associated with far-right ideology in recent years does not appear to have been directly supported by external funding. New Zealand’s royal commission into the 2019 Christchurch terrorist attack concluded the terrorist was self-funded. But money was still an important part of the picture. The terrorist made at least 14 donations using PayPal and bitcoin to groups and individuals who promoted far-right views. Davis says, in some cases, donating to extremists “does start to demonstrate how seriously people are taking that propaganda”. It can be tempting to see far-right fundraising as something that happens far outside the financial systems we use to buy lunch or book flights. And yet, even in my Australian sample, mainstream services such as PayPal and crowdfunding sites like Buy Me a Coffee remain popular. And as cryptocurrencies become more mainstream, their use becomes increasingly frictionless – an evolution that will have implications for tracking and regulation. A professor of computer science at Elon University and co-author of the SPLC analysis, Dr Megan Squire, points to website plugins like BitPay, which help facilitate smooth cryptocurrency payments. “The technology and some simple interface solutions can start to … lower the barrier to entry, and make it easier for ‘Joe Blow’ user to actually donate,” she says. Davis has also observed the growing adoption of what she calls “financial tradecraft” that makes it harder for investigators to follow the trail, including methods of obscuring which wallets are receiving funds. Further complicating the picture are digital currencies created by entertainment and communication platforms. Perhaps the best known of these projects is Facebook’s troubled Libra project. The company behind the chat app Telegram also launched a blockchain project and cryptocurrency despite its reputation for failing to police extremist content. The company shut it down after pushback from the US Security and Exchange Commission. Then there is the blockchain-based Odysee. Viewers can support content creators using a cryptocurrency called LBRY Credits or cash tips. While a number of Australian far-right content creators use Odysee’s video platform, the ultimate motive is unclear: it’s just as likely to be used as a backup for videos that could be removed from YouTube than as a fundraising tool. ‘Keeping yourself secret is easier now’ But there are potential points of pressure and scrutiny for far-right fundraising, such as cryptocurrency exchanges – where fiat currencies can be converted. Some cryptocurrency exchanges already have terms of services that prohibit hate speech and other activities. Coinbase, for example, reportedly blocked transfers to the notorious neo-nazi site The Daily Stormer in 2017. Earlier this year, the company’s user agreement explicitly prohibited uses that “encourage hate, racial intolerance, or violent acts against others”. The push to remove far-right individuals and groups from funding platforms has typically been the result of public pressure. Following the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville in 2017, for example, PayPal and other services were lobbied to remove accounts used by figures involved in the event. Similar pressure has come to bear after the 6 January insurrection, which was also used as an opportunity to make online content and ask for donations by a number of far-right actors. However, the power such payment tools have to remove accounts for all types of users, often without transparency and avenues for appeal, is of increasing concern. Given this fresh spotlight, Squire says we may see a renewed push into cryptocurrencies by the far-right. “The tech for keeping yourself secret is a lot better now than it was in 2017 after Unite the Right in Charlottesville, which was the last big moment when a lot of these guys moved onto crypto,” she says. “There are more coins, there are more services. It’s harder to get a handle on.” Ariel Bogle is a researcher and journalist with a focus on technology and extremism. She owns a small amount of ethereum.A 61-year-old refugee who had been held for more than nine years in Australian immigration detention has finally been granted a three-year temporary protection visa. Masoumeh Torkpour fled Iran in 2011 and has been in detention ever since. In 2018 she was granted refugee status and a refugee tribunal found that she should be issued a temporary protection visa because her mental health issues – including OCD, depression and adjustment disorder – were being exacerbated by conditions in detention. However, she was denied a visa due to rigorous “character” tests. Torkpour was sentenced to two months’ imprisonment during her detention for spitting at and biting detention centre staff over disputes about food and access to a mobile phone. She had been granted asylum in Canada in 1991 after fleeing Iran two years earlier, but was jailed for four years for stabbing a woman she found in bed with her husband. As a result she was barred from obtaining a permanent visa in Canada. She returned to Iran from Canada in 2005 to care for her dying father, but was then detained for having left Iran illegally. The prison sentence in Canada also made her ineligible for a permanent visa in Australia on character grounds. Torkpour was given accommodation in a Melbourne hotel after her release on 15 December, but has now been advised she must find a new home. A spokesperson for the Department of Home Affairs said eligible individuals released from immigration detention could receive transitional support for up to six weeks. Torkpour said she welcomed freedom after so many years, but was struggling to adjust after so many years of being moved from one form of detention to another. She said it was “very stressful to be dumped into the community alone to fend for myself, while I have mobility problems and everything makes me extremely anxious”. Torkpour said the first thing she bought after her release was a candle. “Imprisonment banned me from lighting a candle for years. Finally, I can buy a candle to light on Christmas in honour of Mary, who was lonely too,” she said. Jana Favero, of the Asylum Seeker Resource Centre, said women on temporary visas faced innumerable challenges. “They face barriers to work, find it almost impossible to access emergency housing and are ripe for exploitation. “We are the only country in the world that only grants temporary protection to people found to be refugees. We are setting people up to fail and forcing them into poverty and destitution.” Torkpour said she now hoped to be reunited with her son, Daniel, who lives in Canada. “For years I was labelled as dangerous and rejected,” she said. “But my broken heart hopes that after 11 years, 2022 will bring my son Daniel back from Canada into my arms.” Whatever the future holds, Torkpour cannot be sent back to Iran, as it rejects the involuntary return of its citizens who have sought asylum overseas.At the end of November, my mum asked me to help her get the nativity scene out of the attic. It was uncharacteristically early for her to set it up, but given the two years we’ve all experienced, I understood her desire for the year to be finished and the holidays to arrive. And now here we are, deep in a strange festive season, where party invitations are dependent on producing a negative rapid antigen test. The threat of catching Covid aside, parties can be hazardous places, especially for our clothes. From less-than socially distanced dancefloors to cigarette smoke and spilt drinks – this week we ask some experts how to care for your outfit, once the revelry is over. Give them some air No matter how tempting it may be, Chloe Naughton, the program director for Melbourne Fashion festival, says “the worst thing you can do is take off whatever you’re wearing and leave it in a pile on the floor”. Instead, she suggests hanging it, or laying it flat on a drying rack or table to air it out before putting it away. If you have a steamer, and extraordinary willpower, she suggests giving each piece a light steam first. When Naughton gets home at the end of the night, the fabric and construction of the garment will determine whether she hangs it up or lays it down, since some things like knits and heavy cottons can be stretched by hanging. A good rule of thumb is to hang up clothes you’d normally hang, and lay clothes you’d normally fold out flat. This is even more important if your clothes smell like cigarettes. She says be sure to hang them up outside your wardrobe, and not put them anywhere near your clean clothes. “Then take it to the dry cleaners first thing in the morning.” At a pinch, she says, you can also use a fabric freshener spray. Stop stains on the spot Naughton says if someone spills wine, the best thing to do is pour sparkling water on it immediately to flush out the stain. She says this helps to “break it down and stops it from embedding into the threads”. But if it’s a delicate fabric, like silk, it should be left alone and taken promptly to the dry cleaners the morning after. If some oil falls on your shirt or pants, she says it “needs to be washed out then and there, because if the oil soaks in it will stain”. It may feel weird to walk around in a moist shirt, but if you want it to survive the night, Naughton suggests you “go to the bathroom straight away and use lukewarm water and hand soap” to remove the oil. For stains that you may not notice until the end of the night, oil, red and brown sauce or wine stains can be softened with a cool soak and then run through a hot wash of at least 60C, says Steve Anderton, a laundry expert from the consultancy group LTC Worldwide. It’s best to do this while the stains are fresh; if marks persist try using a general stain remover. He says to use a premium detergent containing a biological enzyme and an emulsifying agent. Focus on fabric type Anderton says garments made from polyester or nylon are highly attracted to fats and oils, including sweat. So if they’ve been stained or worn enthusiastically on the dancefloor, they’ll need to be treated with an emulsifying agent to break this bond. You may need to wash them more than once at 60C – but no higher. Polyester is thermoplastic, and excessive heat can damage it. Naughton says, “if it’s a really hot summer’s day and I know I’ll be at a party in the sun, I’ll choose to wear a breathable fabric like a linen or a cotton”. She says this is because these fabrics allow her body to breathe and make for a more comfortable experience. Go to the pros Naughton recommends taking most garments to the dry cleaners the day after a party, and preferably opt for eco-dry cleaners. Especially prioritise delicate fabrics. She says, “silk needs to be treated by the professionals”. It’s important to remember that silk may appear fine the day after a party, but stains from sweat and deodorant can damage the fabric over time and appear later. If a New Year’s Day run-about to find an open dry cleaner feels a bit ambitious, rethink wearing a silk jacket or chiffon dress on a night that may get rowdy.In the mid-1980s, the Melbourne arts community was divided. In the underground, there was a vibrant punk music and arts scene, while the big arts institutions, such as the National Gallery of Victoria, were seen as old-school and out of date – unsupportive of young artists and lavishing precious public funds on overseas acquisitions. One such purchase was Picasso’s The Weeping Woman, painted about the same time as his famous Guernica. The flamboyant NGV gallery director Patrick McCaughey bought the artwork for a staggering (at the time) $1.6m. But the terrible Australian dollar meant the sale price was actually closer to $2m. McCaughey predicted that the lurid lime green and purple Picasso “will haunt Melbourne for the next 100 years”. His prediction turned out to be true – but for all the wrong reasons. In 1986, not long after excitedly introducing The Weeping Woman to the city, it went missing. Who stole Picasso’s painting from the NGV is the subject of a four-part SBS documentary called Framed, presented by The Feed’s Marc Fennell. As the documentary reveals, it took a couple of days for the painting’s theft to be noticed. A note on the wall said it had been relocated to “the ACT”. Staff and visitors assumed it had been relocated to a gallery in the ACT – the Australian Capital Territory – until the Age received a typewritten letter signed by the “Australian Cultural Terrorists”. This group claimed responsibility for stealing the Picasso and said the painting would be destroyed in a week if their demands were not met. The Victorian arts minister at the time, Race Mathews, who was also the police minister, was singled out in the letter for “the clumsy, unimaginative stupidity of the administration” in this “hick State”. The Australian Cultural Terrorists made a list of demands, including more funding for the arts and a prize for young Australian artists. The theft of The Weeping Woman became hot news around the world. It had all the ingredients of a great story: the stuttering, bow-tie wearing, charismatic NGV head McCaughey pleading for the (uninsured) painting to be returned; the brazen, articulate and verbally aggressive thieves; the huge police operation that included draining the moat around the NGV; and then the rumour network set alight with everyone seeming to know who did it but nobody agreeing who it was. Using a mix of re-enactments and interviews, Fennell has assembled a mix of people who were there at the time, including the journalist Virginia Trioli, the then chief conservator of the NGV, Thomas Dixon, the cultural critic and journalist Ashley Crawford, the artist and activist Gabrielle de Vietri, the journalist Margaret Simon and a former detective sergeant, Bob Quigley. It’s interesting how differently things played out in 1986. There was little security at the gallery, including no CCTV, and the brand of typewriter used to write the ransom notes was key to finding the perpetrator. It’s the sort of story you assume couldn’t happen now. The painting later turned up unharmed in a locker at Spencer Street station but the crime was never solved. Thirty-five years later, the story is still captivating.It’s been a huge political year, dominated again by the Covid-19 pandemic, and a federal election is just around the corner. Scott Morrison will want to go into that contest trumpeting the government’s achievements. But substantial items remain on the prime minister’s to-do list. Here is a selection of unfinished business. Aged care has more funding but deep problems remain It feels like a lifetime ago but a $17.7bn aged care package was the centrepiece of the May budget. That package was the government’s response to the damning findings of the aged care royal commission. Morrison and the health minister, Greg Hunt, adopted a great many, but not all, of the recommendations from the inquiry. One of the central measures was an extra $7.5bn allocated for home care, including $6.5bn to clear the waiting list of an estimated 80,000 people over the next two years, and about $800m to support 1.6 million informal carers, including respite services for 8,400 Australians. The government promised to allocate 40,000 additional home care packages in 2021-22 and the same in 2022-23. In early December the aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, released new quarterly data tracking progress. By the end of September, 10,000 additional places had been released. But as of 30 September, 74,143 people were still waiting for their home care package at their approved level. If you want to fix aged care, you need a workforce strategy. The Grattan Institute noted in December the government had “no clear plan to meet future workforce requirements” and “home care staff are underpaid for what they do”. In a report titled Unfinished Business: Practical Policies For Better Care At Home, the thinktank said 58,000 more carers would be needed just to meet the planned increase in home care places. “To attract and retain home care workers, they should get better pay and conditions,” the report said. The aged care royal commission recommended low wages be increased. The government “noted” that recommendation rather than supporting it. Respect@Work response lacks the central recommendation Back in June 2018, the then minister for women, Kelly O’Dwyer, convinced her cabinet colleagues to fund a new national inquiry into sexual harassment in Australian workplaces by the sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins. In March 2020, Jenkins handed down 55 recommendations, including a proposal for employers to face an obligation to take reasonable and proportionate measures to eliminate sex discrimination, sexual harassment and victimisation. When the government responded formally to the recommendations in April, it balked at the central proposal, saying it would assess whether the proposed positive duty may “create further complexity, uncertainty or duplication in the overarching legal framework”. In July Jenkins chided the government again on the positive duty, reminding it the problem in workplaces was much larger than “a few bad blokes”. But the central recommendation was omitted from the legislative reform package passed by parliament in late August. The government said it would continue to mull over the proposition. Equivocation about the key recommendation happened in the middle of the furore over the former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins’ allegation of sexual assault, the historic rape allegation against frontbencher Christian Porter, which he stridently denies, staff members sharing lewd pictures in Parliament House, and complaints about the online behaviour (not sexual) of Liberal National MP Andrew Laming towards two female constituents. The legislation omitting the positive duty was also passed immediately before the government’s National Summit on Women’s Safety – prompting the Australian of the Year, sexual assault survivor Grace Tame, to blast the government’s “clear pattern of denial, minimisation, ultimately dismissal of women’s issues”. Related: what will become of the Jenkins review? Higgins’ allegation of sexual assault triggered a reckoning inside federal politics. Jenkins was asked by the government to review parliament’s toxic workplace culture, and her insights about the prevalence of sexual harassment and bullying were bracing to say the least. Jenkins recommended a number of structural and cultural changes, including more normalised human resources processes for parliamentary staff. The report landed on 30 November. The finance minister, Simon Birmingham, says the first two recommendations will be implemented early next year, with changes to the workplace framework legislated before the election. We’ll see if that happens. That would be progress, but it would leave the bulk of the systemic changes to be implemented post-election. Voice to parliament remains voiceless The Indigenous affairs minister, Ken Wyatt, signalled repeatedly during this term that he wanted to legislate a national voice to parliament. But the process has moved slowly. The government has also balked at enshrining the voice in the constitution, first proposed in the Uluru statement from the heart in 2017. The Uluru statement recommended a constitutionally enshrined voice to parliament, a Makarrata or truth-telling commission and an eventual treaty between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. Just before Christmas Wyatt took the first steps towards a legislated option. Cabinet approved the establishment of 35 regional and local representative groups. Morrison said in August: “Some might want this process to be faster. I want it to be right.” The heroes of net zero? After a climate policy pivot spanning the best part of 12 months, and a torturous five-minutes-to-midnight negotiation with the Nationals, Morrison managed to land a new commitment to achieving net zero by 2050. But the policy underpinning the putative transition was entirely underwhelming. The prime minister also did not manage to persuade colleagues to increase the ambition of Australia’s current 2030 target. The Nationals vetoed that. Morrison will hope the government’s 2050 commitment is sufficient to shore up Liberals under electoral pressure from climate-focused independents in the coming election, but not ambitious enough to cause the Coalition political trouble in regional Queensland. In any case, the story is not over. Morrison will continue to face pressure to do more. Some Liberals are already pushing for a more ambitious target for 2035. Australia also agreed at the end of the Cop26 in Glasgow to re-examine our 2030 target by the end of next year. Aukus: will this ever happen and will the French forgive Australia? We all saw the big announcement – Joe Biden, Boris Johnson and “that fella from down under” unveiling a trilateral security partnership called Aukus. Eight planned nuclear submarines, the first of them unlikely to be in the water until about 2040, and 18 months before we determine precisely how to proceed. Aukus at the substantive level is a plan for a plan. Cost? Unknown, although the Australian Strategic Policy Institute says it could be as high as $171bn. When he signed up for Aukus, Morrison cancelled a $90bn contract with the French-owned Naval Group. Emmanuel Macron retaliated with a mic drop moment on the sidelines of the G20 meeting in November, branding Australia’s prime minister a liar. The former prime minister Paul Keating, concerned about a loss of strategic autonomy, delivered his verdict at the National Press Club. “Eight submarines against China when we get the submarines in 20 years’ time – it’ll be like throwing a handful of toothpicks at the mountain.” Integrity commission: will legislation ever be introduced? It’s long forgotten now, but on 13 December 2018, Morrison said he would proceed with two reforms – a religious discrimination bill (more of that shortly) and a federal integrity commission. The government had begun work to convert the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity into an anti-corruption body before Malcolm Turnbull lost the leadership. Morrison (who had once dismissed a federal body as a “fringe issue”) said in December 2018 the proposed commonwealth integrity commission would have a public sector division and a law enforcement division. He said his federal model would “avoid the serious failings of state-based integrity bodies that on too many occasions have proved to be kangaroo courts falling victim to poor process and being little more than a forum for self-serving mud slinging and the pursuit of personal, corporate and political vendettas”. Experts promptly deemed the proposal deeply suboptimal. The ensuing consultation process was then dragged out for years. The government had a draft of its preferred legislation ready in January 2020, but Porter, the attorney general at the time, didn’t want to flag it “during the holiday period”. He warned the “consultation process will be extensive and will take as long as necessary to ensure the model we deliver has the powers and resources it needs to be effective, while also avoiding the pitfalls that have been seen with similar state-based bodies”. The final legislation threatened to surface in the final two parliamentary sitting weeks of 2021, but it didn’t land in the parliament. Morrison attempted to blame Labor. But his problem was internal. One of his backbenchers crossed the floor in an effort to trigger debate on a stronger model being championed by independent MP Helen Haines. Religious discrimination: introduced but passage is uncertain On that same day in December 2018, Morrison told reporters he was “looking to legislate before the election” a religious discrimination bill. But the proposal would be slow going because of different objectives within the government. Some wanted a law to protect “religious freedom” – giving Australians a positive right to express religious opinions. Morrison had once declared there was “no more fundamental liberty” than freedom of religion. But others had significant reservations. Porter produced a hybrid – an anti-discrimination bill with more assertive religious freedom elements. By July 2019, Morrison told the opening session of the Hillsong annual conference that the religious freedom debate was too rights oriented, and it was “not the laws that make freedom of religion work, it’s the culture that accepts it”. Roll forward to the final parliamentary sitting fortnight of 2021, and the same internal divisions that had made the proposal so difficult to land continued to fester. In an effort to get the bill to parliament, the current attorney general, Michaelia Cash, agreed to drop the divisive “Folau clause”, which would have protected employers from claims of indirect discrimination if they sanctioned employees for misconduct for expressing religious beliefs. But the internal wrangling continues, with the fate of the legislation uncertain. Just before Christmas, Cash appeared to renege on a deal with Liberal moderates on the package. Moderates want immediate changes to protect gay students from discrimination in religious schools.It was 2003 and the Waifs were booked to open for Bob Dylan for 30 of his tour dates across the United States. After settling into the initial shows, my sister (and fellow Waifs singer) Donna Simpson and I were summoned to soundcheck by Larry Campbell, Dylan’s guitarist, to rehearse some backing vocals on Knockin’ on Heaven’s Door. Sometimes Dylan invites guests onstage to join him in singing it, Larry said. Knockin’ on Heaven’s Door was the first song Donna and I ever learned and we were over the moon at the prospect of joining Dylan onstage to sing it. “Don’t hold your breath,” Larry told us, “It may not happen.” Mid-tour, Dylan generously gifted our whole band beautiful tailored western shirts – the subtle suggestion being that we could sharpen up our act. Each night we waited, shirts pressed, for the call to join Dylan and his band onstage. The call never came. Twenty-nine gigs in, we’d seen all the shows and had our minds blown by music and the fact we were touring the US with one of the world’s most influential songwriters. We were at the top, riding the easy train with backstage catering and a tour bus, friendly with all the cast and crew. The dream of singing in Dylan’s set had long faded into the humdrum routine of after-gig stories and shenanigans. We would come offstage, drink beers, bust out the Scrabble, get loose and decompress before the overnight long haul to the next gig. The last night of the tour rolled around in Raleigh, North Carolina. It was a big outdoor show, hot and sweaty, and the Waifs were well-received by the 6,000-strong crowd. We came offstage pumped. We had done it! Thirty dates through North America opening for Bob Dylan. The green room was below the stage, down a set of wooden stairs. Donna and I stripped off to our undies, cracked open a bottle of vodka and started up with the guys in the band to celebrate the tour’s wrap. We were a few shots in and feeling a little inebriated when Dylan’s stage manager burst through the door, announcing: “Stage lights down – Bob’s waiting for you two.” WHAT?? “Dylan has just invited you both onstage to sing.” In a frenzy we tore through suitcases looking for our new shirts, hopping around, pulling on pants and shoes. Everyone was screaming: “Hurry up! Hurry up!” Donna was ahead of me on the stairs. At the top I rushed towards the darkened stage and ran smack into a concrete pole. As I reeled backwards, someone caught me and pushed me forward. Lights up. Dylan was to my right. He nodded and mumbled: “Nice shirts.” He started strumming those three chords – the first chord progression Donna and I had ever learned. I was delirious – was this actually happening or did I just knock myself out on a pole? Can heaven wait or am I standing at its door right next to the guy who wrote its theme song? The harmonies kicked in. “Ooooooh, ooooh, ooooooh.” I took the fifth. Dylan took the lead. “Mama take this badge off me … ” We smiled. We were in the song – the first song I painstakingly plucked out on Dad’s guitar in an old trailer on the fishing camp. Donna had stolen the Dylan songbook from the school library so we could ease the boredom between hauling fish. She used to dream of meeting him. This was the song we’d heard our parents sing at parties while we were meant to be sleeping; that we’d harmonised on together at every formative gig we’d ever played since we were teenagers. Every one of those 6,000 people in the audience had a similar story with that song, and in that moment, we were in it, helping to bring the sound and melody to life, sending it out to ignite their own memories and connections. Standing beside the greatest, heads pounding, hearts on fire, singing out, looking sharp. Knocking on heaven’s door. • The Waifs are performing around Australia January to April 2022At university we were given a task to explain how the readings we did that week on sexual coercion in the education system were applicable to the contexts we came from. A woman from a low income country went first, and described how “virginity testing” (where fingers are used to test if the hymen is still intact) was part of childhood schooling in her country. It was my turn directly after and I was slightly lost for words. “Uhh … I grew up in a privileged area of Australia so nothing like that happened to me in my schooling … but when I was doing the readings on sexual coercion, I realised I and people I knew experienced the behaviour described pretty much every weekend.” I was met with shock from the rest of the members of the group as I described the ways in which sexual coercion was a fundamental part of being a teenager in Australia. It was hard to comprehend for these people from all parts of the world that this could possibly occur. How could Australia let this happen? It’s such a “developed” country! This and two other pivotal conversations spurred me to ask my Instagram following if they or anyone close to them had been sexually assaulted by someone who went to an all-boys school in Sydney. Over weeks this turned into a national campaign demanding consent education with more than 45,000 signatures. It’s shocking to learn that Australia’s norm is riddled with human rights violations and gender-based violence. It hides under a big banner that screams “Australia is a safe and happy place” but our attitudes toward gender and sexuality have created power imbalances, taboos and widespread violence. I now look back on 2021 and think about the year that Australia said we want better. I admire the more than 6,700 people who named the school that their perpetrator of sexual assault went to. I remember every time a headline emerged about allegations involving people in the highest ranks of our country. I’m grateful that Brittany Higgins had the courage to come forward with her allegation that she was raped inside our very own Parliament House, which triggered the Jenkins report. I’m thankful Grace Tame used her platform to advocate for victims of child abuse in every way feasible. And I reflect in awe about the students across Australia who protested, shared petitions, walked out, stood up, and spoke out. All of this has meant that 2021 will be remembered for some big wins. After decades of women demanding so, and the tireless work of Saxon Mullins, an affirmative model of consent has been passed in New South Wales, and Victoria may soon follow. This reform is groundbreaking beyond the courtroom, because we stop assuming that the default access to a body is a yes, and that “only no means no”, and instead teach the community that without enthusiasm, sex is assault. In NSW parliament, a debate received unanimous, cross-party support for earlier and holistic consent education. It was triggered by 20,000 ordinary citizens who demanded it occurr. Then there were an estimated 110,000 people who attended March 4 Justice rallies nationally, which will go down in history as the biggest uprising against the treatment of women that Australia has seen to date. Outside the public sphere, in a time of reflection, myriads of conversations were held across Australia this year, and incrementally each one has contributed to nurturing a new Australia. This has not come without challenges. For many Australians this year, sexual assault dominating discourse has meant they have had to relive their own experiences, reveal personal details to people around them, or hear heartbreaking stories about loved ones. For some, it’s been a year where behaviours that have seemed normal in the past were suddenly branded as acts of violence. This is something I can say from experience is both confronting and empowering. For too many, these conversations involved finding out that people around them have opinions which have made them feel unsafe and unsupported. Yet, we still did it. We leveraged the work of human rights activists and feminists for generations before us so that those after us can do the same. This year, Australia learned that it can no longer plead ignorance. We have a problem, and it’s a gendered one. Experts have solutions, youth have opinions. Listen to them. I’ve read many news articles this year about Grace, Brittany and myself. While it has been an honour to be in their company in this way, I hope 2022 is the year where we better include and elevate the voices of traditionally marginalised groups of society. This is the only way we can truly turn Australia into a safe and happy place for all. Young Australians don’t care about taboos and we don’t care about expectations. We are making it clear that we want better in 2022 and we will keep marching, keep signing, keep walking out, and keep speaking up until we get it. Listen to us. • Chanel Contos grew up in Sydney, Australia. She has a masters in education, gender and international development from University College London, UK. This year she was the recipient of the Human Rights Commission of Australia’s Young People’s Medal for her work in advocating for holistic consent education • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. If you or someone you know is impacted by sexual assault, family or domestic violence, call 1800RESPECT on 1800 737 732 or visit www.1800RESPECT.org.au. In an emergency, call 000. International helplines can be found via www.befrienders.orgEngland could fit an air purifier to every classroom for half the price of the new royal yacht, a move which scientists and campaigners say would significantly reduce the spread of Covid in schools. The move would cost about £140m, according to calculations by the Liberal Democrats. Government sources have said there will be no delay to the start of the school term, despite surging Omicron cases, and that any additional restrictions will not include classroom closures. Schools, however, have said high numbers of teacher absences as a result of self-isolation could mean they are forced to send whole year groups home. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, has called on retired teachers and those who have left the profession to help fill the gaps. The general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, Geoff Barton, told the Telegraph that classroom closures could occur if schools had no alternative. “If you have a fixed pool available of those who can teach young people, then the only final resort schools and colleges have is to start thinking about the certain year groups that should be prioritised in the short term,” he said. Government guidance suggests teachers should open external windows and internal doors to improve natural ventilation and schools “should balance the need for increased ventilation while maintaining a comfortable temperature”. Opening windows is likely to be more difficult when schools return in cold January temperatures. The Lib Dem education spokesperson, Munira Wilson, said the government’s advice to use CO2 monitors was less effective because they give information on where more airflow is needed but do not affect the flow itself. Headteachers have also criticised the cost of the government’s preferred supplier for air filters – one of the units, made by Camfil City M, costs £1,170 and a Dyson model costs £424.82. Wilson said schools should not be paying for the units at all. “Failure to act right now will fail our children in the future. The government has a week to solve this, otherwise pupils will be left out in the cold and missing out on vital learning once again,” she said. “Nadhim Zahawi gave a cast-iron guarantee that schools would stay open. Unless he gets a grip on this quickly, he will be adding to the countless broken promises from this Government. Worse still, he will be breaking a promise to all our children.” The German government invested £452m in October 2020 in improving ventilation systems in public buildings, including schools, including upgrading air conditioning systems and air purifiers, described by the then-chancellor Angela Merkel as “one of the cheapest and most effective ways” of tackling Covid spread. New York City has also undertaken extensive ventilation surveys and distributed about 100,000 high efficiency particulate air (Hepa) purifiers.Thousands of South Africans will pause to remember the anti-apartheid icon Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who died on Sunday aged 90, every day this week as bells are rung at churches across the country for 10 minutes at noon. Tributes to Tutu, described as the “moral compass” of his country, have poured in from around the world since his death in a Cape Town care home, as a series of events commemorating his life and achievements begin. “A universal spirit, Archbishop Tutu was grounded in the struggle for liberation and justice in his own country, but also concerned with injustice everywhere,” former US president Barack Obama said in a statement. The Nobel laureate’s remains will lie in state for two days before his funeral is held on 1 January at Cape Town’s St George’s Cathedral, his former parish. The bells of the cathedral, where his ashes are to be interred, will toll for 10 minutes at noon daily until Friday in his honour. Dozens of memorial services are to be held across South Africa in the coming days and flags will be flown at half-mast. “Bells will ring at 12 noon each day at the cathedral and at many cathedrals and churches across the land. In Cape Town, the Angelus prayer will be recited,” said Archbishop Thabo Makgoba on Monday. In a troubled country still divided by deep inequality, polarised politics and the legacy of the repressive, racist apartheid system, the death of one of the leading figures of the freedom struggle has brought a rare moment of unity. Members of all communities have stopped by St George’s cathedral since the news of Tutu’s death broke, many laying flowers under a portrait of the cleric fixed to a wall of remembrance alongside a South African flag, or signing a book of condolence. Among them was Miriam Mokwadi, a 67-year-old retired nurse, who said the Nobel laureate “was a hero to us, he fought for us”. “We are liberated due to him. If it was not for him, probably we would have been lost as a country. He was just good,” said Mokwadi, clutching the hand of her granddaughter. “His significance supersedes the boundaries of being an Anglican,” said mourner Brent Goliath, who broke down in tears outside the old stone building. He said he had been an altar boy and had met Tutu several times. “I was very emotional this morning when I heard that he’d passed away. I thank God that he has been there for us,” he said, wiping his eyes as he placed a bouquet of pink flowers under Tutu’s photo. Daphney Ramakgopa, 58, a local government worker, spoke of the loss the entire country was feeling. “We looked up to him as the adviser to everyone in the country, especially our politicians,” she said. South Africa’s cricket team wore black armbands in Tutu’s honour on day one of the first Test against India in South Africa. Cape Town’s Table Mountain was lit up in purple in his honour. South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, called him a man of “extraordinary intellect, integrity and invincibility against the forces of apartheid”. Ramaphosa said Tutu’s death was “another chapter of bereavement in our nation’s farewell to a generation of outstanding South Africans who have bequeathed us a liberated South Africa,” after the country’s last apartheid-era president FW de Klerk died in November. “Fighting for freedom from the trenches of South Africa required a courage that cannot be described,” said Graça Machel, the widow of Nelson Mandela. Though he had largely faded from public life in recent years, Tutu had continued his lifelong fight for causes he believed in, forcefully supporting LGBT rights, equal access to education and the assisted dying movement. The charismatic cleric, whose infectious laughter and informality masked a steely commitment to his principles, had also been fiercely critical of South Africa’s ruling African National Congress party. Covid regulations currently in force in South Africa would restrict attendance at the funeral to a maximum of 100, church authorities said, explaining that “only a fraction of those who want to be there can be accommodated in the cathedral.” The service will be an Anglican requiem mass, “as Archbishop emeritus Desmond wanted”, led by Michael Nuttall, the retired bishop of Natal, who was known as “number 2 to Tutu”. The close relationship between Nuttall and Tutu in the 1980s “modelled how a white leader could work for and closely with a black leader,” Anglican church officials told reporters. Tutu was born in the small town of Klerksdorp, west of Johannesburg, on 7 October 1931. His career in the church began after he resigned a sought-after teaching post in protest at South Africa’s discriminatory laws in 1958, a decade after the victory of the National party in elections ushered in the apartheid system. After studying theology in the UK, where he would needlessly ask for directions only to be called “Sir” by white police officers. Tutu rose rapidly up the religious hierarchy. By the late 1970s, Tutu was one of the leaders of the freedom struggle best known overseas and played a leading role in forcing western leaders to confront the moral cost of cold war calculations that led to tacit support for white-minority rule in South Africa. In 1984, Tutu’s commitment to non-violent struggle won him the Nobel peace prize and he was appointed archbishop of Cape Town shortly afterwards When Mandela became president after South Africa’s first free elections in 1994, Tutu coined the term “Rainbow Nation” to describe his homeland and then led the truth and reconciliation commission, which revealed the horrors of apartheid. But Tutu did not spare his country’s new rulers, challenging Mandela, a close friend, over generous salaries for cabinet ministers and stridently criticising the rule of president Jacob Zuma, which ended in 2018 amid allegations of systematic graft. Tutu was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 1997 and repeatedly underwent treatment. His public appearances became rarer. In one of his last this year, he emerged from hospital in a wheelchair to get a Covid-19 vaccine, waving but not offering comment. The archbishop had been in a weakened state for several months and died peacefully at 7am (0500 GMT) on Sunday, according to several of his relatives. The Nelson Mandela Foundation called Tutu “an extraordinary human being. A thinker. A leader. A shepherd.”Two-time Olympic champion Mikaela Shiffrin is the latest elite skier to test positive for Covid-19 with the Beijing Games less than six weeks away. “I wanted to let you all know that I’m doing well, but unfortunately I had a positive COVID test,” the American wrote on her social media accounts Monday. “I’m following protocol and isolating.” Shiffrin said she will miss World Cup giant slalom and slalom races scheduled for Tuesday and Wednesday, respectively, in Lienz, Austria, adding, “I’ll see you in the new year.” Missing the races in Lienz is a big hit to Shiffrin’s chances of regaining the overall World Cup title. She leads Italy’s Sofia Goggia by 115 points in the standings but needs to maintain a high level of points in the technical disciplines of giant slalom and slalom since Goggia has been virtually unbeatable in the speed events of downhill and super-G. Shiffrin’s positive test comes at a particularly bad time for her with six consecutive technical races scheduled. Other top skiers who have missed races recently after testing positive for Covid include former overall champion Lara Gut-Behrami, Austrian world champion Katharina Liensberger and Alice Robinson of New Zealand. Maryna Gąsienica-Daniel, the Polish skier who finished sixth in two giant slaloms in Courchevel, France, last week, also announced a positive test on Monday. She said on Instagram that she is “isolated at home,” and she, too, will miss the races in Lienz. Gąsienica-Daniel adds that she is “sad” but otherwise “feeling good.” The Beijing Olympics open on 4 February. Shiffrin’s Olympic record includes two golds – in slalom at the 2014 Sochi Games and giant slalom at the 2018 Pyeongchang Games – plus a silver in combined in 2018. Shiffrin finished first and second in the last two races she competed in – the two giant slaloms in Courchevel. The next women’s World Cup race after Lienz is a slalom in Zagreb, Croatia, on 4 January.Earlier today I set you the following three puzzles: 1. What was the question? The person at the rail station’s information desk replied: “2222222” What was the question? Solution: “Can you tell me from when, and to when, the train will be in the station?” The person at the information desk replied: “Two to 2:00, to 2:22.” 2. The question I ask every year – with the smallest incremental change. In what is an annual ritual for the readers of this column, fill in the gaps so the following equation makes sense: 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 = 2022 You are allowed to use the mathematical symbols +, -, x, ÷ and as many brackets as you like. In other words, your answer should be of the form , 10 x 9 + (8 – 6) x 5 x 4 – ((3 x 2) + 1)), although not this one, which doesn’t equal 2022. Solution: Here’s one solution. Please post others below. 10+(((9×8×7)−6+5)×(4+3−2−1)) 3. Three twos and a naught. Construct the numbers from 1 to 10 with the digits 2, 0, 2 and 2. You are allowed to used the mathematical symbols +, -, x, ÷, √, the factorial !, as many brackets as you like, concatenation and exponentiation. (It may be helpful to know that 0! = 1.) 1. 2220 2. 22 – 20 3. √((20-2)/2) 4. 2 + 2 - 02 5. 20/(2 + 2) 6. √((20 - 2) x 2) 7. (2 + 0!)2 – 2 8. (20/2) – 2 9. (20 – 2)/2 10. 20/√(2 x 2) (In the original post I also said you could use the decimal point and the symbol for repeated decimal. In fact, it has subsequently been pointed out that you don’t need these operations at all. I think the solutions above are the simplest.) Thanks everyone! I hope you enjoyed today’s puzzles. I’ll be back next year. Thanks to Inder Taneja for help with today’s puzzles and solutions. You can read his 78-page article about all the fun and games to be had with 2022 here. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I’m the author of several books of puzzles, most recently the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (online and in person). If your school is interested please get in touch.Shishkin’s delayed return to action proved to be well worth the wait here on Monday as last season’s Arkle Trophy winner maintained his unbeaten record in completed races over jumps with a 10-length defeat of Greaneteen – a Grade One winner himself this month – in the Grade Two Desert Orchid Chase. Shishkin was getting some weight from his two main rivals in a four‑strong field and needed to be nudged along for a second or two by Nico de Boinville, his jockey, on the turn for home. Once he clicked up a gear, however, Shishkin powered away from his opponents in just a few strides and was soon in complete control. Bookmakers took the chance to clip Shishkin’s odds for the Queen Mother Champion Chase in March and Nicky Henderson’s seven‑year‑old is now odds-on for the two-mile chasing championship with several firms, with Coral one of the few still odds‑against at 5-4. Energumene, Ireland’s big hope for what promises to be a memorable head-to-head in the spring, is top-priced at 5-2 and it is 11-1 bar the two. “I think there’s a bit of relief but it’s more than that, as I am really genuinely thrilled with him,” Henderson said. “When I looked at the ground yesterday I thought: ‘Do we not go and wait for the Clarence House [in January]?’ So I was nervous. “He was in a bad place for three weeks, which is why he didn’t run in the Tingle Creek and his tracheal wash backed that up. He didn’t run in the Tingle Creek because he was all wrong and he was just as flat as a pancake and then 10 days after that his tracheal wash was horrible. “The way he crossed [the] fences is extraordinary, sometimes you don’t even think he’s left the ground as he’s just out the other side and gone.” Henderson would prefer to get another run into Shishkin before his run at the Festival, though he feels he now has a choice between two imperfect options. “He’s had a good blow and I’d like to have another run before Cheltenham,” he said. “The trouble is you’ve got the Clarence House which comes quickly after this, while the Game Spirit [at Newbury in February] is rather close to the Festival and you haven’t got a lot in between. But we’ll find something for him.” The feature event of the day at Leopardstown’s Christmas Festival was a Grade One chase over two miles and a furlong, but its value as a pointer for the Champion Chase was diminished when Chacun Pour Soi, the likely favourite, was scratched a few hours before the race because of a hamstring problem. In his absence, Envoi Allen registered a first Grade One success for Henry de Bromhead and Rachael Blackmore following his switch from Gordon Elliott’s stable in early March. The seven-year-old had to dig deep to see off the persistent challenge of Battleoverdoyen but crossed the line nearly eight lengths in front. “We had a bit of a scare turning in, but he put his head down and galloped to the line,” Blackmore said. “I think Henry was right to step him back [in trip], obviously with Chacun being out it changed the dynamic of the race [but] he felt good today.” At Chepstow, where the Welsh Grand National took place in front of empty stands for the second year running, it was left to Sam Thomas to provide the post-race emotion after Iwilldoit stayed on strongly to give the trainer the biggest win of his career. “I can’t believe how emotional I am,” Thomas said. “I’m a bit overwhelmed by the whole experience, if I’m honest. It is tremendous to keep it in Wales. I am a proud Welshman and it hasn’t really sunk in. “It is bizarre being stood here in an empty stand with no crowd. It just doesn’t feel right, really. I have enjoyed every minute of that race, but my family should be here, the rest of the owners should be here, and it is a very sad day for racing. Forty minutes away in Bristol there is a full stadium of people watching rugby. It is crazy.” Native River, successful in the 2018 Cheltenham Gold Cup and winner of the Welsh National five years ago, was retired after being pulled up in the race on Mondayyesterday.I wonder if the Premier League should follow the same approach as the Department for Education, which has asked former teachers to volunteer their services to help schools get through the current crisis arising out of teachers being absent due to Covid. Clubs could ask former players to volunteer their services to their old teams and the fixture backlog would be solved. I look forward to seeing John Barnes and Neil Ruddock adding some “weight” to my team, Liverpool. John Atkinson Wilby, Suffolk • Maybe it’s because it’s Christmas, but finally there was a Wordsearch (24 December) containing a majority of women authors. Can you keep it up in 2022? Here’s hoping. Caroline Taylor Cardiff • My nan used to signal time for bed by semi-discreetly taking off her corsets, then placing them in the oven of the fire range, so they would be warm the following morning (Letters, 26 December). Always worked. Roy Shannon Southport, Merseyside • Our young daughter asked: “Why is God called Peter?” “What do you mean?” came the reply. “When they read the Bible we say, ‘Thanks Peter God,’” she said. Carole Coleman Halifax, West Yorkshire • I wonder if any Guardian readers can help? How is it possible for a family to spend £2m on strawberries in one year (Dubai ruler’s divorce settlement reveals ‘truly opulent’ standard of living, 21 December)? It is giving me sleepless nights. Brigid Keenan Batcombe, Somerset • Many thanks for the music quiz of the year (26 December). Thank goodness you didn’t bore us with questions on classical music, folk or jazz. Pete Bibby Sheffield • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Thank you for your article “One in four Britons ‘not confident NHS can care for them’, survey reveals” (26 December). While it is a disgrace, no one has any right to be surprised at the survey results. You cannot go through 11 years of cuts and come out the other end with the essential services upon which we all depend still operating effectively. It is even more terrifying to contemplate exactly what needs to happen for a majority of the population to realise that the low-tax, low-regulation country the Tories keep telling us they want to create can only exist by destroying the civilised society we have spent the last 80 years building. David Franks Luton, Bedfordshire • This is the inevitable, and conceivably planned, consequence of the continuing refusal and/or unwillingness by some MPs to take the actions necessary to prevent unnecessary and avoidable loss of life, in order to wilfully destroy the general perception of the NHS in the UK. Welcome to private healthcare. Bill Robinson Norwich, Norfolk • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The ruthless campaign by the Chinese government to extinguish all memories of the massacre at Tiananmen Square has now resulted in the removal of the sculpture from the campus of the University of Hong Kong (Outcry as memorial to Tiananmen Square victims removed from Hong Kong University, 23 December). Since many of the countless victims were students, it is appropriate for universities elsewhere to ensure that their bravery and martyrdom is not eradicated from history. University student unions in the UK, not least at those institutions with many Chinese students, should keep their memory alive by renaming their building or part of it. This is what several did following the murder by the authorities of the black South African anti-apartheid student activist Steve Biko. The Steve Biko Bar at Bradford University closed in 2005 but the student union building at Manchester University (which has the largest student union in the UK) is still named after him. No doubt the chancellor of Oxford University, Chris Patten – who was the last British governor of Hong Kong – will be sympathetic. There is also plenty of space for the erection of a memorial near the Chinese embassy in central London. Dr Peter van den Dungen Ex-Bradford University lecturer, Halifax, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Matthew Belmonte is correct in decrying the autism label, but he does not go far enough: it can be a very serious handicap to be so labelled (Letters, 21 December). Advancement in employment is generally easiest for people who are team players with interpersonal skills. When I discovered my own autistic traits 20 years ago, initially through identifying with Liane Holliday Willey’s book Pretending to be Normal, I soon realised that my 38-year career to that date had been critically dependent on cognitively superimposing neurotypical layers over my behaviour as far as possible. Undoubtedly, formal diagnosis is the only way that support and care can be considered for those who really need it; for the rest of us, “pretending to be normal” is a far better option. Consciously focusing on the strengths of your autistic traits, such as concentration on detail, can yield competitive advantages if you look for them. The effort involved in understanding and aping social interaction can be extremely stressful, however. Bob Seymour Ogmore-by-Sea, Vale of Glamorgan • The notion that the “label” of autism should be reserved for “those who need it most” is at best misguided and at worst ignorant, and arguably dangerous, for autistic individuals such as myself. On the surface, I may seem “high functioning” – an outdated and misleading descriptor. An acquaintance is likely to perceive me as quiet, intelligent and perhaps slightly odd, but not disabled. To them, I am not someone who “really needs” my diagnosis. What they do not know is how I struggle with work; at present, I cannot hold on to even the most simple jobs because I find the environment and the social expectations overwhelming. Much of adult life makes no sense to me. Yet I went to university. I have a master’s degree. Does this mean I am not autistic enough to need the label? Those who receive the label of autism are already those who really need it, and to suggest otherwise is a step backwards. Name and address supplied • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Andy Beckett is right to warn that fears of overcrowding could stoke xenophobia and racism (The myth of an overcrowded Britain suits our island psyche – and this government, 23 December). But it isn’t just “some environmentalists” and countryside lovers who know there is a problem. We live far beyond our island’s capacity to support us. The UK imports around a third of its food; bad for a heavily indebted country that has turned its back on free trade in an unstable world. England is one of Europe’s most densely populated countries, and parts are buckling ecologically. The water environment is desperately stressed in areas with the highest growth. Biodiversity suffers from habitat fragmentation, pollution and disturbance as we expand our urban footprint. Our addiction to car-dependent sprawl is destroying landscapes that contribute to our wellbeing and our food. If the population boom really has ended, that’s good news for the environment, but real benefit would need a huge decline. Nostalgia for a “full” country? No. Jon Reeds Alston, Cumbria • Andy Beckett argues that overcrowded Britain is a myth. Perhaps, however, he is using the wrong criteria to judge the question. I believe that we are overcrowded if we do not have enough infrastructure to support the population. The questions he should have asked include whether we have enough decent housing, enough NHS facilities, a good enough transport network, good enough wastewater disposal facilities, and the ability to produce most of our own food requirement. Looked at on this basis, it seems pretty clear that we are overcrowded. Graham Goddard Llanelli, Dyfed • Perhaps Andy Beckett should reassess his definition of “full”. Rather than look at how many people are physically in the country, we should define “full” as how many of them actually have somewhere to live, as was highlighted by this report. Alan Gent Cheshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Staff absences from the Omicron Covid variant are leaving public services in a “perilous state”,a union leader has said, amid new grim warnings about the variant’s impact on the NHS workforce. As much as 40% of NHS staff in London alone could be absent because of rising Covid-19 infections under the “worst-case scenario” envisaged by experts, it emerged on Monday. “We’d hope that’s a worst-case scenario, but because we are already seeing an increase, I think it wouldn’t be unrealistic to expect that to go up significantly,” said Prof Alison Leary, chair of healthcare and workforce modelling at London South Bank University. London’s absence rate was up by about 30%, depending on the organisation, which included people who were isolating because of positive tests, she told BBC Radio 4’s World at One. Dr Ian Higginson, vice-president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine, told the programme that the number of staff absences in NHS emergency departments could “push us over the edge”. Severe staff shortages could also undermine efforts to keep pupils in schools, with headteachers in England saying that they may be forced to send children home if they do no have enough staff. Despite a pledge by Boris Johnson to avoid a repeat of January 2021, when the government insisted that schools would remain open, only for them to be closed after a U-turn, school leaders are warning that the rapid spread of Omicron could lead to mass absences for members of staff when schools reopen. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, told the BBC that staff absences had been at “unsustainable” levels at some schools, with up to 25% of staff off in the week leading up to the Christmas break. Staff shortages are also being felt across the board in other sectors such as transport, where rail operators have been running reduced services and implementing measures such as running longer trains. The Rail Delivery Group, the British rail industry membership body, said that in the seven days to Friday 24 December, on average 5.4% of trains were cancelled, compared with an annual average of 2.9%. More recent data has yet to be made available. Local authorities are also concerned about staff absences, which are particularly acute in adult social care, children’s services and waste collection services. Its membership body, the Local Government Association, said that councils were concerned that existing staff shortages “could get worse”. Covid-related staff shortages were already biting when it came to basic day-to-day services. Lewisham council in London tweeted on Monday that its reuse and recycling centre was closed until Wednesday, and that black bin collections would be prioritised in the event of delays to rubbish and recycling services.. Jon Richard, the assistant general secretary of Unison, whose 1.3 million members are work predominantly in public services, told the Guardian: “Key health, council, care and police services have so many staff off that lots are worried they will not be able to keep going. “That’s why extra measures to curb virus spread are of the utmost importance in the coming weeks. Years of cuts have left services with just enough staff to get by in normal times. Now Omicron has put paid to that, leaving services in a perilous state.” The National Police Chiefs’ Council said that it had continued to closely monitor absence rates within policing, which was not currently having an effect on forces’ ability to provide their normal service to the public. Lucy Moreton, a professional officer at the Immigration Services Union, said Covid-related absences in frontline services were rising, but she added that this was also being accompanied by non-Covid-related absence, in particular workplace-related stress.Covid cases in England reached a new high of 113,628 on Christmas Day and 1,281 people were admitted to hospital – the highest daily figure since mid-February. Official data on new Covid cases, which was delayed over the festive period, also showed 98,515 new confirmed cases reported in England on Monday. Data for Boxing Day from England and Wales combined revealed 108,893 daily cases reported. Case numbers have also hit new highs in Scotland, where 8,252 cases were reported for Christmas Day, 11,030 on Boxing Day and 10,562 on Monday. Hospital admissions have also risen, with 1,281 people admitted in England on Christmas Day – the most recent available figure – up from 1,020 the day before and 735 on 18 December. Hospital admissions in England were at their highest almost a year ago, on 12 January, when they reached 4,134. The number of patients in hospital is rising too. There were 8,474 people in hospital with Covid in England on Monday, up from 7,536 the day before. At the height of the wave last winter, the figure was more than 34,000. Politicians are watching the situation in London closely, because infection rates are particularly high in the capital. Downing Street has been hoping that if admissions in London stay below 400 a day, restrictions will not be needed. According to the latest data, 364 patients were admitted to hospital with Covid on Christmas Day in London, down slightly from a high of 390 admitted on 23 December. The number of people in hospital in the city has, however, continued to rise, with 2,640 patients recorded for 27 December. Experts have said data for the period around Christmas may not give a true picture of the current situation. “Data will be unreliable over the festive period as testing and hospital admission patterns change. This will make it difficult to interpret any apparent trends over the next few days,” documents released on Thursday by the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) said.Judges have been told that it is a matter of “common courtesy” in cases involving transgender people to use the personal pronoun and name that a person prefers, and that reporting restrictions could be used to prevent a previous name being disclosed. In updated guidance, they were also reminded that there is a high level of transphobic hate crime, which is believed to be greatly underreported, and that trans people may be apprehensive about coming to court, particularly when there was a risk of possible disclosure of their medical history. The new advice is contained in the “equal treatment benchbook”, a 540-page guide from the Judicial College, which is responsible for training judges in county, crown and higher courts in England and Wales. The guidance, however, is also used by sitting judges. In one of 12 chapters, entitled Trans People, the document states: “It should be possible to respect a person’s gender identity and their present name for nearly all court and tribunal purposes, regardless of whether they have obtained legal recognition of their gender by way of a Gender Recognition Certificate.” A person’s gender at birth or their transgender history should not be disclosed unless it is necessary and relevant to the particular legal proceedings, it adds, before warning that there may be situations where the rights of a witness to refer to a trans person by pronouns matching their gender assigned at birth clash with the trans person’s right to privacy. The guide states that issues around gender identity could and should be addressed at an early, case-management stage, for example instances when a witness might be unwilling or unable to give evidence in a way that maintains the trans person’s privacy. “For example, a victim of domestic abuse or sexual violence at the hands of a trans person may understandably describe the alleged perpetrator and use pronouns consistent with their gender assigned at birth because that is in accordance with the victim’s experience and perception of the events.” In the “rare circumstances” where it is necessary in the proceedings to disclose a person’s previous name and transgender history, the guidance says that the court may consider imposing reporting restrictions to prevent the disclosure of this information. It goes on to observe that the Equality Act 2010 appears to be limited in its explicit protection for trans people, in that the protected characteristic is defined as gender reassignment, adding: “However, its full interpretation and scope has not yet been tested in the appellate courts.” In a foreword, Lady Justice King, the appeal court judge and the chair of the college, described the book as a “living document, constantly updated and amended to reflect changing circumstances and to incorporate the most up-to-date knowledge”. In other sections, the document says the need for swift adoption of remote hearings during the Covid-19 pandemic “has magnified difficulties faced by children and vulnerable adults in hearings”. In relation to sentencing at the time of a pandemic, it advises: “It is permissible to take into account the current conditions in prison arising from Covid-19 protection measures, when deciding whether to suspend a sentence. “For example, the likely impact of a custodial sentence could be heavier if the offender is likely to be confined to a cell for much longer periods than usual. This may be even more so for offenders with mental ill health or impairment.” The most recent edition of the document represents the first major revision in three years.An eighth round of talks on reviving the Iran nuclear deal has begun in Vienna, with Iran saying participants have been largely working from an acceptable common draft text and that its team was willing to stay as long as it takes to reach an agreement. The Iranian foreign minister, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, said he wanted the focus of the coming round of talks to be on how Tehran could verify US sanctions had genuinely been lifted. The landmark 2015 deal, from which Donald Trump withdrew the US, had lifted sanctions on Iran in return for controls on its civilian nuclear programme. “We must reach a point where Iranian oil can be sold easily and without any restrictions so money for that oil can be transferred in foreign currency to Iran’s bank accounts,” Amir-Abdollahian said. He said the negotiators were working from two joint draft texts. The first broadly covers the nature of all the sanctions related to the nuclear deal that the US must lift and the second is on the staging and details of the steps Iran must reverse to come back into compliance with the deal, such as reducing its nuclear stockpile and ending the use of advanced centrifuges. In terms of the third paper on the verification of the lifting of sanctions, Iran has spoken in terms of a fixed volume of oil and industrial exports that must be completed before it need take reciprocal action by returning fully to its compliance with its side of the deal. Iran is concerned western companies will be reluctant to invest in Iran because of fears that a future Republican US president could reimpose sanctions in 2025, putting their investments in jeopardy, as happened in 2018 when Trump pulled out of the deal. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said in a speech in February that sanctions had to be lifted in practice, not just on paper. Research from the Iranian parliament set out the number of barrels of oil to be exported a day and the required value of transactions taking place in Iranian controlled banks in Europe. Although the talks will be difficult, Iran seemed intent on injecting some optimism into a process that began in April. In an important announcement the day before the eighth round, Iran’s atomic energy authority gave a public pledge that it would not seek to enrich uranium above 60%, a promise that came as a relief to Russian negotiators concerned that if Tehran pushed ahead to nuclear weapons-grade 90% enrichment, the European and US delegations would abandon the talks. Western diplomats have said they will not allow the talks to drag on much longer, possibly with early February as the final deadline. They point out the talks first started and were then paused for three months while a new Iranian government reviewed its negotiating position. Israel meanwhile claims Iran is procrastinating while its scientists take Iran secretly closer to a nuclear bomb. Western diplomats accept Iran is closer to breakout time than ever before, but this is not the same as being close to possessing a nuclear weapon. Iran, China, Russia, France, Germany, the UK and the EU attended the talks, with a US delegation indirectly involved – a cumbersome procedure upon which Tehran has insisted even though it has delayed progress. Iran has complained in recent weeks that the European countries, especially France, have taken a position that is indistinguishable from the US. The degree to which Iran needs western sanctions to be lifted to be able to produce a viable budget is contested within the country. The leadership team around the new president, Ebrahim Raisi, claims it can avoid lifting costly subsidies on petrol and still produce a viable budget, a claim rejected by many Iranian economists.Ministers’ crunch talks with energy bosses have failed to deliver a breakthrough despite the industry’s calls for an urgent intervention and a warning from the founder of Ovo Energy that household bills will “almost certainly” double in April. The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, held the virtual meeting on Monday to address fears that the winter energy crisis may escalate after new gas price highs across Europe last week. Kwarteng is understood to have met individually with energy bosses from the UK’s largest energy suppliers about twice each in the week running up to Christmas, when new record energy market highs reignited fears that industry costs could spiral and that more energy suppliers could go bust in the months ahead. However, the joint meeting ended without resolution, with talks over the industry rescue plans drawn up by the regulator expected to continue in the weeks ahead, despite growing calls for urgent action to protect households from the cost of the energy crisis. Stephen Fitzpatrick, chief executive of energy supplier Ovo, told the BBC there had been “nowhere near enough urgency” from the government, even as soaring wholesale costs threatened “an enormous crisis for 2022”. “From where they were April 2021 to April 2022 it looks almost certain now that bills are going to reach £2,000 per household, which is going to be double what they were paying last year,” he said. A source told the Daily Telegraph that the UK faces a “doubling or trebling of bills”, with the government being called on to plug an estimated £20bn rise in the global cost of energy. Gas prices surged last week to 450p a therm, about nine times higher than a year ago, surpassing the record high set in October this year as supplies from Russia slowed despite rising demand to beat the winter cold. “We’ve seen this energy crisis unfold now for the last three months and we’ve watched as energy prices have spiked, fallen back and spiked again,” Fitzpatrick said. “We’ve had more than 30 bankruptcies in the sector, we’ve had millions of customers forced to change supplier. The cost to the consumer has already been more than £4bn.” He added: “We haven’t seen any action from the government or from the regulator. There’s an acceptance that there’s a problem, but nowhere near enough urgency to find a solution.” A government spokesperson confirmed that a meeting was held between the business secretary, energy bosses and Ofgem to discuss “the ongoing effects of record high global gas prices on the sector”. “Throughout the meeting there was discussion of the issues facing the sector and an agreement for meetings to continue over the coming days and weeks to ensure UK consumers are protected,” the spokesperson added. Nigel Pocklington, the chief executive of supplier Good Energy, told investors last week that “no one in the industry is immune” to the surge in market prices, and called on the government to “support the industry at large in navigating these short-term challenges to protect bill-payers and those that serve them”. “This is a national crisis,” Pocklington said. “Wholesale gas and power prices have increased to unprecedented levels over the last three weeks, creating an extremely difficult operating environment for every business in the industry.” Energy bosses are expected to call for the government to offer help to hard-hit households by cutting VAT from bills, and moving green support levies into general taxation. They are also expected to discuss new ways to manage the cost of energy company failures, which has affected millions of households since September. The government also faces growing calls from opposition parties to take action against the energy crisis, which has caused the steepest ever winter bill hike in October and is likely to lead to even larger increases in April when the regulator is due to reset its energy price cap. The Liberal Democrats have calculated that households are likely to pay a total of £100m more for their gas and electricity between Christmas and the new year compared with last year. Ed Davey, the party’s leader, said the government had “totally failed to tackle the problem” and called on ministers to double the financial help offered through the warm home discount scheme.My former tutor Kevin Gornall, who has died aged 47 from a brain tumour, was a design and technology teacher at the all-girls Sandbach high school and sixth form college in Cheshire, where he specialised in engineering. The hours “Mr G” dedicated to his job went far beyond the school day, and he often supported his students in entering science and technology-related national and international competitions, including those run by the Greenpower Education Trust, F1 in Schools and TeenTech. Many of his students used the extracurricular work he organised to support their applications to Arkwright scholarships, industry placements and degree courses in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. Although Kevin and his pupils enjoyed considerable success in many of the competitions they went in for, what truly mattered to him was that his students had fun doing them, and that they gained something from the experience. The medals and podium places were merely a bonus. His commitment was recognised when he was named as outstanding design and technology teacher in 2017 at the Design and Technology Association’s Excellence Awards. His enthusiasm and dedication was supported by his infectious mantra that “nothing is a problem, only an opportunity to find a solution”. More than just a teacher, he truly inspired the next generation of engineers and will be greatly missed by all who were lucky enough to have been taught by him. Born in Rainford, Merseyside, to Margaret (nee Byron), a retail merchandiser, and Gil Gornall, a housing officer, Kevin attended Rainford high school before doing one year of an automotive engineering degree at Coventry University and then returning home to complete an HND in engineering in 1997. Working for a spell in computer-aided design with Martin Roberts, a manufacturing company in Skelmersdale, in 2000 he upped sticks to travel around France as a campsite courier in Normandy, Paris, the Alps and Corsica. It was on a campsite in Paris that he met Sara Lennon, and they became partners, marrying in 2020. On returning to the UK towards the end of 2001, Kevin completed a teaching qualification at Edge Hill University and found his true vocation as a technology teacher, first at Westhoughton high school in Greater Manchester and then, in 2012, at Sandbach high, where he remained until his death. He worked tirelessly for his pupils, inside and outside the classroom, always searching for exciting new projects and experiences that would give them a greater breadth of knowledge beyond the national curriculum. Outside work, Kevin enjoyed working on cars and was a big Formula One fan. He was also a keen traveller and snowboarder, and enjoyed walking his two dogs. He is survived by Sara, his parents, brother Chris, sister Suzanne, three nephews and a niece.My brother, Phil Kitchen, who has died aged 74 after a stroke, was a community support worker and a singer-songwriter. Although born in Yorkshire, he spent most of his life in Newcastle and considered himself a naturalised Geordie. Phil was born in Barnsley, the son of Kathleen (nee Wilkinson), a social worker, and Leslie Kitchen, a priest. He trained as a boy chorister at Wakefield Cathedral and attended Queen Elizabeth’s grammar school in Wakefield. Then he gained a sociology degree (1968) at the University of Kent, and a postgraduate diploma in town planning from the University of Glasgow. In 1972 Phil moved to Newcastle, initially as a community worker with the Young Volunteer Force, supporting the communities of Stanhope Street and Elswick as they were being relocated from poor housing that was going to be demolished. He also set up a centre where residents could voice their concerns and receive support, and helped to organise community festivals to bring people together. Later he was employed by Newcastle city council in Byker and Walker as the shipyards closed. With council cuts, he became an adult basic skills tutor with marginalised groups, encouraging people to write poetry and prose. As a teenager, Phil had been greatly inspired by Bob Dylan. He started writing his own songs in the 1980s after taking part in a creative writing workshop. In the 90s he joined up with John Dowsett, his lodger, to form the band Doctor Socrates and together they made three albums, released in 1996, 1998 and 2009. Retirement in 2007 gave Phil the time to develop his music, and he started working with Arthur Thompson (often called the “Flat Cap Cellist”). His first album under the name Citizen Marra, A Life, was released in 2020. During lockdown, he released a second album, News from the Northern Lands, in September 2021, which he called a “manifesto for a northern utopia”. It documents the impact of the decline in major industries and of austerity on communities, where he believed that poor people had been left behind. Phil loved Newcastle, its people, countryside and coast – and the River Tyne. At the time of his sudden death he was collating songs relating to the Old Northumbria. Phil married and divorced twice. He is survived by Simon and Robert, sons from his marriage to Heather Holmes; by Bethan, his daughter with Jayne Mills; by seven grandchildren; and by his sisters, Mary, Liz and me.Hospitality bosses have welcomed news that the government has ruled out additional Covid restrictions in England before the busy New Year’s Eve trading period. Businesses had been calling for certainty, with bars and restaurants saying they had been left in limbo at a time of potentially lucrative bookings – or costly cancellations. The industry had feared that Boris Johnson and ministers would toughen up Covid-19 measures in England, after the Omicron variant led to a surge in Covid infections. Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland have already imposed tougher Covid rules on physical distancing and the number of people who can meet, including the closure of nightclubs. Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of UKHospitality, the industry body, said the confirmation by Sajid Javid, the health secretary, that no further clampdown would come in England until early 2022 was welcome news for businesses. She said the government had taken a “pragmatic and proportionate approach” which would “give a real lifeline for many who have struggled with the loss of trade in the run up to Christmas”. She added: “Losing new year on top of December would have been devastating, and keeping restrictions to a minimum helps protects businesses and jobs.” The possible restrictions that ministers were reportedly considering, including advice to households not to mix indoors, would have been a lockdown in all but name, she said “with trade pushed to unsustainable levels”. Martin Wolstencroft, the CEO of ARC Inspirations, which runs 18 bars in the north of England, said that having no further restrictions would be “fantastic for the industry”. Speaking before the prime minister confirmed that there would be no changes, he said certainty was needed for “our managers and staff, our customers – who want to know if they can meet up with loved ones – and the full supply chain”. He had planned on the basis that his bars would be open, and had already placed orders, as he said it was not possible to leave everything to the last minute. “This is a very, very profitable time for everyone – it’s when we make the money that gets us through January,” he said. Michael Kill, the chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association (Nita), which represents bars, pubs, nightclubs, restaurants and entertainment venues, said that the decision had come after “an extremely anxious few weeks for our sector”, but he was pleased that the PM had listened. He said: “Our industry can now start to plan with some certainty over the next week, and make up for lost time promoting one of the key nights of the year in the coming days. “It is important that given this opportunity that we continue to recognise our responsibility to the public health strategy, and urge our customers to not only support us during this period but play their part in ensuring that this is the start of our recovery.” On Twitter, Nita called the announcement “amazing news”, saying: “New Years is on!!” Kill said a longer-term strategy was needed, adding: “It is clear that the open, close strategy, which has had a huge impact on our industry, is not sustainable.” Others echoed the call for more clarity. Speaking ahead of Javid’s comments, Paul Askew, the chef patron of the Art School restaurant in Liverpool, said his business was being “eroded” by announcements that had caused anxiety and the cancellation of big group bookings. “This dithering in the middle ground may serve political convenience but not business recovery and confidence,” he said. “The government has to give a clear statement to consumers that it’s safe to go out, or if it isn’t then enact a circuit breaker and compensate all of the businesses affected.” Mark Davyd, CEO of Music Venue Trust, said Johnson needed to provide “a lot more clarity on what his government will be doing in the near future, and in the longer term … there is an urgent need to support public spaces to improve ventilation and air quality, with structured and intelligent public investment.” A £1bn emergency package, consisting of business grants and help with sick pay, which was announced last week by Rishi Sunak, drew an angry response from hospitality bosses, who said it was not nearly enough after a collapse in pre-Christmas trade. Nicholls reaffirmed the warning on Monday, adding: “Without further rate relief and a lower rate of VAT to sustain employment, businesses will fail and jobs will be lost.”Until now, there has never been a platinum jubilee in British history for the simple reason that no monarch of England or Scotland has ever reigned long enough. That is about to change. In six weeks’ time, on 6 February 2022, Elizabeth II will have reigned for 70 years. It is a formidable feat of longevity, and of much else besides. And the royal record book is not full yet. If she remains on the throne until the summer of 2024, the Queen will become the longest-reigning European monarch of all time, eclipsing even the 72 years of the Sun King himself, Louis XIV of France. The Queen’s anniversary will be marked by events throughout 2022, in much the same way as the silver, golden, diamond and sapphire jubilees were marked before it. The climax, during a four-day bank holiday weekend at the start of June, will be comfortably familiar and a great public attraction: street parties, a televised concert, a thanksgiving service, a pageant, a flypast and a royal visit to the Epsom Derby. It promises to be an outpouring of national affection for the Queen and a feelgood event for a country that has been noticeably deprived of fun recently. And yet, although the jubilee formula is well established and well liked, there should be no mistaking that this one will be different. The central difference concerns the part that the Queen herself will be able to play. By the time of the bank holiday weekend, she will be 96. Though she has been, until recently, one of the most active nonagenarians imaginable, she is now clearly slowing down. The House of Windsor’s private motto is said to be that the monarchy must be seen to be believed; the platinum jubilee may be a celebration of a monarch who may be scarcely seen at all. Break the taboo There is no reason why any of this will or should detract either from the 2022 jubilee itself or from the public’s enthusiastic celebration of the Queen over the coming months. But the difference from earlier jubilees underlines that the old order is passing. The overwhelming majority of us have no memory of anyone other than Elizabeth II on the throne or of anyone other than a matriarch embodying the monarchy to Britain and the world. Yet it will not be long before there will be a new monarch, a king, who will face the task of remaking the compact between the crown and the public in his own way. The British monarchy is therefore on the threshold of a new phase after this long, stable – and feminised – period in its history. This is something that those who are directly involved have been quietly discussing and planning for years. The expectation is that this jubilee is likely to be the last major royal occasion before the death of the Queen and the succession of King Charles III. The detailed manuals for these events exist and have been regularly revised. Yet this official preparedness for change in the monarchy does not extend, and is generally discouraged from extending, to the British public. This newspaper believes that Britain needs to talk more – and talk more publicly and seriously – about what should come next. As a nation, we are not good at doing this, partly out of deference to the Queen. The family dimension of the Windsors’ lives is endlessly reported and discussed in the media, while television dramas like The Crown generate vast audiences. But the practical constitutional questions about how this monarchy should work in a modern democracy are still treated as almost completely taboo. This is a humiliating situation. The role of the monarchy and its place within democracy, the state and the rule of law are serious questions. They are, in their way, as important as questions about the electoral and parliamentary systems, the powers of government and how laws are made and changed, all of which intersect in various ways with the monarchy. The monarchy enjoys enviable public support, in part as the embodiment of national stability, but the public also wants it to be a modern monarchy, embodying today’s values. There is a need to talk about all this, and to talk about it before the change happens, not after it has already happened. A question for modern Britain The best way for this to start is in Britain’s parliament, through a select committee – possibly specially convened for the purpose – that can take and collect evidence in public, including from members of the royal family and household if necessary, about a large range of issues. These could include the appropriate constitutional, political and military roles of the monarch, including with other nations; the regulation, financing and accountability of the monarchy; the size of the royal household maintained by the state; the laws of succession and the appropriate ceremonies for the inauguration of the new monarch, including their religious dimension, the coronation and the coronation oath. These issues are an important case in point. The next coronation will be a tourist money-spinner for Britain. But it will also have immense constitutional meaning. The oath that the new monarch swears embodies issues of church and state that are especially problematic in a nation with an established church, and in which less than half of the public describe themselves as religious believers of any kind. The sacral anointment behind a screen of the monarch as a person set apart from the nation and its laws is an especially remarkable challenge for a multi-faith and often largely secular nation. No other constitutional monarchy in Europe attempts all this any longer. Most have decided that the succession is for parliament to decide and administer. Why not Britain too? Let’s at least talk about it. If there is not a serious effort in the very near future to formulate and discuss these questions about the new reign in public, we will one day find that they have already been answered pre-emptively by the monarch-to-be and senior civil servants, but without any public involvement. That contains risks, including for the monarchy, which Britain is unused to confronting during the Queen’s long reign. What should happen in future to our constitutional monarchy is an entirely proper question for modern Britain to consider, especially now and during the celebrations of 2022. The questions are parliament’s business and they are the public’s business too. They should not be concealed or brushed aside as something that is nothing to do with the rest of us.Boris Johnson is “a significant drag on Tory fortunes”, according to a poll that tested the Conservative party’s chances at the next election with different leaders at the helm. The current chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has a much better chance of challenging Keir Starmer’s Labour than the incumbent prime minister, according to the poll by Opinium shared exclusively with the Guardian. The research found the party would be 60 seats worse off under Johnson, compared with Sunak. However, other potential leadership rivals the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and the levelling up secretary, Michael Gove, fared worse than Johnson, with the former estimated to lose 40 more seats and the latter 70 seats more. The pollster found 39% of people asked intended to vote Labour at the next election, seven points ahead of the Conservatives on 32%. But when Johnson’s name was added to the voting intention question, Tory support dipped below 30%, and Labour’s lead increased from seven to 12%. Sunak emerged as by far the most attractive successor, with Labour maintaining its lead but by just three points if the chancellor was to take over as leader. The nine-point difference between a 12-point and three-point lead was worth about 60 seats that Tories would lose with Johnson but retain with Sunak, the polling suggested. Commenting on the findings, Peter Kellner, the former president of the YouGov opinion polling organisation, said: “It might be expected that simply reminding voters of the names of the two main party leaders would make little difference to voting intentions. “The fact that it shifts the party lead by five points suggests that Johnson is now a significant drag on Tory fortunes.” Voters were asked: “Please imagine that at the next election [NAME] was leader of the Conservative party and Keir Starmer was the leader of the Labour party. Who do you think you would vote for?” As well as Johnson, Opinium asked people how they would vote under three further scenarios: if Sunak, Liz Truss or Michael Gove led the Tories – and in each scenario assumed that Starmer remained Labour’s leader. Truss is far less popular with the wider public than with Conservative activists, the polling suggests. The latest survey of party members conducted by the Conservative Home website showed her as their favourite successor to Johnson, with Sunak second. However, Opinium’s figures suggest that she would do even worse than Johnson, and far worse than Sunak, and lead the Tories to a crushing 16-point defeat. Gove, however, would do worse again, according to the poll. With him as leader, the Tories would lag Labour by 18 points. Kellner added: “As with all such polls, the numbers may change. Truss could reasonably argue that she is not yet as well known as Sunak; were she to be elected party leader, she would have ample opportunity to burnish her image. “In contrast, Sunak might face a difficult spring, as living standards fall, with inflation outstripping pay, and tax rises coming in April. “Even so, the gulf between Sunak and Truss is currently big enough to make the choice of Truss as leader a clear electoral risk.” The seat predictions are based on a uniform swing, that is, they take no account of local factors, tactical voting or boundary changes and should be regarded as a broad guide, not a precise projection. The research showed Johnson projected to win 203 seats, compared with 263 under Sunak, 162 under Truss and 136 if the party were led by Gove. The Conservative party currently holds 361 seats; 326 are needed to form a majority government. The poor polling for Johnson, which also includes a poll commissioned by the Sunday Times showing on Sunday Labour surging to an eight-point lead over the Tories, comes after a torrid period of sleaze scandals for Johnson and his party. The Owen Paterson lobbying scandal that ultimately led to the Tories losing a seat they had held for 200 years at a byelection, the refurbishment of the prime minister’s Downing Street flat and various claims of lockdown parties in Whitehall and No 10 have all damaged Johnson and the Conservatives’ reputation, against a backdrop of surging Covid cases and the prospect of more restrictions nearly two years into the pandemic.Conservative MPs in marginal seats will enter 2022 with an agonising dilemma. Do they stay loyal to Boris Johnson, who helped them win two years ago, or depose him in order to keep their seats next time? Opinium’s figures show that Johnson has lost his personal appeal, at least for the moment. Opinium’s normal voting intention question, reported in the Observer on Sunday, showed Labour on 39%, seven points ahead of the Conservatives on 32%. But when Johnson’s name is added to the voting intention question, Tory support dips below 30%, and Labour’s lead increases five percentage points to 12%. It might be expected that simply reminding voters of the names of the two main party leaders would make little difference to voting intentions. The fact that it shifts the party lead by five points suggests that Johnson is now a significant drag on Tory fortunes. Perhaps some Conservative-inclined respondents intend to stay with the party if he goes before the next election – but not if he stays. Opinium proceeded to ask people how they would vote under three further scenarios: if Rishi Sunak, Liz Truss or Michael Gove led the Tories. (Each scenario assumed that Keir Starmer remained Labour’s leader.) Sunak emerges as by far the most attractive successor. Labour stays ahead, but by just three points. The nine-point difference between a 12% and 3% lead is worth about 60 seats that Tories would lose with Johnson but retain with Sunak – the great majority to Labour, but a handful at risk to the Liberal Democrats and Scottish National Party. Liz Truss is far less popular with the wider public than with Conservative activists. The latest survey of party members conducted by the Conservative Home website shows her as their favourite successor to Johnson, with Sunak second. However, Opinium’s figures suggest that she would do even worse than Johnson, and far worse than Sunak, and lead the Tories to a crushing 16-point defeat. Her one crumb of comfort is that Gove would do even worse: with him as leader, the Tories would lag Labour by 18 points. As with all such polls, the numbers may change. Truss could reasonably argue that she is not yet as well known as Sunak; were she to be elected party leader, she would have ample opportunity to burnish her image. In contrast, Sunak might face a difficult spring as living standards fall, with inflation outstripping pay, and tax rises coming in April. Even so, the gulf between Sunak and Truss is currently big enough to make the choice of Truss as leader a clear electoral risk. Meanwhile one intriguing feature of Opinium’s figures is that they contradict the fashionable theory that female voters have become especially hostile to Johnson. To be sure, the normal voting figures confirm the finding of other polls that Labour leads the Tories by women (11% in this poll) more than men (4%) – a gender gap of seven points. But it seems that this reflects a general verdict on the government as a whole, more than a personal rejection of Johnson. If Johnson were a particular target of women’s dislike, we would expect the gender gap to widen further when his name is added to the voting question. Instead, it disappears completely: In a Starmer-Johnson contest, Labour leads by 12% among both men and women. The five-point increase in Labour’s lead is driven by men far more than women. With Sunak, Truss and Gove, the gender gap returns (4, 8 and 8 points respectively): it is only with Johnson that it disappears completely. And as the same respondents answered all five voting questions, we can be confident that the extra hostility to Johnson uncovered by this survey really is more common among men than women. Peter Kellner is a political analyst and former president of YouGovMy friend James Law, who has died aged 65 of a heart attack, was one of the world’s leading researchers into child language development. His research was dedicated to improving the lives of children with communication needs and to the transformation of public health approaches to speech and language therapy. He was born in Guildford, the son of Rosemary (nee Bowman), an interior designer, and Douglas Law, a lawyer and publisher. After education at Wellington college, and a degree in linguistics and history at East Anglia University, James trained in London at the Kingdon Ward School of Speech Therapy (now part of City, University of London) where, from the first, his approach was creative and individual. Always drawn to working with children and young people, he believed in gaining the trust of the whole family, understanding the story. A born collaborator, James relished his first academic role as a lecturer at City, stoking an atmosphere of enquiry and debate, and rising to be head of the department of speech therapy. In 2003 he moved with his partner Jane Macer and their two young children, Isla and Euan, to Scotland, where they both had family ties and a much-loved cottage in the Highlands. For a while James co-ordinated health services research across the Edinburgh region but in 2010 was invited to take up a chair at Newcastle University. As professor of speech and language sciences, he finally found the freedom to expand his interest in child language development, travelling the world to share, learn and connect. Students and colleagues attest as to how tirelessly he gave of his time and knowledge. One student remembers a phone conversation from a train in which connection failed 10 times. He persisted and finished the call. James was a modest man, and it was hard to draw him out on the the subject of being appointed OBE in 2018 for services to the profession he had worked so diligently to shape. Those close to him, however, knew how much this meant, because it indicated that “the work had been heard”. James brought people together, across disciplines, to explore what interventions worked and made a real difference to vulnerable children and their families. In recent years he led a European-funded research network over 43 countries in 30 languages, studies from which will benefit children for years to come. His insight and wry humour will be greatly missed. He and Jane married in 2017. She survives him, along with Euan and Isla, and his brother, Nicholas.Speaking to state governors on Monday, Joe Biden said the dramatic surge in US Covid cases caused by the Omicron variant “should be a source of concern but it should not be a source of panic”. “If you’re fully vaccinated and got your booster shot,” Biden said, “you’re highly protected. If you’re unvaccinated, you’re at a high risk of getting severely ill from Covid-19, being hospitalised and in some cases dying.” Omicron accounts for 73% of US coronavirus infections, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said last week. The president outlined plans to help states tackle the rising caseload. But he did so as uncertainty and disruption continued to spread, particularly in the aviation industry, and as his chief medical adviser said Americans should avoid large New Year’s Eve events. “When we are talking about a New Year’s Eve party … I would recommend strongly stay away from that this year. There will be other years to do that, but not this year,” Anthony Fauci told CNN. Fauci added that he hoped the surge in cases would subside in January. But he said infections could still overwhelm hospitals, especially in highly unvaccinated areas. “We really still need to be extremely careful,” he told MSNBC. New York, home to a traditionally huge celebration in Times Square, has said this year’s event will be scaled back. Authorities said 15,000 people would be allowed into official viewing areas, down from 58,000. The president and Fauci’s statement comes as health authorities on Monday shortened the recommended isolation time for Americans with asymptomatic cases to five days, down from the previous guidance of 10 days. The CDC said after isolation, asymptomatic people should follow with five days of wearing a mask when around others. It also recommended a five-day quarantine for those exposed to the virus who are unvaccinated or are more than six months out from their second mRNA dose or more than two months after the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine and not yet boosted. “CDC’s updated recommendations for isolation and quarantine balance what we know about the spread of the virus and the protection provided by vaccination and booster doses,” said Rochelle Walensky, the CDC director, in a statement. Biden last week announced reinforcements to bolster hospitals and testing, but some experts say that effort is too little, too late. On Monday, the president and his Covid advisers met with the group representing state governors. Biden said: “There is no federal solution. This gets solved at state level. It gets down to where the rubber meets the road – where the patient needs help, or preventing the need for help.” His message, he said, was simple: “If you need something, say something. We’re going to have your back any way we can.” He also outlined three federal measures to help states: more capacity “to get shots in arms”; more testing, from eight authorised home tests and from federally run pop-up locations; and more federal support for hospitals. “We have so many [people] vaccinated and boosted [that] we’re not seeing hospitalisation rise as sharp as it did in March of 2020 or even this past fall,” Biden said. “America has made progress, and things are better,” he said. But Biden also said he anticipated rising hospitalisations. The federal government has stockpiled millions of gowns, gloves, masks and ventilators. Additionally, Biden said: “We’re mobilizing an additional 1,000 military doctors and nurses and medics to help staff hospitals.” The Federal Emergency Management Agency, Biden said, would deploy hundreds of ambulances and emergency crews, and had deployed emergency response teams in Colorado, Michigan, Minnesota, Vermont, New Hampshire and New Mexico. “We’re ready to provide more hospital beds as well,” Biden said. “Bottom line is, I want assure the American people we are prepared and we know what it takes.” Americans seeking to travel over the Christmas weekend saw chaos as the Omicron surge snarled air travel. Fight crews contracted the virus, causing thousands of cancellations. More than 800 flights were canceled within, into, or out of the US on Monday, the flight-tracking website FlightAware.com showed. That was on top of more than 3,000 cancellations during the Christmas holiday weekend. Shares of American Airlines, United Airlines, Delta Air Lines and Southwest Airlines were down in early trading. Most airline stocks have rallied on hopes of a travel boom as travelers start visiting friends and family after pandemic-related restrictions. But poor weather has added to travelers’ woes. Southwest said it had canceled about 50 of 3,600 flights on Monday due to weather problems. Winter weather led to nearly 250 flight cancellations to or from Seattle on Sunday, said Alaska Airlines, which expected more than 100 cancellations on Monday. It said Covid was no longer a factor. United said it canceled 115 flights on Monday, out of more than 4,000, due to crews out with Covid. Delta and American did not immediately comment. Fauci said a vaccine mandate should be “seriously” considered for domestic flights. “You’ve got to ask yourself why you’re making that requirement,” Fauci told MSNBC. “If you’re making a requirement for vaccination for people to get on planes who are coming into the country, that’s understandable. You don’t want to bring more cases into the country. “But if you’re talking about requiring vaccination to get on a plane domestically, that is just another one of the requirements that I think is reasonable to consider.” Fauci declined to indicate whether he had discussed a mandate with Biden, but did reiterate that mandates can push more people to get vaccinated. “When you make vaccination a requirement, that’s another incentive to get more people vaccinated,” he said. “If you want to do that with domestic flights, I think that’s something that seriously should be considered.” Other travel stocks also came under pressure on Monday. At least three cruise ships were forced to return to port over the weekend after Covid cases were detected. Infections are up across the US, with 205,509 new infections reported on average each day, a Reuters tally shows. More than 816,000 people have died. In New York, Monday saw a sweeping mandate take effect, requiring nearly all private-sector businesses to ban unvaccinated employees from the workplace. Workers at about 184,000 New York businesses were required to show proof they had received at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. Businesses that do not comply could face fines starting at $1,000. The outgoing mayor, Bill de Blasio, has said imposing penalties will be a last resort. Employers have to verify and keep a record of each worker’s proof of vaccination. Workers who have received only one shot have to get a second within 45 days. Companies must display a sign affirming they are complying with the rule “in a conspicuous location”.My friend Berry Mayall, who has died aged 85 of cancer, was an indefatigable academic, and wanted to go on making a difference for as long as she could. She was not religious, but she came from a Methodist background, and her attitudes were grounded in the idea of service to others and modest consumption. Visiting her in her tiny cottage in Suffolk was like going back to an earlier age, not just minimalist, but without any unnecessary comfort or decoration. She also grew fruit and vegetables in the garden there, and at an allotment in London, where she had a flat in a house shared with her daughter and grandchildren. Berry was born in Leicester, the youngest of the three children of Dorothy and George Standing; her mother taught tailoring at the WI and her father was a schoolteacher. She graduated in English from Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1958, but came to academia late, after teaching and social work jobs. All her academic life was spent at the Institute of Education (now part of UCL), from the time she joined in 1973 as a researcher at its Thomas Coram Research Unit under Professor Jack Tizard. After her cancer was operated on in 2018 she hoped to go back to her work, but eventually in 2019 she accepted retirement and in 2021 was made professor emeritus. She made an international impact with her work on childhood. Children she thought of as equals, regarding them as being oppressed in everyday life. She was also furious at government policies that made life difficult for children, especially those living in poor circumstances. Her legacy of analytical papers and books explores the constraints of being a child, in different eras, and in different societal settings. Visionary Women and Visible Children: England 1900-1920 (2017) was her last paper. A good mentor, she would carefully read through the work of students and colleagues, expecting everything to be well written. She was also very supportive and a good listener when there were personal difficulties. She was not entirely self-denying. Once a month she and I used to go to Sunday morning Bach concerts at the Royal Academy of Music, and have lunch out afterwards, although she was exceptionally scrupulous in sharing out the costs. We went together on occasional trips abroad, usually centred around attendance at a conference. On these trips she was notoriously irritable and anxious, making her a difficult travelling companion, but she always perked up and enjoyed small and unexpected events, and made insightful observations. In 1964 she married James Mayall. Though they parted company early on, they remained on good terms. She is survived by her daughter, Hannah, and four grandchildren, and by her sister, Gillie.Ministers have confirmed that no new Covid-19 restrictions will be imposed in England before the new year. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, told reporters there will be “no further measures before the new year”, adding: “Of course people should remain cautious as we approach new year celebrations and take a lateral flow test if that makes sense, celebrate outdoors if you can, have some ventilation indoors if you can.” It puts England at odds with the rest of the United Kingdom in how people will be allowed to ring in the new year. Here is what you can, and cannot, do: Scotland There will be limits on the size of live public events for three weeks beginning 26 December. Indoor events will be limited to 100 standing or 200 seated, while outdoors events will be limited to 500 seated or standing. This means many public New Year’s Eve celebrations in Scotland, including Edinburgh’s main Hogmanay street party, have been cancelled. Nightclubs will be closed for three weeks from 27 December. Pubs, bars and other settings where alcohol is being served will return to table service only. One-metre social distancing will be enforced in all indoor hospitality and leisure settings. England In England, Covid passes for nightclubs and other venues have been in place as of 15 December. People are required to show they have been vaccinated or recently tested negative (or are exempt) to gain entry. This applies to indoor events with 500 or more attenders where people are likely to stand or move around, such as music venues, certain outdoor events, such as music festivals, and any events with 10,000 or more in attendance. Face coverings are compulsory in most indoor public venues, including theatres and cinemas as well as on public transport and in shops. Masks are not required in pubs or restaurants. Wales People wishing to celebrate in pubs, cinemas and restaurants must do so in groups of six or fewer. Licensed premises will be restricted to table service only, face masks will have to be worn and contact tracing details collected. Social distancing of two metres will be in place and nightclubs are closed from Boxing Day. Large events will not be allowed, with a maximum of 30 people in indoor events and a maximum of 50 people at outdoor events. Northern Ireland From Boxing Day, nightclubs will be closed and indoor standing events are banned. Dancing is banned in hospitality venues, but this will not apply to weddings. Pubs, restaurants and cafes will be restricted to table service only and a maximum of six people (or 10 from a single household) are allowed at a table. This excludes children aged 12 and under.My friend and colleague Hilary Perraton, who has died aged 86 of cancer, played a key role in developing distance learning. He was one of the first employees of the National Extension College (NEC), established in 1963 by Michael Young (Lord Young of Dartington) as a pilot for an open university. Later he helped to promote these new methods in less developed countries. Hilary was born in Lee-on-the-Solent in Hampshire to Leslie, a college lecturer, and Marjorie, a teacher. He attended Churcher’s College school in Petersfield and then learned Russian during his national service years. He studied history at St Catherine’s College, Cambridge, where he met fellow student Jean Warner, whom he married in 1960, two years after his graduation. His first job was for the London county council, “looking after dustbins”, as he put it. From there he went to the Associated Examinations Board as an administrative officer, before joining the newly established NEC. There he helped to pioneer courses combining TV and radio broadcasts, written materials, science kits, postal tutorials and occasional face-to-face sessions. By 1971 he had joined the International Extension College so that he could help to develop these new methods for the benefit of people in developing countries and, on secondment in 1973, he helped to establish the Botswana Extension College. On his return two years later he worked with Young and colleagues to devise a co-operative arrangement with the University of London Institute of Education to provide accredited courses in distance learning. In 1983 Hilary moved to the Commonwealth Secretariat where, drawing on his extensive contacts across the Commonwealth, he was chief architect with Lord (Asa) Briggs in creating the Commonwealth of Learning to promote the use of distance learning methods for socio-economic development. He moved to Barbados in 1994 to develop such programmes for the University of the West Indies and then, on returning to Cambridge in 1996, founded and directed the International Research Foundation on Open Learning. His many publications included Open and Distance Learning in the Developing World (2000). His colleagues found him scrupulously, often stubbornly, honest in his judgments, incredibly supportive, and totally uninterested in status or self-promotion. Nevertheless, the Commonwealth of Learning awarded him an honorary fellowship and, in 2005, he received an honorary doctorate from the Open University. A lifelong reader of the Guardian and a member of the Labour party, he was passionately interested in current affairs, and in retirement from 2002 onwards wrote several books exploring how and why people have travelled abroad to study, including A History of Foreign Students in Britain (2014). He also found time, for some years, to serve as treasurer for an annual Oxfam Walk, and revived his Russian by reading Russian novels with a U3A group. Holidays were always important and he loved to walk in the Lake District and along the South West Coast Footpath, a love he passed on to his children. He is survived by Jean, their children Jonathan and Claire and granddaughter Ruby.A heavy Christmas weekend storm blanketed the mountains of northern California and Nevada in snow, causing whiteout conditions and closing highways in the Sierra Nevada. Forecasters have warned that travel in the Sierra Nevada, the mountainous region along the California-Nevada border, could be difficult for several days. Three people were injured in a 20-car pileup on US route 395, officials near Reno said, amid limited visibility on Sunday. Farther west, a 70-mile (112km) stretch of Interstate 80 from Colfax, California, through the Lake Tahoe region to the Nevada state line was shut due to the snow, low visibility and downed trees and power lines. The winter weather brought 16ft of snow to the Sierra this month, breaking a 50-year record in the state. “We smashed the previous record,” Andrew Schwartz, the lead scientist for UC Berkeley’s Central Sierra Snow Laboratory, told KTVU on Monday. “This is, officially, the snowiest December on record.” The region could see 200in of snow by Tuesday morning, Schwartz told the news station. In Placer county, which stretches from the valley to the shore of Lake Tahoe, officials asked that residents stay home on Monday. “Emergency crews cannot keep up with the snow-packed roads and downed trees. Please stay home. Backroads expected to have same issues,” the sheriff’s office said on Twitter. Ski resorts in the popular tourist destination were largely closed. Meanwhile, the California Department of Transportation closed many roads and warned of slippery conditions for motorists. “Expect major travel delays on all roads,” the National Weather Service office in Reno, Nevada, said Sunday on Twitter. “Today is the type of day to just stay home if you can. More snow is on the way too!” Possible “widespread whiteout conditions” and wind gusts of more than 45mph (72kph) were expected in greater Lake Tahoe. The weather service issued a winter storm warning for the area until 1am Tuesday. Turbulent weather stretched from Seattle to San Diego and across the west. More than a foot (0.3 meters) of snow was reported near Port Angeles on Washington state’s Puget Sound. Portland, Oregon, received a dusting, but the city was expected to get another 2.5in (6 centimeters) by Monday morning, according to the weather service. The National Weather Service office in Great Falls, Montana, issued a warning through Tuesday of “dangerously cold wind chills” as low as 55 below zero that “could cause frostbite on exposed skin in as little as 5 minutes”. In California, heavy rain caused rockslides that closed more than 40 miles (64km) of coastal Highway 1 in the Big Sur region south of the San Francisco Bay Area. There was no estimate for the reopening of the scenic stretch, which is frequently shut after wet weather. Heavy rain in southern California flooded streets and knocked down power lines Saturday, in the latest of a series of blustery storms. Powerful gusts toppled trees, damaged carports and blew a track-and-field shed from a Goleta high school into a front yard two blocks away, according to the Santa Barbara county fire department. No injuries were reported. More than 1.8in (4.5 centimeters) of rain fell over 24 hours in Santa Barbara county’s San Marcos pass, while Rocky Butte in San Luis Obispo county recorded 1.61in (4 centimeters), the weather service said. At Los Angeles international airport, a “storm-related electrical issue” forced a partial closure of Terminal 5, causing post-Christmas passengers to divert to other terminals for certain services, prompting a warnings of delays and cancellations to flights. In the San Bernardino Mountains east of Los Angeles, crews were repairing a section of State Route 18 that washed down a hillside after heavy rain late Thursday. The closure of the major route into the Big Bear ski resort area could last for weeks, officials said. The heavy rains and snow were welcomed in parched California, where the Sierra snowpack had been at dangerously low levels after weeks of dry weather. But the state Department of Water Resources reported on Christmas Eve that the snowpack was between 114% and 137% of normal across the range, with more snow expected. Up to 8ft (2.4 meters) of snow was predicted at the highest elevations of the Sierra. Before Sunday, 20in (50 centimeters) of snow already had fallen at Homewood on Lake Tahoe’s west shore. About a foot (30 centimeters) was reported at Northstar near Truckee, California, and 10in (25 centimeters) at the Mount Rose ski resort on the south-west edge of Reno.Clashes have reportedly broken out between hunters and protesters during a tense Boxing Day meet in Wiltshire. Video footage shared on social media appeared to show punches being thrown from both sides as mounted riders moved through Lacock village, near Chippenham, for the annual Avon Vale Boxing Day hunt. The Hunt Saboteurs Association (HSA) has accused hunters of resorting to violence on one of the biggest days in the hunting industry’s calendar. Like many hunts of its kind, the Boxing Day hunt took place on 27 December because this year’s holiday fell on a Sunday, traditionally a day of rest for the hunting community. It is not clear how the fighting broke out or who was involved. Footage showed anti-hunt protesters shouting “shame on you” at a group of riders and in another video, a woman holding a sign is pushed to the ground. Wiltshire police said officers attended the hunt at about 11am after “concerns were raised about tensions between those involved in the hunt and protesters”. They said the two groups were dispersed and no arrests had been made at this stage. A statement from the Avon Vale Hunt said: “The hunt has been made aware of an incident that occurred just after the hounds had left the meet in Lacock today. We do not know the circumstances but we do not condone violence even in the case of extreme provocation by anti-hunting protesters. “We would like to thank the many hundreds of people who peacefully attended today in support of our hounds.” Despite the worsening Covid-19 situation and growing calls to ban the practice on public land, many Boxing Day hunts went ahead this year. Critics are demanding the prohibition on public land of a sport they believe is often merely a front for illegal foxhunting. The Scottish Greens renewed their call for an outright ban on foxhunting in Scotland. An HSA spokesperson said: “Foxhunters’ backs are against the wall and they’re increasingly resorting to violence as the pressure increases.”The Los Angeles police department has released body-camera footage and surveillance video of an incident in which an officer shot and killed a 14-year-old girl inside a department store while firing at another person. The footage from the Thursday morning incident shows that as soon as police encountered a man suspected of assault inside the store, an officer fired three bullets at him from a distance. One of the officer’s bullets struck the girl when it bounced off the floor and into the dressing room where she was with her mother, police said on Monday. The 14-year-old victim has been identified as Valentina Orellana-Peralta, according to the LA county medical examiner’s office, which ruled the death to be a homicide from a gunshot wound to the chest. Orellana-Peralta died on the scene at the Burlington Coat Factory store in North Hollywood. The officer who fired the shots was put on paid leave, and has not been identified. The man shot by police upon arrival was Daniel Elena Lopez, 24, who also died on the scene, officials said. Attorneys representing the family of Orellana-Peralta said in a statement Monday that the girl was in the dressing room with her mother, trying on Christmas dresses, and that she died in her mother’s arms. Police received several 911 calls for help, according to audio released on Monday. One woman, who appeared to work at the store, told police there was a “hostile customer”, who was “attacking” people, and that she was directing people to evacuate the store. That caller said that the man had a bike lock that he was using to assault and threaten people, but told the dispatcher it did not appear he had a knife or a gun. Other panicked callers said they believed the man might have a gun. Footage released from inside the store suggests that Elena Lopez did not have a gun. Officials have said they uncovered only the bike lock. The videos show Elena Lopez wandering around the store with his bike and hitting several customers, including people as they started to evacuate. At one point, he was hitting the air while no one was around him. Just before police arrived, he started repeatedly attacking a woman who ended up on the ground, the video shows. Eventually, roughly a dozen officers entered the store. One officer with an assault rifle initially ordered the other officers to “slow down” and “get distance” and “back up” before they approached Elena Lopez. That officer said he would take lead. But the officer’s body camera footage showed that as soon as he made it to the store aisle where Elena Lopez was standing and saw the man for the first time, he fired three bullets in rapid succession at him. The footage did not capture the officer making any commands, and did not show Elena Lopez advancing toward the officer. Elena Lopez was at the other end of the store aisle from the officer and appeared to be turning away from him. The victim, who was bleeding, was on the ground next to the officer when he fired his weapon. “This chaotic incident resulting in the death of an innocent child is tragic and devastating for everyone involved. I am profoundly sorry for the loss of this young girl’s life and I know there are no words that can relieve the unimaginable pain for the family,” said Michel Moore, LAPD chief, in a statement. Both the California attorney general’s office and the California Department of Justice will be investigating the shooting. The footage, released late Monday afternoon, has raised concerns about the use of deadly force and why the officer fired at Elena Lopez without making commands and while Elena Lopez was far from the victim and the officer. “There was nothing in the video that justified opening fire the way the police officer with the assault rifle did,” said John Hamasaki, a criminal defense lawyer who is a member of the San Francisco police commission and regularly reviews footage of police killings. “I was shocked to see the video … Deadly force is the last option on the table.” Hamasaki noted that police are trained to try to first control a situation with commands, which did not appear to happen in this case. He also noted that police have been focused on deescalation for years, but that there seemed to be little effort to communicate with the man to deescalate the situation before the killing. The death of a 14-year-old bystander has sparked outrage across the US. Domingo García, president of the League of United Latin American Citizens, said in a statement: “It is indefensible that trained Los Angeles police officers could open fire in a crowded store at the height of Christmas shopping without first knowing for sure if the suspect was armed.” The case has also drawn comparisons to an LAPD killing in 2018, when an officer fired at a suspect inside a Trader Joe’s store and in the process killed a store manager. LAPD killings have sharply increased this year – the department has fatally shot 18 people in 2021, compared with seven in 2020, according to the LA Times. On Sunday, the department announced that an officer had fatally shot another man who was allegedly holding a knife. Maya Yang contributed reporting.Jury deliberations resumed on Monday in Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial in federal court in Manhattan. The trial began in earnest on 29 November. Maxwell, 60, is being tried on six counts for alleged involvement in her ex-boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of girls, some as young as 14. Maxwell has pleaded not guilty. Epstein, a financier and convicted sex offender whose associates included Prince Andrew, Donald Trump and Bill Clinton, was arrested in July 2019 for sex trafficking girls. He killed himself in a Manhattan federal jail, where he was awaiting his own trial, about a month after his arrest. Deliberations in Maxwell’s trial began last Monday, before a break for Christmas. On Monday morning, a week after the conclusion of closing arguments, members of the media resumed their long – and cold – vigil outside the courthouse in lower Manhattan. The atmosphere was somewhat deflated, amid speculation that some jurors might return to the court Covid-positive, as the Omicron variant surges through the city. It appeared the jurors avoided infection. Just before 10.30am, the panel sent the court a note. It requested a variety of office supplies, including “different color Post-its”, white poster board and highlighters in different colors. The jurors also asked to see testimony from Matt, the former boyfriend of Jane, the first Maxwell accuser to testify at trial, and asked for a definition of “enticement”. Maxwell is accused of luring minors into Epstein’s orbit. The judge, Alison Nathan, said she would point the jurors to her instructions, and said she would tell them “entice means to attract, induce, or lure using hope or desire”. Just after 11am, jurors sent another note, requesting testimony from Gregory Parkinson, a former police officer who led a search of Epstein’s property in Palm Beach, Florida, in October 2005. During his testimony, on 3 December, Parkinson walked jurors through a video of this search and answered questions about still images presented onscreen. “Mr Parkinson, what is the green object?” the prosecution asked, in reference to one image. “That is a portable, collapsable massage table,” Parkinson said. During Parkinson’s testimony, the prosecution asked Judge Nathan for permission to take government exhibit 51 into the courtroom. A detective then walked in, carrying a folded massage table. Parkinson got down from the witness stand, put on a pair of gloves and looked at the table while it was in its folded position. He returned to the witness stand. The detective who brought the massage table into court opened it. Parkinson was asked to describe what he saw. “The table itself in an open position,” he said. On Monday morning, Maxwell seemed to be in good spirits. When she walked into the courtroom moments before 10.30am, sporting a camel turtleneck and black pants, she hugged each of her lawyers. One, Jeffrey Pagliuca, said: “Happy birthday.” Maxwell turned 60 on Christmas Day. At about 3pm, jurors requested to see the transcript of testimony from David Rodgers, one of Epstein’s former pilots. Before Nathan dismissed jurors around 5pm, she told them that if they didn’t reach a verdict on Tuesday, they should be prepared to stay late going forward. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlA police officer said he was “honestly shocked” to see a motorist had driven for more than 30 miles along the M25 in a car so badly damaged its rear end was hanging off. PC Serge Hadfield, from Surrey police, stopped the car near Cobham on Sunday after a member of the public called the police. He found the bumper of the Porsche “literally bouncing out of the boot”. “[Hadfield] also couldn’t believe that we had only had one call on it at the time,” Surrey police told the PA news agency. The force tweeted an image of the vehicle showing the damage to the back of the car. “We stopped this vehicle seen driving on the M25 near Cobham,” they wrote. “The driver told officers he had crashed the car on the M25 in Kent and thought it would be OK to continue the journey in this condition.” The driver, aged late 50s to early 60s, was pulled over at Cobham Services in Surrey after being picked up at junction nine. He gave a positive breath test but was under the legal drink-drive limit, Surrey police said. The car had been “prohibited from use on the road” and the driver reported for driving a vehicle in a dangerous condition. “The driver will now seek alternative travel arrangements,” they added.Boris Johnson will not introduce further Covid restrictions in England before 2022, giving mass events the go-ahead and leaving nightclubs open for New Year’s Eve – in contrast with all other UK nations. Scientists criticised the decision, which came as England recorded its highest number of Covid infections. One said it was the moment of “the greatest divergence between scientific advice and legislation” seen since the start of the pandemic. The announcement came after advisers told Johnson that significant NHS pressures were coming from staff absences rather than overcrowded intensive care units. One model has predicted that in London, where Covid rates are highest, up to 40% of staff could be absent because of sickness. Ministers are expected to continue to focus efforts on vaccination – including the booster rollout. Sources say most of the cases behind the rise in hospital admissions are people who are unvaccinated. The decision not to introduce curbs makes England an outlier in the UK, after Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland put limits on social gatherings and mass events. Johnson’s cabinet rejected new measures before Christmas, as cases of the Omicron variant started to rise. Three cabinet ministers who spoke to the Guardian on Monday said they remained deeply sceptical that any further measures were necessary. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said people should take steps themselves to protect others. “We won’t be taking any further measures. Of course people should remain cautious as we approach new year celebrations and take a lateral flow test if that makes sense, celebrate outdoors if you can, have some ventilation indoors if you can,” he said. The call for caution was reiterated by the prime minister in a series of tweets on Monday night. “We will continue to monitor the data carefully, but there will be no new restrictions introduced in England before the new year,” he said. “However, I would urge everyone to continue to act cautiously given the rising number of Omicron cases. “Most importantly I urge everyone to get their first, second or booster jab without delay to protect yourselves and your loved ones.” England recorded 1,281 people admitted to hospital in England on Christmas Day – the most recent available figure – up from 1,020 the day before. Though it is the highest figure since mid-February, it is well below the highest in the pandemic when admissions reached 4,134 last January. Downing Street has been hopeful that if admissions in London stay below 400 a day, NHS capacity should remain stable. According to the latest data, 364 patients were admitted to hospital with Covid on Christmas Day in London, down slightly from a high of 390 admitted on 23 December. Case rates reached a new high of 113,628 on Christmas Day and fell to 98,515 on Monday, though the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) has previously cautioned that data will be unreliable over the festive period as testing and hospital admission patterns change. Johnson’s decision to rule out further curbs this year came after a crunch summit he chaired online from his Chequers residence, with England’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, and the government’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance. Messaging from government will instead put an emphasis on personal responsibility. “Nothing in the data around hospitalisations is showing we need to put our foot on the accelerator,” a Number 10 source said. “It is not accelerating as quickly as it might have done. We just need to keep a close watch.” Javid said the most recent data showed there were disproportionate numbers of unvaccinated people being admitted to hospital and that there were 1.5m vaccination slots available over the next few days. “Can I please say to people, please do come forward,” he said. “Protect yourselves, protect your loved ones and protect your community.” Officials monitoring the data suggested that although there was a climb in hospital admissions, there was a more positive picture emerging when officials examined how long people were staying in hospital and those admitted to intensive care, along with analysis from the UK Health Security Agency suggesting Omicron was milder. One Whitehall source said the data received by NHS Trusts showed a particularly stark disparity between vaccinated and unvaccinated admissions to hospitals. “Those who are in ICUs are unvaccinated. It really brings home that should be the priority.” Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS providers – which represents trusts in England, said there were no reports of large numbers of patients requiring ventilators, and that the main pressure the NHS faced was staffing. “Talking to chief executives this morning, the sense is that admissions are rising but not precipitously so,” Hopson said, adding that a number of asymptomatic patients are being admitted to hospital for other reasons and then testing positive for Covid. “Trusts are not, at the moment, reporting large numbers of patients with Covid-type respiratory problems needing critical care or massively increased use of oxygen, both of which we saw in last January’s Delta variant peak.” Prof Alison Leary, the chair of healthcare and workforce modelling at London South Bank University, said the NHS absence rate in the capital had risen by 30% on normal levels as of Christmas Eve. Leary said one scenario modelled had predicted about 40% of the workforce being absent in London. Though the decision to rule out further restrictions before new year has delighted businesses, the move has divided scientists, several of whom said Johnson was gambling on an unclear picture during a period where data was often unreliable. Simon Clarke, an associate professor in Cellular Microbiology at the University of Reading cautioned that the latest case figures did not include data for samples taken between Christmas Eve and Boxing Day, and that it would only become clear how the virus had moved through the population over the Christmas period in the coming week or so. “While nobody wants to live under tighter controls, the public need to realise that if we end up with a significant problem of hospitalisations and mass sickness, it will be worse than if authorities had acted earlier,” he said. Danny Altmann, a professor of immunology at Imperial College London said: “It does feel hard that, at a time when we need to all pull together to maximise all possible mitigations, we seem to have our greatest divergence between expert clinical/scientific advice and legislation.” Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said the government needed to develop a coherent strategy to combat staffing pressures in hospitals and schools. “The government should publish, as a matter of urgency, the very latest data on hospitalisations and NHS staff absence rates, as well as up-to-date advice from Sage, so that the public can be reassured that they are genuinely following the data and scientific advice and that Boris Johnson is not simply capitulating to his own opponents in the Tory party,” he said.Richard Ayoade brings a strange sense of dislocation with him everywhere he goes – as a presenter on The Crystal Maze, a panellist on quizshows and in characters such as Moss in The IT Crowd and Dean Learner and Thornton Reed in Garth Marenghi’s Darkplace. It jibed particularly well with his stint as Channel 4’s eponymous Travel Man, a role from which he has stepped down. His detached oddity added a much-needed freshness to the travelogue format and gave his weekly companion a challenge to which to rise, lending each episode of the nine series he hosted a bit of bite. This episode welcomes the new presenter, Joe Lycett, with what is effectively a Christmas special. Travel Man: 96 Hours in Iceland follows the usual format, but the participants – Lycett’s companion here is the suitably trollish Bill Bailey – get double the usual 48 hours to sample the delights of their destination. It is a perfectly enjoyable hour in their company. They journey – partly by husky-drawn sledge – around a country that spreads 200 active volcanoes and a population the size of Coventry’s across nearly 100,000 gorgeously frozen square kilometres. They visit geothermally heated waters, eat in an all-tomato restaurant (within an enormous greenhouse that produces one-fifth of Iceland’s annual fruit production), watch the aurora borealis from a transparent hotel pod and jam as “Rancid Minibreak” in the sound booth of the Icelandic Punk Museum, which is housed in a repurposed public toilet. They travel to Dimmuborgir, where the earth is said to meet the underworld, and to the Cave of the Yule Lads. These are 13 mischievous figures (with names such as Sausage Swiper, Door Slammer and Spoon Licker) of seasonal folklore. They put toys in the shoes of good children on Christmas Eve and leave potatoes in those of the others. They are – at least for the purposes of cameras and/or December – embodied by 13 men who seem very happy making believe in their rustic-elf costumes. Lycett looks discomfited by it all. Bailey looks as if he has come home. It is a busy but essentially soothing 96 hours. As ever, the sights are captioned with salient facts and labelled with prices, giving us the total cost of the trip at the end of the show, in case we wish to get off our bums and – pandemic permitting – emulate it. Lycett is a perfectly good presenter and Bailey a perfectly good guest. They alternate as foil and comedian while felting miniature troll-Baileys, boiling eggs on the ends of fishing lines dropped into thermal vents (“That’s what I got into showbiz for”) and gazing up at Guðjón Samúelsson’s extraordinary concrete church, Hallgrímskirkja, which towers over Reykjavik. There are moments when the pair stray into strained banter territory, but there is also plenty of good, easy stuff. Emerging from a tiny earthquake simulator in a shopping centre after an underwhelming seismic simulation, Lycett says thoughtfully: “I would say, in a shopping centre, this would be a space a Timpson could take.” As they fly in a tiny plane along Iceland’s longest fjord, Lycett notes that he is hoping to see a whale, but there appear to be none. “They’re famously very hard to book,” Bailey says, with the air of a father eager not to assuage a child’s disappointment. There is profound, visceral truth in Lycett’s comment that the stark, brutal Sun Voyager sculpture by Jón Gunnar Árnason, overlooking the glittering sea, looks like one of the Loose Women. This is all fine – and may improve further with different guests bringing different energies to proceedings. Lycett is a sufficiently flexible and generous performer to embrace them. But if you were an Ayoade fan, you will miss his quirks, eccentricity and scalpel-sharp wit. The new version does not have the snap and crackle of the original. The change occasioned in me the kind of mild sorrow that discovering your favourite cafe has been take over by Starbucks might. We will all survive, obviously. Life will go on. But just a bit – a very little bit – flatter than before.Almost half of the UK’s bank branches have been lost, or scheduled for closure, since 2015, putting vulnerable customers at risk of being “cut adrift”, according to figures put together by a consumer group. Analysis carried out by Which? for the news agency PA found that 4,735 branches have been shut or earmarked for closure over the past six years. The figure is equal to 48% of the network as it stood in January 2015. Many of the big banks have been cutting their branch networks in recent years, claiming customers are spurning traditional counter service in favour of banking online and via mobile phones. Some have said the Covid pandemic has accelerated this shift to digital banking, and recent months have seen a spate of announcements of closures. In October, Lloyds Banking Group said it would close 41 Lloyds Bank and seven Halifax branches across England and Wales between January and April 2022. That came on top of 100 closures earlier in the year. Several weeks later TSB announced it was closing 70 branches – a quarter of its network, meaning it had more than halved the number of outlets it had over less than two years. Jenny Ross, Which? Money editor, said: “Wave after wave of bank branch closures in recent years have left many people who depend on them for essential banking services – particularly the elderly and vulnerable – at risk of being cut adrift. “Recent proposals put forward to help secure the future of cash are very promising, but we will be watching closely to see if they are preventing further communities from losing cash access and vital banking services.” Although the pandemic has hastened the move from cash to contactless payments, figures published earlier this year showed that in 2020 there were still 1.2 million people in the UK who relied on coins and notes for their day-to-day spending. The government has said it will legislate to protect the future of cash, and has introduced cashback without a purchase in shops to enable people to access their money without a bank branch or ATM. In December several major banks announced an initiative to share services, and there are plans to extend a pilot scheme in which Post Offices hosted bank staff and offered counter services to individuals and businesses. Natalie Ceeney, chair of Cash Action Group, said there were still millions of people for whom the decision to close a bank branch was really disruptive. “That’s not only vulnerable people who may be on low incomes or have a disability, but small businesses, whose customers pay in cash and can no longer deposit their takings at the branch that was once across the high street,” she said.Welcome to Five Great Reads, our daily summertime wrap of brilliant journalism and juicy writing, selected by me, Alyx Gorman, Guardian Australia’s sandals, sex and sandwiches editor. This has either landed in your inbox, in which case thank you for your leap of faith in subscribing; or you’ve stumbled across it some other way. If you fall into the latter category and like what you see, put your email in this little box to hear from me again. Sign up for Five Great Reads Big plans for New Year’s Eve across the country are looking a little wobbly this morning as Omicron brings climbing numbers to previously Covid-zero states, and NSW’s positive test rate jumps to 6.5% – an all-time high for the pandemic. In South Africa preparations have begun for a week of mourning the 26 December death of Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the anti-Apartheid hero described by Bob Geldof as “one of the greatest men of our time” in a piece for the Guardian yesterday. And, despite the spectre of Covid, the Ashes are on for the third Test today, with Australia leading the series 2-0. You can read all about that from people who didn’t have to look up either the current score or whether it to call today’s game a “Test” or a “match” right here from 10.30am. Now, on to the reads. 1. Is it time to upgrade your mask? Probably, argues “mask nerd” Aaron Collins. Why? Because while cloth and surgical masks certainly offer protection (especially when people wear them properly), other options can be between five and 10 times better. How does he know? “I embarked on a year-long mission to test, document, and review the best masks I could find. This eventually entailed building a mini aerosol laboratory in my bathroom, with scientific instruments capable of measuring particles 1/50,000th the width of a human hair.” 2. What do you say to the person who’s ‘waiting for Covax?’ That’s really up to you but reading this dive into data transparency around the crowdfunded Australian vaccine is probably a good first step. How long will it take? You can read the whole thing in about five minutes. It’s worth every second to learn about a local vaccine candidate many have never heard of, but that thousands of Australians put their money into. 3. What’s the story behind this photograph? Read about the stories behind the most arresting images of 2021 right here. Yes, but tell me about the horse? It was a test by the Swiss army veterinary service that involved airlifting horses via helicopter. Notable quote: “I couldn’t include the helicopter in the shot, as the cable was too long – almost 30 metres – but I think it gives the photograph a surreal air, just seeing a horse suspended like that,” the photographer said. “It is a very strange image. I think it is improved by not having the context of the helicopter.” 4. What was your most memorable gig? For the Waifs, it involved being called onstage to sing with Bob Dylan – well after their after-party had started. Notable quote: “Donna and I stripped off to our undies, cracked open a bottle of vodka and started up with the guys in the band to celebrate the tour’s wrap,” Vikki Thorn says. “We were a few shots in and feeling a little inebriated when Dylan’s stage manager burst through the door, announcing: ‘Stage lights down – Bob’s waiting for you two.’” 5. How do you bounce back from rock bottom? John Crace shares the astonishing story of his heroin addiction and the friends who pulled him back from the brink. How long does it take to read? About four minutes. Notable quote: “It took time for relationships to mend, for former friends and members of my family to trust that my recovery wasn’t yet another flash in the pan. But slowly, after a lot of therapy – I am still with the same therapist 30 years on – things took shape.”For much of the evening Ralf Rangnick’s grimace suggested that Manchester United’s manager was suffering from severe toothache. Instead of following the supposed script and pressing Newcastle into submission, Rangnick’s disjointed team were frequently pulled apart by Allan Saint-Maximin’s attacking manoeuvres and Joelinton’s midfield excellence. Although Edinson Cavani stepped off the bench to rescue a point for United, the period between Saint-Maximin’s seventh minute opener and the Uruguayan’s 71st minute equaliser possibly ranked among Rangnick’s least comfortable technical area interludes. After getting his tactics so right for so long Eddie Howe deserved to see his side register a transformative victory, but many among a full house at St James’ Park will have departed believing, however improbably, that relegation can still be avoided. Granted, Newcastle have won only once all season but Rangnick had David De Gea to thank for preserving a point that leaves United seventh, seven points adrift of fourth placed Arsenal. While an amalgam of Covid and injuries dictated that Howe was able to name only eight substitutes, including two goalkeepers, his technical area counterpart fielded an at least theoretically formidable starting XI for United’s first game in more than a fortnight. Some observers suspected that this Covid induced break might prove a blessing in disguise but, in reality, United swiftly proved alarmingly ring rusty. When Raphaël Varane turned in unusually ponderous fashion, he forfeited possession to Sean Longstaff and in a blink of an eye Saint-Maximin had the ball at his feet and was sashaying beyond three markers, Harry Maguire included. For a moment it seemed as if the Frenchman had delayed his shot just too long, but instead Saint-Maximin was merely picking his spot in the top corner of the goal. As the ball curved imperiously beyond a helpless De Gea, even Cristiano Ronaldo looked impressed. Perhaps tellingly, Howe had directed some gentle criticism at the mildly out-of-sorts Saint-Maximin last week, and the former Nice winger appeared on a mission to prove a point. It left Maguire, Varane and company struggling to cope with his devastating, thoroughly destructive, change of pace. Results may have disappointed since Howe succeeded Steve Bruce but the newcomer’s man-management has certainly brought the best out of an apparently reinvented Joelinton. Once again operating at the heart of midfield rather than centre-forward, the Brazilian delighted in dispossessing a startled Scott McTominay on several occasions. The deeper Joelinton dropped the better he got, in several instances serving as a quasi-sweeper protecting his defence from danger by whisking the ball from opponents’ toecaps, most memorably an advancing Diogo Dalot. His presence as a reborn enforcer also protected Jonjo Shelvey, permitting his fellow midfielder to concentrate on finding gaps in Rangnick’s rearguard. Accordingly, De Gea needed to react smartly to divert Shelvey’s 25-yard shot at a juncture when Ronaldo’s expression started turning sullen. Worryingly for United’s manager, there seemed a distinct lack of telepathy between Ronaldo, Mason Greenwood and Marcus Rashford. In mitigation, it hardly helped their cause that Bruno Fernandes was strangely ineffective in a thoroughly overrun midfield department in a team that sometimes appeared configured in a strangely awkward 4-2-2-2 guise. When Saint-Maximin wrong footed three visiting defenders and Callum Wilson’s first time shot eluded De Gea’s grasp, St James’ Park erupted in ecstasy. Fortunately for Rangnick, that “goal” was disallowed for offside. Fortune quickly frowned on Howe again when Wilson, his most reliable scorer, injured an ankle and was forced off. The resultant reshuffle saw Jacob Murphy arrive wide on the left as Longstaff shifted slightly further forward and Saint-Maximin assumed central striking duties. Unsurprisingly, Rangnick made a double substitution, introducing Jadon Sancho and Edinson Cavani at the expense of Fred and Greenwood. But his now improving side would have fallen further behind had Saint-Maximin not proved he is human after all by shooting straight at De Gea after being cued up by Emil Krafth’s right wing advance. As Howe’s anguished body language emphasised it was the sort of miss that can change games, seasons even, Rangnick perhaps felt almost the same about the moment when Cavani side footed Sancho’s cutback off target. Meanwhile, Ronaldo volleyed wide – and was arguably lucky to receive merely a yellow card for a wild, reckless, petulant off the ball kick at Ryan Fraser. It was not his finest hour. It was left to Cavani to raise the tone by losing his marker, meeting Dalot’s cross and scoring on the rebound with Martin Dubravka stranded after his initial shot was blocked. Somewhat fortuitously United were level, and when De Gea saved brilliantly from Miguel Almirón after Murphy had hit a post, Howe, who also saw Saint-Maximin hobble off, knew that it really was not going to be his night.The spectre of Covid-19 continues to loom over the Ashes after the number of positive cases in England’s touring party rose from four to six during the third Test in Melbourne. A round of PCR tests for players on both sides came back all clear before the start of the third day, allowing England to resume on 31 for four in their second innings, 51 runs behind and battling to prevent Australia claiming an unassailable 3-0 lead. However, the emergence of two additional cases in the England group – up from four on day two and now featuring three coaches and three family members – suggests a spread is occurring.” Further testing will take place in the coming days, presenting the latest nervous wait for both cricket boards. Announcing the news, Cricket Australia made no reference to the increase but confirmed the third Test in Melbourne would be able to play out to its conclusion. The tour remains on as it stands, with players and support staff set to remain under the same restrictions – no indoor dining in restaurants and minimal contact with the general public – when they move to Sydney for the fourth Test that starts on 5 January. A CA spokesperson said: “Players from the Australian and England teams all had PCR Covid-19 tests after play yesterday and all results have come back negative. The families of both sets of players also had PCR tests yesterday and all returned a negative test. The England team’s support staff and their family members who tested positive after PCR tests yesterday are in isolation. Play in the third Ashes Test match resumes at the MCG at 10.30am today.” The outbreak was first detected on Boxing Day evening – 24 hours after the 60-strong tour party celebrated Christmas in a restaurant in St Kilda – when one of the family members travelling with the England team began to experience symptoms of the virus. This was then followed by positive results for one additional family member and two from England’s coaching staff, with a third initially deemed a close contact. England’s playing XI cleared an emergency round of lateral flow tests at the team hotel, allowing play to commence after a 30-minute delay, the team then fighting back with the ball only to lose four wickets in a dramatic final hour at a raucous MCG. Jimmy Anderson, speaking after stumps, said: “We actually got on the bus to come to the ground at the usual time but were then told to get off the bus because we found out about a couple of positives. All the lads then went in and had lateral flows to make sure we were all OK and then waited for the all-clear to come here to the ground.” Asked on Monday if the tour was in danger, Nick Hockley, the CA chief executive, replied: “No. This is what the protocols are for. We are being extra vigilant as there are increasing cases in the community but our protocols are designed for absolutely this set of events. What we are all working to do is to keep this series going because the players on both sides are desperate to continue playing. We’ll be doing everything we can to make sure that happens.” On arrangements for Sydney, amid speculation that simply completing the series in Melbourne may present the best option, Hockley replied: “In Sydney we have an exclusive property for the playing group and we’re flying there by charter. Everyone now is on high alert, everyone is being extra cautious.” Cases in Victoria rose to 1,999 on Boxing Day and, as well as the outbreak in the England camp, the broadcaster Channel Seven was forced into a rejig of its commentary teams after a member of the production staff contracted the virus. Ian Botham and Ricky Ponting, the former Australia Test captain, were among those asked to stay away initially but eventually returned after negative PCR results. The developments further underline the precarious nature of a series that involved tense negotiations over the bubble and has already led to Australia’s captain, Pat Cummins, being forced to isolate and miss the second Test in Adelaide because of close contact with a positive case at a restaurant. During that match, a 275-run win for Australia that gave them a 2-0 series lead, there was also an outbreak in the media centre, with separate positive cases in the BBC Test Match Special team and the production staff of the host broadcaster Fox Sports causing disruption to their respective services. Along with general disruption to the schedule over the past two years, English cricket has already had three men’s series directly affected by Covid outbreaks. Their one-day internationals in South Africa 12 months ago were postponed because of positive cases in the hotel, while the entire England 50-over squad and coaching staff were changed for a series against Pakistan during the recent summer when players contracted the virus. Most damaging was the fifth Test against India at Old Trafford in September that was called off before the start of play on the opening day – and later rescheduled for the summer of 2022 – after a physio who had been treating the touring party became the fourth member of their support staff to test positive.Andy Brassell on a disjointed night for Manchester United: Rangnick speaks! Here’s Louise Taylor’s match report. Sean Longstaff and Joelinton speak. SL: On the balance of the game I think we deserve the three points. Tonight was what St James’ Park is all about. We played well and created a lot of chance.s and it’s about taking it into chances. We know how good he is. I think the disrespect he gets is a disgrace, he’s always the best player in training, ask anyone at the club. Everyone rates him so highly, you realise how good he is. I am so happy for him. J: It’s a new position, and I always try to give everything for the team. It was an unlucky result, and we have to be proud of the game and keep going and take the positives. I try to give everything, I underysnmad what [Eddie Howe] asked for me to do. Newcastle now face an anxious wait on the fitness of Wilson, Saint-Maximin and Schar. They play Everton on Thursday and Southampton on Sunday and the chances of any of them featuring look decidedly low. The table makes grim reading for both teams. John Davis sums it up so well: “As a Newcastle fan, this has swung between absolute certainty we wouldn’t go down and marvelling at how Howe has re-invented Joelinton (and re-invigorated Shelvey) to resignation now the two players we can’t afford to lose (Wilson, ASM) have gone off with muscle pulls. And that? Almiron gets a shot on target for the first time in two years and de Gea does that?” That will be seen as one that got away by Eddie Howe’s team. They gave Manchester United a terrible scare, and Allan Saint-Maximin might have won it with one chance in particular after his opening goal. Edinson Cavani saved some blushes. Manchester United were, frankly, absolute rubbish and got very very lucky. 90+6 min: And that’s it, the points are shared at full-time. 90+5 min: Cavani goes down, and Manchester United want a free-kick. But he was offside. Relief for the home team. Eddie Howe and Jason “Jason” Jason Tindall giving it big hand signals on the sidelines. Amanda Staveley looks pensive in the stands. 90+4 min: Blood and sand! Dubravka drops the ball at the feet of Sancho. Cavani’s chip is hacked away. What a game it’s been. Low on quality, high on drama. 90+3 min: Another Newcastle injury as Schar looks to twang his hammy trying a diagonal long ball. Oh Eddie, oh no. 90+1 min: There’s six minutes added, even if the stadium announcer initially says four. It’s that exciting. There’s a call for a handball after Joelinton smashed it into Varane’s hand, in a natural position, whatever that is. 89 min: Bruno redeems himself by clearing the ball as Newcastle push for a winner. He needed to do something. Newcastle look the livelier and more likely to score. 88 min: Oh Newcastle! Bruno, who has been hopeless all evening, gives the ball away lazily. Murphy hits the post and then Almiron forces a great save from De Gea. It would have been a deserved winner. 87 min: Almiron presses Telles into a mistake. Weren’t Manchester United supposed to be the pressing team now? Little sign of it tonight. 86 min: Ronaldo is caught whingeing after a bad pass fails to reach him. 85 min: All to play for, and Manchester United play it around. Now there’s no Saint-Maximin to chase them down they seem a tad more relaxed. 83 min: The physio makes the sub signal and Saint-Maximin will take no further part. Eddie Howe does not appear to be a lucky manager. On comes Dwight Gayle. Alan Shearer, in artisan pompadour hat, looks nervous in the stands. 82 min: Ronaldo and Dalot link down the right, and the cross goes to Cavani. At the other end, Saint-Maximin has pulled up. It’s another calf problem. And that’s it for him, and maybe for a while. With Wilson, that’s a bitter blow. 80 min: The home fans are singing for their team, more in hope than expectation now. Though there’s always a chance with this Manchester United team. There’s a brief glimpse of Ronaldo, who has been in absentia since Cavani changed the focus of the attack. 78 min: Scott McTominay, his left boot removed, limps off as Nemanja Matic comes on for Manchester United. 77 min: Longstaff’s pass to Murphy sets up an attack that De Gea smothers, and Manchester United try to go again. This time, Cavani doesn’t get to it. 76 min: Cavani close again. Telles speeds on to a Rashford ball and it finds the Uruguayan at the back post but his scooped finish doesn’t reach its target. Newcastle are tired. 75 min: Off goes Ryan Fraser, on comes Miguel Almiron, who will add more buzz to that speedy Newcastle attack. 73 min: Manchester United push for more. Newcastle flagging after all that effort. Cavani, despite that goal, is doing some whingeing of his own. He wants more. 72 min: Saint-Maximin, fired by the injustice of that equaliser, sets off one of his runs and forces another De Gea save. Manchester United may be level but they are still highly vulnerable. Well. Dalot passes from the byline, Cavani’s shot is blocked but the poacher supreme pokes home. 69 min: This has been as bad a Manchester United performance as any under Ole Gunnar Solskjaer, and if that situation needed to change then so still does the attitude of their players. Their reaction to this scoreline has been to act like spoiled children. 67 min: Murphy, who has been lively since replacing Callum Wilson, sends the ball past the Manchester United post. De Gea watches it go by. Then Maguire is booked for a foul on Saint-Maximin. Maguire has been having one of his games. 65 min: A save from De Gea from Saint-Maximin again. Bruno Fernandes is booked for dissent. Manchester United, a rabble. 63 min: Fernandes’s pass into the Newcastle box sets up a counterattack and Fraser forces a save from De Gea. Joelinton carries the ball all the way. The home fans demand a penalty and then watch Rashford get a glimpse of a chance at the other end. It’s end to end, breathless stuff. The quality is low but the intrigue gets higher. 61 min: Great enjoyment from the home fans as Rashford skews the ball in the fashion that you might see from Boris Johnson in a charity match. It was honestly that bad. Manchester United have been atrocious. 59 min: Long pass to Rashford, but hit too long. Seems the Rangnick plan features some good, old-fashioned “get it launched”. 57 min: Ronaldo is booked, after he clatters Fraser. He is perhaps lucky that, like everything else tonight, he missed his target. Petulant stuff from Him. 56 min: The aforementioned Maguire attempts a long pass from defence. And then has to be chased down by Jacob Murphy. Oh, the indignity. 55 min: Toon roars as Dalot is hounded down by Saint-Maximin, and even more when Cavani, in a typically good position, spoons a Sancho cross wide. 54 min: Asha tweets in: “I hadn’t considered how much of a problem Harry Maguire is to Man Utd. He’s captain and emblematic of everything Man Utd right now. Moments of good play, moments of bad play and an absolute whinge-bag.” 53 min: Bruno Fernandes dropping deep. He’s not had it easy under this new regime. Sancho meanwhile wallops the ball behind after Manquillo stands him up. That was not good from the new arrival. 52 min: Joelinton is still in his left of midfield shuttling position, essentially an Andy Sinton du nos jours...Ronaldo gets a sighter, as the ball drops to the edge of the box and he whips it wide. 50 min: Another look at that Saint-Maximin chance and it gets no better on second viewing. 49 min: The signs of that chance is that Ralf Rangnick is yet to plug in his half-time hairdryer, though Fred and Greenwood have already felt his cold shoulder. Meanwhile, Rashford wakes up and his shot fizzes as Dubravka has to make a decent save. 47 min: Oh wow! What a miss. Krafth skips down the right, and the ball comes to Saint-Maximin, who can only shoot at De Gea, who to his credit was in the right position. 46 min: And back away we go. And off goes Saint-Maximin again, who this time gets tangled up in his own legs. Two Manchester United subs: off go Fred and Greenwood, on come Sancho and Cavani. On Sky, Gary Neville, who says he is “fuming”, has just called Manchester United’s players “a bunch of whinge-bags”. And he’s right, they have been moaning at each other all night. The emails are in: Tom Collins: “Got to say judged purely as a footballer Rashford has plateaued. He’s in danger of being the next Lingard. Not a consistent goalscorer, still yet to really nail down a position. Impromptu West Ham loan on the horizon. Oh the indignity...” Jake Shaffer: “This match is like one of those bracingly bitter, herbal, dirty tasting “digestive” liquors one is supposed to have following the gluttonous feast of goals and fun football served up yesterday. In many ways, it is a stern reminder that 2021 isn’t over for us yet.” Mary Waltz: “The constant refrain from the sack ole squad was “Why did you spend all that cash on VDB and not play him. McFred are rubbish, anyone with half a brain would bin that lineup” I understand that complaint but it appears it wasn’t just Ole.” Stephen Carr: “Evening John. The most intriguing sub-plot in tonight’s game is the competition between Fred and Shelvey to see who can give the ball away the most times. Too close to call at this stage.” Matt Burtz: “I don’t profess to have an encyclopedic knowledge of pop music, but for my money the two best saxophone riffs belong to “Baker Street” and “Careless Whisper”.” Peter Oh: “Based on the meagre pickings CR7 and Greenwood have had so far, it sounds like supply chain problems aren’t limited to global shipping.” Well, yes. The home team deserve their lead. They have been inspired where Ralf Rangnick’s team have been awful. Callum Wilson will be a big loss and Newcastle may regret not scoring more in a first 45 they were easily the better team despite Manchester United’s greater possession. 45+4 min: That’s it for the half. It ends with Wilson on the floor rubbing his calf. Nobody was near him when he went down for the original injury. On comes Jacob Murphy for mere seconds. 45+3 min: A dreadful pass from Manchester United’s midfield drifts out. That’s the story of their half. 45+1 min: Four minutes are added on. Joelinton buzzes around again, and Saint-Maximin has a sight of goal that Fred manages to clear. Callum Wilson may not last the four minutes, sadly. 45 min: Uh oh. Callum Wilson is down and there looked to be a twist as he fell. He looks in great pain, and he’s no stranger to such injuries. Nervous moments for everyone here, and even if Newcastle have money, Wilson has a big part to play in their future. He’s up, that’s the good news but he is limping. 44 min: Fernandes has a shot saved from a Ronaldo flick. He should have netted, and is saved by Ronaldo being offside. 42 min: Dalot’s cross smashes into the chops of Joelinton, who is back down on the floor again. He’s been in the wars. His recreation as an all-action midfielder continues apace. 41 min: Rashford fouled, though the home crowd don’t like it. Ronaldo looks surly as he steps up to attempt a free-kick. Fernandes will take, and it finds Ronaldo ghosting through. Dubravka is brave as he clears. Newcastle had gone to sleep. 39 min: Home cheers as Dubravka claims as the ball is launched towards Rashford. 38 min: Newcastle have the ball in the net! Saint-Maximin careered through and Wilson directs it into the net. Offside so the primal roar is quietened. It was well off. 36 min: It is Ronaldo who clears from a corner, and Newcastle then almost grant him the space to set up a counter. At the moment, and this is often the case before preluding genius, he looks as if he put the wrong boots on. 35 min: Another bad pass from Varane and off goes Saint-Maximin, and Maguire comes across to clear. Then the ball comes back to Newcastle and Maguire smashes Callum Wilson over. A free-kick in a dangerous position, from the left of the away team’s box and Telles heads behind. 33 min: The Newcastle fans getting nervy, their team is seeing far less of the ball. Bruno Fernandes loops in in a cross that Krafth almost hands to Ronaldo but the great man swings and misses. Manna for the jeering Toon Army. 31 min: Manchester United pressure building. A Greenwood shot is blocked and Rashford is seeing more of the ball. But it’s still not coming together. Ralf Rangnick looks most unimpressed. 29 min: Greenwood cuts in from the right, and his pass almost finds a speeding Rashford, only for Dubravka to charge out on safari and whack the ball clear. 27 min: Some calm - ish - play from De Gea and Varane at the back. Not much confidence amid that unit at the moment. 26 min: “Eddie Howe’s black and white army” rings out. That sounds very like belief and backing from the fans. Perhaps that and tens of millions may give him half a chance. 24 min: Boos from the Newcastle fans as Sean Longstaff trips McTominay, and the Scot limps off. He was clearly hurt so not sure what all that was about. 23 min: Shelvey drives forward and pings a shot that David De Gea has to punch away. It was spinning all over the show. 22 min: This looks as disjointed as a typical Ole Gunnar Solskjaer match from Manchester United. Their best hope lies in a Newcastle mistake. 20 min: Joelinton is back up for now. They are taking their time over him. Rashford wins another corner when smashing it against the first defender. His team have not scored from a set piece all season. Telles takes again, and Bruno Fernandes, who has been anonymous, hooks the ball to nobody. 18 min: Telles takes the corner and it is cleared. Joelinton is back down again, and looks to be in some distress. 17 min: Jeers from the home fans but Ronaldo almost got on the end of a ball into the Newcastle box. Rashford then forces a corner. 16 min: Gary Naylor is in: “They talk about PlayStation players, but Allan Saint-Maximim is a Playground player. Nobody communicates the joy of simply playing the game more than the scampering Frenchman.” 15 min: A brief moment of panic when McTominay almost cuts off a Dubravka pass to Shelvey. Then Dalot, getting through plenty of work, gets to the byline. Newcastle clear it. Ronaldo goes down but no dice from the referee and lots of boos greet the great man. 13 min: Cristiano Ronaldo has got his face on. He, Greenwood and Rashford have not looked on the same wavelength at all. 12 min: Close! Joelinton whips one past the post after being teed up at the edge of the box. 11 min: Newcastle are quick on the counter, and as a Rashford flick comes to nothing, they speed away, only for a flag to haul them back. They could do with another. Surely Manchester United can’t stay this bad? (They probably can.) 10 min: The Newcastle fans fancy this. Manchester United are there for the taking, and look thoroughly disorganised, and lacking creativity. 8 min: We were treated to a shot of Amanda Staveley celebrating there. She really enjoyed that moment, as did Eddie Howe. Raphael Varane, not so much. That was play out of the Harry Maguire playbook. A Varane mistake and off goes Saint-Maximin, and he cuts inside and whacks it miles beyond the reach of David De Gea. 6 min: Shelvey upends Ronaldo, who had pressed him into a mistake. Are you watching, Jonathan Wilson? Dalot, in the team on merit, aims a cross into the box from a Fred pass. Dubravka claims it with some ease. 5 min: Eddie Howe giving it plenty of clapping on the sideline. It’s quite a fashionable move these days. Pep Guardiola, Marcelo Bielsa and Antonio Conte are all proponents. 4 min: Joelinton goes down. Is he ill? Did he get a kick to the goolies? The latter seems to be the case. 3 min: Harry Maguire seems to fall asleep and Ryan Fraser skids away with the ball, only for his cross to be cleared. Eddie Howe’s team pushing up and pressing hard. 1 min: After the players take the knee, Craig Pawson the referee gets the game underway after a retake. Yes, a retake. Looks like Marcus Rashford is playing deeper, with Ronaldo and Mason Greenwood up front. Mark Knopfler’s Local Hero rings out, a song that ends all too suddenly, all too soon. Whatever happened to the saxophone in popular music? The teams make their way to the pitch to the sound of Carmina Burana. This is a big game for both teams even if the match has lost the lustre of decades past. Keith Barclay emails in: “Two sub goalies for Newcastle has to be quite unusual even for these Covid times: Woodman and Gillespie?” And they have only named eight subs. Perhaps one of them will do a David James. Feels like this is an issue for both teams playing tonight. Mind, you, it’s an issue for everyone at the moment. The League can today confirm that between Monday 20 December and Sunday 26 December, 15,186 COVID-19 tests were administered on players and club staff. Of these, there were 103 new positive cases,” the league said in a statement. The figure has steadily increased in recent weeks with 42 cases between December 6-12 and 90 testing positive between December 13-19. The Premier League has had 15 games postponed so far due to Covid-19 outbreaks at various clubs. Eddie Howe speaks to Sky, too. Massive occasion, massive game, a historic game in the past. We are looking to create those memories for us and create a good feeling for our supporters. We are looking for any game to be transformative. Together we need to put it together and deliver a complete performance. We have a mix of injuries and Covid cases. We’ve had an eight-day gap so I’m looking for energy and intensity in our place, we should have no excuses for not delivering a physical performance. Hopefully we give a really good account of ourselves. The progress will be defined by the matches. There’s work going on behind the scenes, I can assure everyone of that. Phil Jones is among those Manchester United subs, while Victor Lindelof and Victor Bailly are both absentees, with the Swede testing positive for Covid. Ralf Rangnick just confirmed that to Sky Sports. “I would say since last Tuesday or even last Thursday we have had two or three training sessions at a high level. In the last three or four days we’ve had some good training sessions. [On Mason Greenwood] He is definitely playing up front but you will just have to see. No Anthony Martial or Jesse Lingard in the Manchester United squad, and that suggests January transfers are being borne in mind. Raphael Varane plays for the first time since October. Little surprise that Newcastle make six changes from the team pumped 4-0 by Manchester United, with Saint-Maximin and Wilson partnered up front for the first time since that Burnley win. Newcastle: Dubravka, Manquillo, Schar, Lascelles, Krafth, Fraser, Shelvey, Sean Longstaff, Joelinton, Saint-Maximin, Wilson Subs: Woodman, Gillespie, Hendrick, Murphy, Almiron, Anderson, Gayle, White Manchester United: De Gea, Dalot, Varane, Maguire, Telles, McTominay, Fred, Fernandes, Rashford, Greenwood, Ronaldo Subs: Henderson, Jones, Cavani, Shaw, Sancho, Wan-Bissaka, Matic, Van de Beek, Elanga United’s past two games – against Brentford and Brighton – were postponed after an outbreak of the virus among Rangnick’s squad that left only eight outfield players available. But with 25 players now in training before Monday’s trip to Newcastle, the German claimed that United’s number of double vaccinated footballers is among the highest in the division. “I don’t know which of our players have had two or three [the booster] vaccinations. This is a question that only our medical department could answer but I know from our medical department that our ratio of vaccinated players is above the average of the Premier League,” said Rangnick. “As far as I know we have a high record of vaccination of players in our club, but still in the last two weeks we have been shown that even if you are vaccinated two or three times, you can still catch the virus, especially the new virus. So you are not being protected [fully] but at least you are being protected from severe symptoms – most of our players who tested positive at least had very weak symptoms and didn’t suffer.” Back then beating Manchester United was not regarded as an exceptional feat by Newcastle fans but Howe’s class of 2021-22 face Ralf Rangnick’s team having won only once all season and in acute peril of relegation. “There’s a lot of memories that spring to mind of those games in the 1990s and just after,” said Howe. “Newcastle tended, at that period of time, to have memorable games against most teams. There are standout moments you think back to; I can still picture some of the goals and the scenes in my mind. “It’s up to us to try to recreate those times – the attacking verve, the swagger that Kevin Keegan’s 1990s Newcastle had, the flair the individual players possessed and the team identity. It’s something we’re desperate to do. But we’re going to need a little bit of time to see that in full creation. At the moment, we’re still progressing and we have to obviously get the defensive side of our game right before we transition into the team we all want to be.” Manchester United...remember them? Northern club, big in the 1990s and 2000s, too. Used to have a Scottish manager, then disappeared off the face of the Earth. That’s right, them. Well, they are back, having not played since 11 December for reasons Covid-related when beating Norwich 1-0 in a match that already feels like it took place some time in the 1890s. The current incarnation have Ralf Rangnick in charge, who at 63 is three years older than Matt Busby when he retired and is probably keeping the seat warm for someone else. Or so we think, though perhaps Ralf may have designs on the manager’s job. And the Glazers have proved they are willing to be won over by a run of good results. As for Newcastle, it also feels like sometime in the 1890s that they beat Burnley and celebrated for social media pix that keep being reheated by certain wags who are enjoying the Toon Army’s lowly position despite all that Saudi loot. They have conceded 11 goals and scored just one since, and got pumped by Manchester City last time out. Eddie Howe is almost already at the stage where every game is a cup final in the battle against relegation. This is Newcastle’s penultimate game before the transfer window and they can spend spend spend though the only player they seem to have a strong link to is Manchester United Odion Ighalo...oh well. Thus, a game between two very enigmatic teams awaits. Join me.Jürgen Klopp believes Liverpool can overtake Manchester City in the race for the Premier League title providing his players “defend at the top level” for the rest of the season. Liverpool can reduce the gap on the champions back to three points with victory at injury-hit Leicester on Tuesday, when Klopp will have Virgil van Dijk, Fabinho, Thiago Alcântara and Curtis Jones available following their return from Covid isolation. The game at the King Power Stadium marks the halfway point of Liverpool’s campaign and their manager, while acknowledging the ominous challenge presented by City, is confident his team’s improvement can deliver a second league title in three seasons. “I think it’s possible, that’s what we should think because that is why we are here, but it is absolutely difficult,” said Klopp on the task of finishing above Pep Guardiola’s side. “The consistency the boys show is incredible but that is the only chance you have. In a league with probably the best team in the world it is really tricky to be ahead of them. So far, at least, we are not completely out of reach. It is not like we have no chance anymore, but of course you know City won’t drop a lot of points so you better not drop a lot of points yourself. “What do we have to do better? First and foremost we have to defend at the top level. On top of that we have improved a lot football-wise: we play some really good stuff and we are more difficult to defend against than we maybe were in the past. Some good steps. Will that be enough? I have no idea. Without being at least as consistent as we have been we have no chance. If we really want to go for a big one then we have to be even more consistent.” Klopp is reluctant to compare Liverpool’s current form to the title-winning campaign of 2020 but admits his squad has improved in certain aspects. “I hope I don’t eat my words but we are more stable than we were in the past,” he said. “We have to stay like this, at least. That is the minimum. We have to play flexible football, direct football, creative football, to defend rock solid and to force things as well in games up until the last second. We had periods in games when we were 2-0 up and the opponent came back. The things we don’t do right we have to learn from, and that is what this group always did. It gives some reason to be optimistic but of course opponents are incredibly strong and even when they are not flying they win the games.” It was four years ago on Monday that Liverpool confirmed the transformative £75m signing of Van Dijk from Southampton. The defender’s return to fitness and form after nine months out with a cruciate ligament injury strengthens Klopp’s belief that his team can defend at the level he considers necessary to win a title. “He’s now back to his best for sure. What helps us a lot and what helps him a lot is that we have options around that we don’t have to push him through the moments when his body is giving a sign that he needs to step aside,” said Klopp. “That’s why the situation is very good. Virgil’s arrival was obviously a big day in our common history and it is a good example for a winter transfer and how it works. “A winter transfer works when you either wanted to sign a player the summer before or the summer after. We wanted Virgil in the summer, for some reasons we couldn’t do the transfer, but then in the winter we tried again and could get it through. It was a very important day, it changed a lot for us. All of a sudden we could defend in a different way. We could make the pitch smaller for the opponent, so that was pretty helpful.” Liverpool have Mohamed Salah, Sadio Mané and Naby Keïta available for the Leicester game as well as for Sunday’s visit to Chelsea after their departures for the Africa Cup of Nations were delayed.Antonio Conte has described the Covid situation in the Premier League as “a big mess” but says clubs are trying their best to deal with the fallout from positive cases. Tottenham face Southampton on Tuesday with the Italian hopeful that his club are over the worst when it comes to infections within the squad, but has explained how just one positive result can disrupt everything before a game. Spurs will travel to the south coast without knowing the results of the PCR tests taken on Monday but Conte believes it is the only way to do it. “This is a big mess, because you can prepare with a player that the next day you can’t [play in the game]. Also the players that are positive can infect the other players. But I think now we’re doing very well because before the training session there is a rapid test and then the other test you have the result the day after. I think this is a good solution. [A rapid test] is not 100% but there’s a good percentage of reality in this test. “But we did have these problems two weeks ago. We were having training sessions, I was preparing for the game and then at the end of the training session you can have a positive player in your team.” On the pitch Conte has seen much improvement since he arrived at Spurs, the team going on a six-match league unbeaten run, winning four of the games to close the gap to the top four. Spurs have scored an average of two goals a game in the league under Conte but while he has been impressed with the forwards from an attacking point of view he also praised them for their work in defence. Harry Kane, Son Heung-min and Lucas Moura have all been on the scoresheet in recent weeks and Steven Bergwijn is “improving day by day”, according to Conte. “We know very well that in front we are very good and for this reason we need to exploit the situation, where you have important players,” he said. “I’m happy that these three, four players that we have in front, they are totally involved offensively but above all defensively, and this is good because we are a team. The rest of the team I think has a great appreciation of the efforts of the strikers without the ball. That’s why when we have the ball we have to create situations to exploit them.” The former Chelsea and Internazionale coach also had encouraging words for some of the younger players of the squad, including Oliver Skipp and Japhet Tanganga. “Japhet is a player who has a great sense of belonging,” Conte said. “It’s the same for Oliver. For Skipp, he’s playing with me regularly. In every game he’s playing and he’s good. He’s making big improvements and I think that he could become one, a very strong midfielder, a really good midfielder. “He has to continue to work. We are talking about a humble boy, a humble player. Oliver feels a lot of sense of belonging to play for Tottenham. For Japhet, for Oliver, it’s a dream. During the game you can see this.”