More than 100 members of the global super-rich called on Wednesday for governments around the world to “tax us now” to help pay for the pandemic response and tackle the gulf between rich and poor. The group of 102 millionaires and billionaires, including Disney heiress Abigail Disney, said the current tax system is rigged in their favour and needs to be rewritten to make taxation fairer for hard-working people and restore trust in politics. “As millionaires, we know that the current tax system is not fair,” they said in an open letter published on Wednesday. “Most of us can say that, while the world has gone through an immense amount of suffering in the last two years, we have actually seen our wealth rise during the pandemic – yet few if any of us can honestly say that we pay our fair share in taxes.” The super-rich signatories, who brand themselves as “patriotic millionaires”, called for the introduction of “permanent wealth taxes on the richest to help reduce extreme inequality and raise revenue for sustained, long-term increases in public services like healthcare”. “Restoring trust requires taxing the rich,” they said in the letter, published as world leaders and business executives meet for a virtual Davos World Economic Forum. “The world – every country in it – must demand the rich pay their fair share. Tax us, the rich, and tax us now.” The group, which also includes Nick Hanauer, a venture capitalist who made an almost $1bn fortune from an early bet on Amazon, said an annual “wealth tax” on those with fortunes of more than $5m (£3.7m) could raise more than $2.52tr. That would be enough, they said, to “lift 2.3 billion people out of poverty; make enough vaccines for the world and deliver universal healthcare and social protection for all the citizens of low and lower-middle-income countries (3.6 billion people).” The proposed tax would see those with more than $5m pay 2%, rising to 3% for those with more than $50m and a 5% rate for dollar billionaires. Taxing the UK’s wealthiest 119,000 people at these rates would raise an estimated £43.7bn, a year, according to an analysis by campaign groups Fight Inequality Alliance, Institute for Policy Studies, Oxfam and the Patriotic Millionaires. The signatories said this would be enough to: Pay for the Health and Social Care Levy twice over every year – eliminating the need to raise national insurance on working people. Cover the salaries of an additional 50,000 new nurses. Pay for the permanent increase of universal credit. Build 35,000 affordable houses and retrofit the UK’s draughtiest homes to reduce the cost of energy bills and help fight the climate crisis. Gemma McGough, a British entrepreneur and founding member of Patriotic Millionaires UK, said: “At a time when simply living will cost the average household a further £1,200 a year, our government cannot expect to be trusted if it would rather tax working people than wealthy people. If they do anything in the next few months, they should do this: rather than raising national insurance, tax the rich – tax us – instead.” Jenny Ricks, global convenor at the Fight Inequality Alliance, said: “The insane reality is that while billions face a daily struggle to survive during this pandemic, billionaire-wealth is spiralling out of control. This cannot be right. The multiple crises we face from vaccine inequality to climate breakdown have a vice-like grip on people’s lives that is not letting up. For years Davos has shown us the elites cannot and will not end the virus of inequality they have helped to create and built their fortunes on the back of.”Think of “the north” and images that come to mind include Antony Gormley’s Angel of the North, the sculpture of Henry Moore and Manchester’s music scene. But now a rare show of cross-party unity has called for all of the cultural icons of northern England to be a catalyst to rebuild the region and rebalance it with the rest of the UK. Ministers will join Labour council leaders and mayors to launch the first report of its kind on Wednesday, which sets out in detail how culture could and should be a central part of the region’s post-pandemic recovery. Recommendations in a ten-point action plan include devolving funding decisions to a regional level from London; encouraging more strategic partnerships and less competition between different areas; and greater investment in next-generation creative talents. It calls for culture to be “embedded” in the government’s levelling-up white paper, expected in the next week. Prof Katy Shaw, lead writer of the Case for Culture report, said she thought many people were fed up with “hearing about the value of the north only in terms of things like technology or business. “For the first time what this report is doing is evidencing, not just asserting, why and how culture is possibly the quickest and also the most underused lever for levelling up,” she said. “We’re sick, really, of hearing how much change is needed in the north to rebalance and rebuild and how we are always at the bottom of the snakes and ladders board. “The north is really well positioned coming out of the pandemic to think about how we can work on what we are good at – and that includes culture. We can use culture as a catalyst to boost our region and to boost our position in the UK to have genuine levelling up.” Dan Jarvis, the Labour mayor of South Yorkshire, will be at the launch. He said levelling up had to be more than an economic mission. “It’s got to be about improving how people feel about the places where they live,” he said. “Culture does this … it adds colours to people’s lives and makes a place somewhere that we want to live, study, work and invest in. No one deserves to live in black and white. There is a real opportunity now to level up the north and culture must be central to that.” Other expected speakers include the arts minister, the Conservative peer Stephen Parkinson; the levelling up minister, Neil O’Brien; and the shadow culture secretary, Lucy Powell. A key theme of the report is encouraging more collaboration. Tracy Brabin, the mayor of West Yorkshire, said funding cannot carry on being a “beauty contest where we’re all pitching against each other. “The money and time spent in these bids is unfortunately so draining and then when you don’t win there’s nothing.” Organisations who gave evidence for the report argue that funding decisions made in London are not always fair. They are not, said one, “based on a current understanding of our cultural map, challenges or opportunities.” The report has been prepared for the northern culture all-party parliamentary group jointly chaired by James Daly, Conservative MP for Bury North, and Julie Elliott, Labour MP for Sunderland Central. In a joint statement they said this was the first time the “north has come together as one, to champion the north’s rich cultural tapestry.” They added: “We know that northern culture makes a huge contribution to the UK economy but now is the time for the north to seize this ‘once in a generation’ opportunity to increase diversity, sustainability, accessibility and resilience in its talent pipeline.” Shaw, director of cultural partnerships at Northumbria University, said culture had not played a big enough role in the wider levelling-up debate but that was changing. She said she had been going to “northern powerhouse” conferences for five years “and this was the first year there’s ever been a panel on culture. “It’s because, coming out of the pandemic, people can see this huge opportunity with culture that delivers on everything from wellbeing to education to decarbonisation. Like all of these things the government will say: ‘Where’s the evidence’? That’s really what our report has been able to do for the first time.”Boris Johnson’s promise to “level up” the nation by providing next-generation-speed broadband to most homes by 2025 is under threat as rural dwellers are left behind in the internet revolution, according to a report by parliament’s spending watchdog. The report by the public accounts committee found that the government is relying too heavily on companies, most notably BT Openreach and Virgin Media O2, to achieve Johnson’s key election manifesto pledge of addressing the UK’s status as a global laggard in broadband speeds. These companies are focused on the less costly, easier to reach urban conurbations across the UK. The government plan, developed by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, is failing to deliver on a promise to find affordable solutions to connect those living in rural areas and remote towns and villages. “What DCMS does know full well is it can’t rely on the private sector to get fast broadband to the hardest to reach, excluded and rural areas,” said Dame Meg Hillier, the chair of the PAC. “And despite its repeated promises to do exactly that, we are apparently little nearer to closing ‘the great digital divide’ developing across the UK nor addressing the social and economic inequality it brings with it.” At the end of last year, 47% of UK homes and premises had the potential to sign up for next-generation-speed broadband. While the rollout plan means half of all urban dwellers can get these speeds, only a quarter of those in rural areas have the opportunity. The huge demand for reliable, high-speed internet connections as millions moved to home, remote and flexible working and schooling during the pandemic has increased pressure on and scrutiny of the government’s plans. An initial promise by Johnson to deliver full-fibre broadband to every UK home by 2025 was subsequently expanded to include gigabit technology, which provides equally fast connections but the PAC said is “not as future proof”, in order to achieve the target. The promise to reach every home was then reduced to 85% of homes and premises, with the government making only £1.2bn of a £5bn fund created to connect rural homes available until one year before its 2025 deadline, which the PAC is not convinced will be achieved. “DCMS’s planning and project management show all the signs of the previous rollout – the focus will continue to be on the easier to reach areas and there is still no plan for the hardest to reach communities,” Hillier said. “It couldn’t really explain how broadband has got as far as it has in this critical national strategy. And incredibly it still doesn’t have a real plan for getting the rest of the way to its downgraded targets.” The PAC pointed out that the longer-term goal of every household getting access by 2030 still excludes about 134,000 premises in the hardest to reach areas that are not commercially viable. These “forgotten homes” are still unable to get even the 10Mbps speed connection deemed the bare minimum to meet a modern family’s needs. The prohibitive cost of reaching these premises through conventional methods means the government is considering alternative technology such as satellite broadband to connect them. “It is misleading to suggest we are reliant on the commercial sector to hit our target, which we remain on track to meet,” said a spokesperson for the DCMS. “We are investing £5bn so hard-to-reach areas can get gigabit speeds. Our policies and investment also mean 97% of premises can access superfast broadband which meets people’s current needs and helped us through the pandemic.”As we barrel towards what’s sure to be an unedifying federal election campaign with more of us long-term unemployed and facing entrenched poverty than ever before, poor people are bracing ourselves. We know we’re about to be assaulted with opinions from wealthy people about what we need and what we don’t, with higher income support payments placed firmly in the latter category. Those of us who rely on welfare are so used to having offensive commentary foisted on us by people who’vespent most of their working lives in politics you’d think we’d be inured to it. And yet, here I am, reeling from another poverty polemic. This week, Labor MP Patrick Gorman wrote in an opinion piece titled Labor leads the war on poverty: “Poverty is not simply being low income.” So who do politicians want you to sympathise with when they talk like this? Gorman writes: “Homeless, women in abusive relationships, people with multiple jobs but no job security, Indigenous Australians still experiencing centuries-long discrimination, and [an] increasing number of pensioners, especially single women, living in poverty” should be at the centre of government decision making. “Lifting Australians out of poverty does not mean reducing enterprise or aspiration. It simply means expanding opportunity” he writes, adding that Labor’s plan “will ensure those who work hard have secure jobs, secure housing and a secure retirement after a lifetime of work.” This rhetoric leaves harmful stereotypes about unemployed people intact – and weaponises us. It implies there is a class of “undeserving” poor who have no aspirations. It erases the unpaid labour done by hundreds of thousands of people on poverty payments, and the 550,000 people on unemployment payments who are disabled. It ignores that the vast majority of people living in poverty aren’t in these situations – we’re simply subsisting on obscenely low Centrelink payments set by the government. It’s unthinkable that someone could expect to credibly write hundreds of words about poverty without mentioning this. At first I thought it was a joke, mocked up by a jaded poor person in response to Monday’s commitment that Labor may boost defence spending to more than 2% of gross domestic product if they form government. That’s more than double what’s needed to lift unemployment payments above the Henderson poverty line. But the message was deadly serious, and it’s a deeply harmful one we’ve heard ad nauseam from both major parties. It repeats the same old tropes: secure jobs, housing and retirement, but only for those who “work hard”. These, apparently, are not rights owed to those of us who deliver the government’s desired 4–5% unemployment rate. Never mind that people on welfare payments do work, unpaid and underpaid. Not that the brutal social security system got a mention in the article ostensibly about poverty. Probably because the government-inflicted poverty from obscenely low welfare payments is bipartisan policy. Gorman is right to point out the dire circumstances facing some folks in paid work, but it’s no excuse for ignoring the 2.5 million people and their kids surviving on working-age payments as low as half the poverty line. It’s time to dispel the myths being peddled about what poverty actually means. It’s not some arbitrary figure. It’s not a necessary evil. It’s not immaterial. And it’s certainly not something that only affects people who have a job. It is measurable and it is a political choice. Powerful people who make decisions about precisely how much poverty we should be expected to endure continually approach the issue as a mere academic one. They can only do so because they have never felt what it’s like to be on the verge of missing rent every fortnight, or eating one meal a day, or having the bills get further and further behind, anxiety increasing as the late fees pile up. Poverty means you can’t feed yourself or your kids. It means feeling hungry and being able to do nothing about it. It means when there are supply shortages, as everyone else scrambles to grab as much as they can of whatever they can many of us are left with nothing, because we can’t afford to adapt. We can’t afford to stock up, or buy a more expensive brand if the cheap one sells out, or pay extra to have groceries delivered. There’s no money or energy to traipse around to different stores. There is no room to breathe. All this misery causes long-term damage. It leads to stress and exhaustion and bad teeth and chronic illness and mental ill health. We know from countless stories it leads to suicide, but governments refuse to make that data available, presumably for fear of what it shows. So to the politicians who parcel out meagre sums to so-called poverty alleviation and mental health programs, I have one message: yes, poverty is simply being low income. No amount of charity, psychological bandaids or “place-based initiatives” will change this. All poverty is ultimately income poverty. And its number one cause in this country is abhorrently low welfare payments. We don’t need more food banks, more rebates, more niche supports that are impossible to find out about, let alone access. We need money. To see a politician handwringing about poverty while ignoring welfare recipients this week was too much. Put up or shut up. When Labor were last in government, the gap between the poverty line and unemployment payments grew faster than at any time under Howard or the recent series of Liberal prime ministers since 2013. Labor have refused to say they will increase jobseeker if they win government. It’s even less likely the Coalition will, having increased the rate by $25 a week in April 2021. We’re long overdue for a new measure of poverty in this country. Until then, the best we have is the Henderson poverty line, dating back to the 60s. When people on jobseeker lived at this level temporarily in 2020 because of Covid-19 supports, we heard of the relief it brought, and also how many people still went without (more than a third still regularly skipped meals, medication and healthcare). This is the rate unemployed people and advocates have been pleading to have brought back urgently while the long-term work of better understanding poverty and rebuilding public investment in housing, healthcare and education is done. Both major parties are committed to tax cuts for the rich, negative gearing and capital gains tax policies that fuel astronomical house price growth – and pouring good money after bad on farcical defence projects. Yet they have the audacity to lecture us on careful spending. Both have staunchly ignored every shred of evidence about how government-inflicted poverty and “mutual” obligations are destroying lives and killing people. They have constantly sought to make budget savings off the backs of the poorest people, whether it’s single parents, disabled people, or just the unemployed in general through unlawful schemes like robodebt. So no, whether Liberal or Labor, you’re not for the poor. You’re at war with us. Kristin O’Connell is an activist and disability support pensioner working in social policy at the Antipoverty CentreThe Senate officially took up Democrats’ voting rights bill, which passed the House in a party-line vote last week. The proposal is expected to fail in the Senate after Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema made it clear that they would not support changing the filibuster to allow for the bill’s passage. Despite the bill’s likely failure, Chuck Schumer said the Senate would vote on the legislation “win, lose or draw”. “Members of this chamber were elected to debate and to vote, especially on an issue as vital to the beating heart of our democracy as voting rights,” the majority leader said in a floor speech. “The public is entitled to know where each senator stands on an issue as sacrosanct as defending our democracy.” Secretary of state Antony Blinken is traveling to Kyiv this week, amid heightened concerns of a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. Blinken will meet with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy before traveling on to Berlin to discuss potential responses to Russian aggression. “We’re now at a stage where Russia at any time could launch an attack on Ukraine,” White House spokesperson, Jen Psaki, said. The White House launched the “beta” version of its website to order free at-home coronavirus tests. The site, CovidTests.gov, includes a link to a US Postal Service form that allows Americans to request four tests to be shipped to their homes. The site will officially launch tomorrow morning, the White House said. Two more House Democrats announced they will not seek reelection in November. The announcements from Jim Langevin and Jerry McNerney bring the total number of retirements among House Democrats to 28, as the party braces for the possibility of widespread losses in the midterm elections. The US congressional committee investigating the Capitol attack has issued a blitz of subpoenas to some of Donald Trump’s top lawyers – including Rudy Giuliani. Subpoenas went out to Giuliani and his associate Boris Epshteyn, as well as Sidney Powell and Jenna Ellis, who all defended Trump’s baseless voter fraud claims as he attempted to overturn the election result. More than 1,200 students in Oakland, California, signed a petition saying they would stay home starting today over coronavirus safety concerns. The protest is one of several student-led efforts around the country, indicating growing frustrations amid public school children even as the Biden administration and state governments push to keep campuses open amid the latest pandemic surge. – Guardian staff The US congressional committee investigating the Capitol attack has issued a blitz of subpoenas to some of Donald Trump’s top lawyers – including Rudy Giuliani – as it examines whether the former president oversaw a criminal conspiracy on 6 January 2021. The House panel subpoenaed four of Trump’s legal team on Tuesday: the former president’s personal attorney Rudy Giuliani and his associate Boris Epshteyn, as well as Sidney Powell and Jenna Ellis, who all defended Trump’s baseless voter fraud claims as he attempted to overturn the election result. Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, said in a statement that the panel issued the subpoenas to the four Trump lawyers because they were “in direct contact with the former president about attempts to stop the counting of electoral votes”. The move by the select committee amounts to another dramatic escalation in the investigation, as the orders compel Trump’s lawyers to produce documents and testimony, suggesting the panel believes the lawyers may have acted unlawfully. In its most aggressive move, the select committee ordered Giuliani to testify under oath about his communications with Trump and Republican members of Congress regarding strategies for delaying or overturning the election results. Read more: As students stage walkouts over a lack of high-quality masks and coronavirus tests, the Biden administration today announced that it has distributed that last of its $122bn Covid-19 relief funding for schools from the American Rescue Plan. “I am proud that, with the approval of these plans, states have 100% of their funds and robust plans to help schools remain open and help students thrive,” said Education Secretary Miguel Cardona. Cardona also echoed calls from Joe Biden to keep public schools open. “We know what it takes to keep our schools open safely for in-person learning, and these funds will help us achieve that goal,” he said. But students in Oakland and around the country are alleging that resources have not been distributed equitably, and moreover, in the face of the highly-transmissible Omicron variant, students and teachers who are immunocompromised or live with elderly or immunocompromised family members still feel unsafe attending class in person. Safety concerns and mandated quarantines for exposed students are among the reasons the Los Angeles Unified School District recorded 130,000 student absences last week with only a 66.8% attendance rate. More than 1,200 students in Oakland, California, signed a petition saying they would stay home starting today until administrators offer virtual learning options, and if that wasn’t possible, at least provide more KN95 or N95 masks and weekly testing for students. On Tuesday, three district school campuses were closed because students and teachers, in solidarity, stayed home. At a news conference today, Oakland Unified School District (OUSD) spokesperson John Sasaki said that attendance numbers wouldn’t be available until tomorrow, but the district was expecting more than a thousand students to stay home. The district said it is providing free tests and masks, and had implemented other safety protocols including air purifiers, but students and teachers have alleged inequities in the distribution of resources between schools in more and less wealthy neighborhoods. In recent weeks, students in New York City, suburbs of New Jersey and Washington, have launched protests and petitions as well, demanding virtual learning options amid the latest, Omicron-fueled wave of the coronavirus pandemic. Districts meanwhile have faced immense pressures from parents and politicians to keep school campuses open as the US enters its third year of the pandemic. Students and teachers around the US have complained of inconsistency in schools’ coronavirus policies and a chaotic return from winter break. Last week, students from several New York City schools walked out demanding virtual learning options, and a video of hundreds of masked, Brooklyn Technical High students filing out of class went viral. “I think the number one emotion I feel is just frustrated,” Favour Akingbemi, 17, a senior at Washington Preparatory high school in South LA, told the Guardian earlier this month. Nearly three of Akingbemi’s four high school years have been defined by Covid-19. “It’s upsetting that we’re still stuck in this pandemic,” she said. The US supreme court on Tuesday considered whether the city of Boston violated the free speech of a Christian group which sought to fly a flag in front of city hall. The justices seemed to have little doubt that Boston was wrong to refuse to fly the banner, which was described as a Christian flag. Three flagpoles stand outside Boston city hall. The US flag and the Massachusetts state flag are permanent fixtures. The third pole is usually reserved for the Boston flag but the city has allowed groups to use it while holding events in front of the building. Flags that have been flown include the LGBTQ+ pride flag and those of different nations. In 2017, Harold Shurtleff, the founder of Camp Constitution, a volunteer group that aims “to enhance the understanding of the country’s Judeo-Christian heritage”, applied to have a white flag with a red cross on a blue square flown during an event featuring “short speeches by some local clergy focusing on Boston’s history”, court documents say. The city denied the application and shortly afterwards published rules saying it would deny flags that support “discrimination, prejudice or religious movements”. Shurtleff sued, saying the city violated his free speech by denying him and Camp Constitution access to the flagpole, which he argues is a public forum. The city argued that the flagpole is government speech and that to fly religious flags from it would constitute an unconstitutional endorsement of religion. In court documents, lawyers for Shurtleff argue that the city long exercised little control over who could use the flagpole, sometimes approving applications without looking at the flags that would be raised. Before Shurtleff’s application, over a decade, the city approved 284 flag-raising events without denying any. Once the supreme court announced it would be taking up Shurtleff’s case, Boston said it would no longer accept applications to fly flags in front of city hall. Two lower courts decided in favor of the city but those decisions could be overturned by a supreme court controlled 6-3 by conservative justices. Furthermore, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and the Biden justice department have filed briefs siding with Camp Constitution, saying the flagpole has been used essentially as a public forum. Read more: Joe Biden ends his first year in office at a particularly bleak moment for a US president who promised competency and normalcy. Much of his domestic agenda is stalled on Capitol Hill, impeded by members of his own party. The virus is once again raging out of control: daily infections of Covid-19 have soared to record levels, hospitalizing more Americans than at any previous point during the pandemic. The administration’s vaccine-or-testing mandate for large employers was blocked by the supreme court’s conservative supermajority. Inflation is at a nearly 40-year high. Diplomatic talks have so far failed to pull Russia back from the brink of war with Ukraine. After winning more votes than any presidential candidate in American history, Biden is now – just 12 months later – one of the country’s most unpopular presidents. For months, Biden’s approval ratings have languished in the mid to low 40s, with an average approval rating of 42%. A Quinnipiac poll released last week found him at a dire 33%, which the White House has dismissed as an outlier. Nevertheless, among his modern predecessors, only Donald Trump fared worse at this point in their presidencies. The puzzle of Biden’s unpopularity has many pieces, pollsters and political analysts say. How much of it is within his control is difficult to say. Biden came to office with lofty ambitions: he promised to lift the threat of deadly virus and to usher in a new era of responsive governance and bipartisanship in Washington. One year into his presidency, Biden remains confronted by an unabating pandemic, a nation still very much divided and a Republican party that continues to embrace the “big lie” that Donald Trump won the 2020 election. Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The Senate officially took up Democrats’ voting rights bill, which passed the House in a party-line vote last week. The proposal is expected to fail in the Senate after Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema made it clear that they would not support changing the filibuster to allow for the bill’s passage. Despite the bill’s likely failure, Chuck Schumer said the Senate would vote on the legislation “win, lose or draw”. “Members of this chamber were elected to debate and to vote, especially on an issue as vital to the beating heart of our democracy as voting rights,” the majority leader said in a floor speech. “The public is entitled to know where each senator stands on an issue as sacrosanct as defending our democracy.” Secretary of state Antony Blinken is traveling to Kyiv this week, amid heightened concerns of a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. Blinken will meet with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy before traveling on to Berlin to discuss potential responses to Russian aggression. “We’re now at a stage where Russia at any time could launch an attack on Ukraine,” White House spokesperson, Jen Psaki, said. The White House launched the “beta” version of its website to order free at-home coronavirus tests. The site, CovidTests.gov, includes a link to a US Postal Service form that allows Americans to request four tests to be shipped to their homes. The site will officially launch tomorrow morning, the White House said. Two more House Democrats announced they will not seek reelection in November. The announcements from Jim Langevin and Jerry McNerney bring the total number of retirements among House Democrats to 28, as the party braces for the possibility of widespread losses in the midterm elections. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. The Biden administration has launched the “beta” version of its website to order free, at-home coronavirus tests. The site, CovidTests.gov, includes a link to a US Postal Service form that allows Americans to request four tests to be shipped to their homes. White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said the site will officially launch tomorrow morning and noted there may be some glitches until then. “CovidTests.gov is in the beta phase right now, which is a standard part of the process typically as it’s being kind of tested,” Psaki said at her daily briefing. “Every website launch, in our view, comes with risk. We can’t guarantee there won’t be a bug or two, but the best tech teams across the administration and the postal service are working hard to make this a success.” The Biden administration has already ordered 1bn free at-home coronavirus tests to be distributed to Americans as the country confronts the highly transmissible Omicron variant. William Barr, Donald Trump’s second attorney general and perceived hatchet man until he split from the former president over his lies about election fraud, has a book deal. The publisher of One Damn Thing After Another, due out on 8 March, Harper Collins, promised a “vivid and forthright” read on Barr’s long career in the law and conservative politics, in which he was first attorney general under George HW Bush. “Barr takes readers behind the scenes during seminal moments of the Bush administration in the 1990s, from the LA riots to Pan Am 103 and Iran Contra,” the publisher said. “With the Trump administration, Barr faced an unrelenting barrage of issues, such as Russiagate, the opioid epidemic, Chinese espionage, big tech, the Covid outbreak, civil unrest, the first impeachment, and the 2020 election fallout.” Barr stoked rage on the left when he was seen to be running interference for Trump during the investigation of Russian election meddling and links between Trump and Moscow, his handling of Robert Mueller’s report prompting protest from the special counsel himself. Barr was also present during many flashpoints of the Trump administration, including walking at the president’s side when in the high summer of 2020 he marched across Lafayette Square, cleared of protesters against racism and police brutality, to stage a photo op at a historic church. Barr split from Trump, and ultimately resigned, as the president refused to admit defeat by Joe Biden in the 2020 election. Angry scenes between the two men have been reported in other books, including bestsellers by Bob Woodward and Robert Costa of the Washington Post and Jon Karl of ABC News. Barr stoked Trump’s rage by telling the Associated Press he had not seen evidence of “fraud on a scale that could have effected a different outcome in the election”. He was out of office amid the culmination of Trump’s concerted attempt to overturn his defeat, around the deadly Capitol riot of 6 January. On 7 January 2021, Barr condemned Trump for “orchestrating a mob to pressure Congress” and said: “The president’s conduct yesterday was a betrayal of his office and supporters.” The same day, the Guardian published a look at the state of the Department of Justice after Barr’s second stint in the chair. Vanita Gupta, a former head of the DoJ’s civil rights division, said: “The morale and the reputation of the department has been gutted because of undue political influence on the decisions of career staff. “… The department needs to be rebuilt by new leadership committed at every turn to decisions made on the law and on the facts, and not on what the president wants.” Senate Democrats are expected to meet this evening to discuss possible changes to chamber rules, although it remains unlikely that any proposal can attract the support of Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema. Politico reports: Among their multiple options to defang the 60-vote requirement to get most bills through the Senate, Democrats are leaning toward voting on the revival of the so-called ‘talking filibuster’ to the Senate, according to several people familiar with the situation. The talking filibuster would, after lengthy debate, require a simple majority to advance any bill toward final passage. Democrats have also discussed a carveout from the filibuster for voting and elections reform, but that idea appears to be getting less traction. Texas officials are having trouble providing third party groups with enough paper voter registration forms, citing a paper shortage, according to KUT, Austin’s NPR station. Texas is one of eight states in the US that does not allow voters to register online. Citing supply chain shortages, the Texas secretary of state’s office now says it does not have enough paper to for voter registration applications. Texas’ voter registration for its 1 March primary is 31 January. “The fact is we simply don’t have the supply to honor every single request for free applications,” Sam Taylor, a spokesman for the Texas SoS’ office, told KUT. The secretary of state’s office has had to limit the number of registration applications it can give our per request to 1,000 to 2,000 forms. Grace Chimene, the president of the Texas chapter of the League of Women Voters, a civic action group, said the shortage has made it harder to register voters at naturalization ceremonies, according to KUT. The group registers about 30,000 people at such ceremonies in Houston alone, she told the outlet. Chimene also told KUT that the secretary of state’s office had advised her to seek out donations instead of relying on forms from her office. The problem comes after several reports that counties were denying high percentages of requests for mail-in ballots under a new Texas law. The president of the NAACP, Derrick Johnson, wrote to members of the Senate today to urge them to pass voting rights legislation. “Senators, our democracy may be standing in its final hour. The bedrock of freedom in America lies in our sacred right to vote. Without it, everything else crumbles,” Johnson wrote in the letter. The civil rights leader concluded, “Senators, with your vote, you will decide who defines America, and who has a voice in America.” As of now, it looks like Democrats’ voting rights bill will fail to pass the Senate because Republicans intend to filibuster the legislation, and majority leader Chuck Schumer does not have the votes to change the filibuster. Schumer invoked cloture on the bill today, and the (likely doomed) vote may happen as early as tomorrow. The Florida governor, Ron DeSantis, has proposed the formation of a large and unprecedented state agency to investigate election crimes – in a state where there is little evidence of voter fraud in the 2020 election or otherwise. In response, one prominent state prosecutor sought to tie DeSantis to rightwing conspiracy theorists, calling his proposal “a solution in search of a problem … a $6m door prize for a QAnon pep rally”. Nonetheless, DeSantis, who has also proposed his own militia, wants state lawmakers to allocate nearly $6m to fund an Office of Election Crime and Security, which would have 52 staffers, including 45 investigators. There would be a central office in Tallahassee, the state capital, and investigators based throughout Florida. Staffers in an office with a budget of more than $660,000 to acquire motor vehicles would refer election crimes to either the state attorney general or local prosecutors. The proposed office would have more investigators than law enforcement agencies in some of Florida’s biggest cities have to investigate murders, the Tampa Bay Times reported. Read the Guardian’s full report: The rightwing Fox News host Laura Ingraham has stoked outrage by announcing that the chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff’s positive Covid test – and applauding as she did so. One critic called Ingraham a “merchant of death”. Another said he was “not sure when hate became a Christian value”. Gen Mark Milley became a target of rightwing anger after extensive reporting showed how he worked to contain Donald Trump at the end of his time in power, keeping US armed forces out of domestic affairs. Milley has also defended the teaching in military institutions of critical race theory, an academic discipline which conservatives have turned into a profitable election issue. On Monday, Ingraham introduced a section of her show called Positively Boosted, in which she gleefully recounts which vaccinated public figures have tested positive. Clapping and smiling, she said: “Triple-vaxxed joint chiefs chairman Mark Milley, our favorite Mark Milley, tested positive for Covid yesterday. “And who else? Gen David Berger, the Marine Corps commandant, also positively boosted.” Ingraham also said: “We certainly hope they’re all healthy and fine. But stop pushing your mandates.” Full story: The US and Russian foreign ministers will hold talks in Geneva on Friday in a development a US official said suggested “perhaps diplomacy is not dead” in efforts to fend off an attack on Ukraine. With the White House warning that such an attack could come “at any time”, US secretary of state Tony Blinken will fly to Kyiv on Wednesday and Berlin on Thursday to consult with the Ukrainian government and European allies before the meeting with Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov. Nato also offered Russia a fresh round of talks. “The fact that Secretary Blinken and Foreign Minister Lavrov agreed to meet on Friday in Geneva suggests that perhaps diplomacy is not dead,” a senior state department official said. “We will certainly know a lot more after that engagement on Friday.” At the end of last week, after three sets of discussions in Europe that produced no progress, a senior Russian official suggested that diplomacy could be at a dead end. Tensions have continued to rise, with movements of Russian troops and heavy weapons westwards from the Far East, and into Belarus, as well as US allegations that Russia already had operatives in Ukraine preparing for “false-flag” acts of sabotage. “We’re now at a stage where Russia at any time could launch an attack on Ukraine,” the White House spokeswoman, Jen Psaki, said. “The fact that we’re seeing this movement of forces into Belarus clearly gives the Russians another approach, should they decide to take further military action against Ukraine,” the state department official said. “Russian military plans to begin activities several weeks before a military invasion is something we’ve been watching closely and our assessment has been that could happen anytime between mid-January and mid-February.” Similar claims were made on Tuesday by the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, who said there was evidence of a “significant Russian presence of intelligence operatives inside Ukraine” and that it was “absolutely possible” they’re planning “incidents, accidents, false flag operations”. Two more Democratic members of Congress have announced that they will not run for re-election in November, bringing the total to 28 amid widespread expectation that Republicans will take back the House. Jim Langevin, a Rhode Island veteran, and Jerry McNerney of California, have 19 terms between them. Langevin posted a video announcement and said: “Thank you, Rhode Island.” McNerney said: “I will keep working for the people of my district throughout the remainder of my term and look forward to new opportunities to continue to serve.” Torunn Sinclair, a spokeswoman for the National Republican Congressional Committee, said: “No one wants to run as a House Democrat.” Concerning the implications for Joe Biden of Democrats losing the House later this year, one could do worse than read this piece from Reuters, under the headline “Another midterm worry for Biden White House: probes and impeachment attempts”. Experts who spoke to Reuters expected Republican-led House committees to “subpoena everything under the sun”, including about Hunter Biden, the president’s son, and quite likely to try to impeach Biden – in revenge for the two impeachments of Donald Trump. Ten House Republicans voted for the second, over the Capitol riot, but three of them will not run again this year either. A Republican congressional staffer “with ties to leadership” told Reuters: “There will be a lot of pressure on Kevin McCarthy, if he’s speaker, to pursue impeachment of Biden from day one. He may not have much of a choice if he wants to retain the title.” Speaking of McCarthy, congressional oversight and possible subpoenas… Here’s where the day stands so far: The Senate officially took up Democrats’ voting rights bill, which passed the House in a party-line vote last week. The proposal is expected to fail in the Senate after Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema made it clear that they would not support changing the filibuster to allow for the bill’s passage. Despite the bill’s likely failure, Chuck Schumer said the Senate would vote on the legislation “win, lose or draw”. “Members of this chamber were elected to debate and to vote, especially on an issue as vital to the beating heart of our democracy as voting rights,” the majority leader said in a floor speech. “The public is entitled to know where each senator stands on an issue as sacrosanct as defending our democracy.” Secretary of state Antony Blinken is traveling to Kyiv this week, amid heightened concerns of a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. Blinken will meet with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy before traveling on to Berlin, where he will meet with allies to “discuss recent diplomatic engagements with Russia and joint efforts to deter further Russian aggression against Ukraine,” according to the state department. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. As the Senate took up Democrats’ voting rights legislation, a group of about 30 protesters calling for the bill’s passage were arrested on the steps of the Capitol. The protesters, who are part of a hunger strike to bring attention to the issue of voting rights, were detained by US Capitol Police after staging a demonstration on the Senate steps. As part of the demonstration, the protesters sang songs criticizing Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the two Democratic senators opposed to filibuster reform, and Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell. The group sang “Go tell Sinema we shall not be moved,” “Go tell Manchin” and “Ain’t gonna let McConnell turn me around,” per CNN: Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer argued Democrats have an obligation to do everything possible to pass voting rights legislation, despite the high likelihood of failure because of Republican filibustering. “If Republicans choose to continue their filibuster of voting rights legislation, we must consider and vote on the rule changes that are appropriate and necessary to restore the Senate and make voting rights legislation possible,” Schumer said in his floor speech. But as of now, Schumer does not have the votes necessary to change the filibuster, as Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema remain opposed to doing so. Because of the 50-50 split between Democrats and Republicans in the Senate, Schumer needs the support of every member of his caucus to reform the filibuster. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer argued this represents a historic moment, as the upper chamber considers whether to pass Democrats’ voting rights bill. “The eyes of the nation will be watching what happens this week in the United States Senate,” Schumer said in a floor speech moments ago. “Just a few days removed from what would have been Dr Martin Luther King Jr’s 93rd birthday, the Senate has begun the debate on the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act for the first time, the first time, in this Congress.” Schumer acknowledged the bill will likely fail because of a Republican filibuster, as Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema remain opposed to changing chamber rules to pass the bill. But Schumer said it was vital to allow the American people to see where their lawmakers stand on this issue, suggesting that public scrutiny may help change some minds in the Senate. “Win, lose or draw, members of this chamber were elected to debate and to vote, especially on an issue as vital to the beating heart of our democracy as voting rights,” Schumer said. “The public is entitled to know where each senator stands on an issue as sacrosanct as defending our democracy. The American people deserve to see their senators go on record on whether they will support these bills or oppose them. Indeed, that may be the only way to make progress on this issue now -- for the public to see where each of us in this chamber stands.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has officially filed cloture on the voting rights bill that passed the House last week. Schumer was able to file cloture without a roll call vote because Senate Republicans did not object to the majority leader’s motion. But the bill itself is still expected to fail because Democrats do not have the 60 votes necessary to overcome a Republican filibuster of the legislation. And Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema remain opposed to changing filibuster rules to allow the voting rights bill to advance. Given the 50-50 split between the two parties in the Senate, Schumer needs the support of every Democratic member before he can get rule changes approved. The unsuccessful vote on the voting rights bill may happen as soon as tomorrow, per Politico: Secretary of state Antony Blinken is also traveling to Kyiv and Berlin this week to discuss policies toward Russia as the Kremlin eyes a potential invasion of Ukraine. “Secretary Blinken will begin his trip in Kyiv, Ukraine, where he will meet with President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba on January 19 to reinforce the United States’ commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,” the state department said in its press release. Blinken will also meet with employees of the US embassy in Kyiv to discuss “contingencies” if tensions with Russia escalate further. The secretary will then travel to Berlin on Thursday to “discuss recent diplomatic engagements with Russia and joint efforts to deter further Russian aggression against Ukraine, including Allies’ and partners’ readiness to impose massive consequences and severe economic costs on Russia,” according to the state department. A bipartisan congressional delegation traveled to Kyiv over the weekend to reassert America’s support for Ukrainian sovereignty, amid concerns of a potential Russian invasion. The group included Republican senators Rob Portman, Kevin Cramer and Roger Wicker and Democratic senators Jeanne Shaheen, Chris Murphy, Amy Klobuchar and Richard Blumenthal. The senators met with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy yesterday, before flying back to Washington today for the debate over Democrats’ voting rights bill. “Ukraine continues to defend its territorial integrity against an increasingly aggressive Russia, while also striving to enact critical domestic reforms to solidify its democracy – it is more important than ever that the U.S. support Ukraine in its efforts,” Portman said in a statement. Shaheen added, “Our bipartisan congressional delegation sends a clear message to the global community: the United States stands in unwavering support of our Ukrainian partners to defend their sovereignty and in the face of persistent Russian aggression.” The senators’ trip came as US officials accused Russia of planning a false flag operation to justify an invasion of Ukraine, as diplomatic efforts to deescalate tensions have faltered. Glenn Youngkin, the new governor of Virginia, was greeted in his first day in the executive mansion by a fleece vest in Democratic blue and a cutout of Donald Trump promising a call about 2024. The outgoing governor, Ralph Northam, left the items and other “pranks” as part of a commonwealth tradition. “The prank is the last bipartisan thing we have left,” Tucker Martin, once spokesman for the former Republican governor Robert McDonnell, told the Washington Post. The vest and the cutout were pokes at Youngkin’s campaign, in which he beat the former governor Terry McAuliffe in a bitter contest. Youngkin, a finance executive, wore a fleece vest in Republican red as he sought to present himself as a regular suburban dad. The garment left by Northam included the logo “Top State for Business”, the Post reported, a title won twice while the Democrat was in power. The Trump cut-out was a reference to Youngkin’s successful distancing of himself from the former president during a campaign in which, many charge, he nonetheless ran on culture war issues and racist dog whistles. On his first day in office, Youngkin sought to ban school mask mandates, ensuring pushback from among others area parent Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, and the teaching of critical race theory, which is not taught in Virginia schools. Youngkin has also been reported to be staffing up with Trump alumni. The Post also detailed past gubernatorial pranks, among them an alarm clock set to go off at 4am (left by McDonnell for McAuliffe in 2014); a “huge, taxidermied bear in the governor’s private bathroom” (McDonnell for McAuliffe again); cellphones hidden in elevator shafts (Tim Kaine for McDonnell, in 2010); and a “life-size cutout of himself in the shower” (Mark Warner for Kaine, 2006). Further reading: Tensions are high over at the supreme court, as some justices clash over wearing masks in the courtroom amid concerns about the spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus. NPR reports: It was pretty jarring earlier this month when the justices of the U.S. Supreme Court took the bench for the first time since the omicron surge over the holidays. All were now wearing masks. All, that is, except Justice Neil Gorsuch. What’s more, Justice Sonia Sotomayor was not there at all, choosing instead to participate through a microphone setup in her chambers. Sotomayor has diabetes, a condition that puts her at high risk for serious illness, or even death, from COVID-19. She has been the only justice to wear a mask on the bench since last fall when, amid a marked decline in COVID-19 cases, the justices resumed in-person arguments for the first time since the onset of the pandemic. Now, though, the situation had changed with the omicron surge, and according to court sources, Sotomayor did not feel safe in close proximity to people who were unmasked. Chief Justice John Roberts, understanding that, in some form asked the other justices to mask up. They all did. Except Gorsuch, who, as it happens, sits next to Sotomayor on the bench. His continued refusal since then has also meant that Sotomayor has not attended the justices’ weekly conference in person, joining instead by telephone. The justices have also clashed over recent cases involving abortion rights and the coronavirus pandemic, as the court’s conservative majority dominates the debate. The court’s three liberal justices have become more pointed in their dissents and questioning, NPR notes. After her conservative colleagues signaled a willingness to overturn the landmark abortion case Roe v Wade, Sotomayor said in November, “Will this institution survive the stench that this creates in the public perception that the constitution and its reading are just political acts?” The Fox News host Laura Ingraham hasn’t decided if she’ll vote for Donald Trump in 2024 should he run again for the White House, according to an interview with Northern Virginia magazine. “I’m not saying I’m there for him yet,” Ingraham said. “But I think whether he runs or not – I mean, his policies worked. Trump’s blueprint for policy – a forward-looking, optimistic set of pro-America policies – that blueprint, without a doubt, is winning.” The interview mentioned that Ingraham sort of once went on a date with Trump, and described how she used a photo shoot for the piece to pose for Christmas card images with her kids, despite the shoot not being at her own house, for security reasons. Among things the piece did not discuss: Ingraham’s contortions around the Capitol attack, in which Trump supporters stormed Congress on 6 January 2021 in an attempt to stop certification of Trump’s election defeat, around which seven people died and more than 700 have been charged, 11 with sedition. Ingraham was among Fox News hosts who texted the White House in panic as the attack unfolded. As David Smith reported for the Guardian in December, the host of The Ingraham Angle wrote to Trump’s chief of staff, Mark Meadows, that “the president needs to tell people in the Capitol to go home. This is hurting all of us. He is destroying his legacy”. Yet later that night Ingraham went on air baselessly shifting blame from Trump’s supporters to the anti-fascist movement antifa. She told viewers: “From a chaotic Washington tonight, earlier today the Capitol was under siege by people who can only be described as antithetical to the Maga [Make America Great Again] movement. Now, they were likely not all Trump supporters, and there are some reports that antifa sympathisers may have been sprinkled throughout the crowd.” As Democrats struggle to pass their voting rights bill, the party also currently lacks a strategy to get the Build Back Better Act, the centerpiece of Joe Biden’s economic agenda, across the finish line. The $1.75tn spending package, which includes massive investments in healthcare, childcare and climate initiatives, cannot pass the Senate because of Joe Manchin’s objections to the bill. And now some House Democrats facing difficult reelection campaigns this year are pushing for the separation of the bill into multiple pieces. The Washington Post reports: These members have argued to top House leaders in recent days — so far, to no avail — that holding votes on narrow measures such as curbing prescription drug costs and extending the child tax credit would help Democrats make a case that they can improve voters’ lives economically despite soaring inflation and other issues that have dragged down Biden’s approval ratings. The tension was surfaced in a meeting early this month with House Majority Leader Steny H. Hoyer (D-Md.), the second-highest ranking member of their caucus. Members pushed back when Hoyer, reflecting the continued view of House leadership, argued that breaking up the spending bill would mean abandoning the potentially transformative giant package, which he said still has a chance of passage. ‘I don’t care,’ Rep. Susan Wild (D-Pa.) shot back, telling Hoyer that House Democrats should spend the year sending bills to the Senate with the hope that bipartisan deals could be reached on issues important to a broad range of voters. Florida governor Ron DeSantis abruptly proposed his own plan for Florida’s congressional districts over the weekend, urging state lawmakers to approve a map that would even further tilt the state’s congressional districts in favor of the GOP and diminish the influence of Black voters. DeSantis’ proposal comes as the Florida legislature is moving ahead with its own proposed lines for Florida’s 28 congressional districts. One proposal advancing in the Florida senate would give Republicans a hold on 16 of those districts, but DeSantis’ would give the GOP 18 districts. The plan from DeSantis, who unveiled the plan on the eve of the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday, also cuts the number of African American districts in Florida from four to two, according to Politico Florida. No district in Northern Florida would have more than 40% of a Black voting age population. One district in northern Florida would have around 30% of a Black voting age population, compared to 45% right now, according to Florida Politics. A redistricting proposal from the governor is highly unusual. While DeSantis, widely considered a top contender for the 2024 GOP presidential nomination, can veto any plan, the governor does not usually propose maps. Some observers believe the proposal is a signal DeSantis is likely to veto a plan that is not more GOP friendly, according to Politico. While Democrats are expected to fail again in their effort to pass voting rights legislation, a group of bipartisan senators is working on a more narrow bill to help improve US elections. The senators’ work involves the 1887 Electoral Count Act, an obscure law that dictates how presidential election results are certified by Congress. Donald Trump tried to use the law to pressure Mike Pence to overturn Joe Biden’s victory in the 2020 race, and the certification process was ultimately disrupted by the Capitol insurrection. Axios reports: The idea of targeting the 1887 Electoral Count Act for repairs has now garnered support from some of Congress’ most conservative members, as well as leading House Democrats. It may be the best chance of passing any form of election reform in an otherwise divided Congress. ... A bipartisan group of senators working on a proposal that can pass the Senate has nearly doubled in size, Sen. Mitt Romney (R-Utah), an original member of the group, said Sunday. ... Most reformists agree on two core changes: raising the threshold for objections beyond just a single senator and representative, and clarifying the role of the vice president as merely ceremonial. While many Democrats support changing the 1887 law, they also believe the proposal is not enough to address the sweep of voting restrictions passed by state legislatures since the 2020 election. However, if Democrats once again fail to pass their own voting rights bill, they may be more open to the bipartisan group’s suggestions. Vice-president Kamala Harris on Monday warned that the right to vote in America was “under assault” and tens of millions of Americans faced potential disenfranchisement unless threatened voting rights legislation was passed by US lawmakers. The speech was given on the Martin Luther King day public holiday and comes as King’s family and other civil rights activists in America are pushing for expanded federal voting rights legislation despite political opposition from Republicans. Activists want politicians to pass two measures aimed at expanding voting rights across the country – the Freedom to Vote Act and the John R Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. Passing voting rights legislation is seen as crucial in the face of a wave of Republican state legislation that is aimed at erecting barriers to voting that is likely to suppress the votes of communities of color. Harris delivered strong words – though no new concrete plan of action – regarding fighting off a wave of Republican-led voting rights suppression. She said: “Our freedom to vote is under assault,” adding that “voter suppression laws can make it more difficult to vote for as many as 55 million Americans, or one out of six people in the country”. Greetings, live blog readers. The Senate is expected to take up Democrats’ voting rights bill this week, after the legislation passed the House in a party-line vote last week. However, as of now, there is still no indication that Senate Democrats will be able to change filibuster rules and get the bill passed. Senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema made clear last week that they will not support changing the filibuster, which Republicans have repeatedly used to block voting rights bills. Joe Biden traveled to Capitol Hill last week to try to convince the holdout senators to support rule changes, but his argument was apparently not enough to convince Manchin and Sinema. With the filibuster in place, Democrats need 60 votes to get the voting rights bill passed, and that hurdle is virtually insurmountable in a 50-50 Senate. So unless Manchin and Sinema change their minds, which seems highly unlikely, Democrats are poised to take up a voting rights bill that is doomed to fail. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.New Zealand has temporarily cut off the only pathway home for overseas citizens and visa holders, citing the risk of the Omicron variant. Officials announced on Tuesday evening that new spaces in the country’s managed isolation and quarantine system (MIQ) would not be released. The Covid-19 response minister, Chris Hipkins, said on Wednesday that while the pause was “temporary” there was no date for when spaces would again be available – meaning New Zealand’s border would be closed for an indeterminate time to citizens without an existing booking. “Pausing the next MIQ lobby is a temporary position while MIQ is under extreme pressure from New Zealanders returning with Omicron,” he said. “No decisions have been made on the date, sequence and conditions for the border reopening and cabinet will consider options within the next couple of weeks based on the most up-to-date advice. Until then, we are not in a position to release more MIQ rooms.” The MIQ head, Chris Bunny, said there had been an “unprecedented number of Omicron cases coming into New Zealand and MIQ”, with a tenfold increase in cases at the border compared with December, and a seven-day rolling average of 33. On Wednesday, New Zealand recorded 24 new cases in the community. One of those cases has been confirmed as Omicron, a household contact of an MIQ worker. Separately, an airport worker tested positive on Wednesday. New Zealand’s tough border restrictions have been crucial to its avoiding an Omicron outbreak and keeping Covid cases extremely low – but they are also a source of increasing heartache and rage for those who have found themselves locked out, often in extremely difficult personal circumstances. Other than the risky path of chartering a boat across the Tasman sea, securing a spot in MIQ is the only way into New Zealand. Competition for the rooms, which are released via a lottery system, is fierce. At the last release in early January, a queue of 16,000 people were vying to book one of 1,250 available rooms. For those stranded overseas, the cancellation of future releases was distressing. Maxine Strydom, a member of Grounded Kiwis, which advocates for stranded New Zealanders, said she was stuck in Perth with her two children, and had been unable to secure a spot, despite her job and tenancy in Australia ending. “All of us stranded overseas are affected. We’re all going through mental and emotional stress,” she said. “Soon I’m going to have no money, no house, and no help in a foreign country.” Claire, a New Zealander in San Diego, said: “I feel like every shred of hope has been stripped away … There is no end in sight, it’s just demoralising.” Claire asked to be referred to by first name only amid concerns about criticism by fellow New Zealanders, most of whom have favoured border restrictions. Prof Paula Lorgelly, a health economist based in the UK, had been trying to plan her return home since 2021. She praised the New Zealand government’s overall Covid response, but said at a personal level the cancellations had been difficult. “I’m kind of resigned to waiting,” she said. “[I hope] that it’s a short-term pain for what I perceive to be quite a long-term gain.” The government had previously announced plans to begin a staggered reopening of the border for vaccinated travellers in mid-February. With the emergence of Omicron, however, that plan has been pushed out, and no alternative date announced for when border restrictions may ease. The prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said this week it was only a matter of time before an Omicron outbreak cracked through New Zealand’s border – and the country needed to use this window to push vaccination rates as high as possible. About 80% of New Zealand’s total population has had one dose, and 78% are fully vaccinated. Hipkins said New Zealand would use the time that the border stayed closed to increase vaccination. “Our focus will be on getting booster rates up and immunising as many five to 11-year-olds as possible before Omicron takes hold in the community.” • This article’s subheading was amended on 20 January 2022 to clarify that the temporary pause in MIQ relates to people without existing bookings.“You arrive in the darkness and everyone’s warming up and there’s eucalypt burning for the smoking ceremony,” says John Paul Janke, co-host of NITV’s 26 January Sunrise Ceremony. The Wuthathi and Murray Island man is recalling the atmosphere before the broadcast from North Head in Sydney a couple of years back. “And just the beautiful smell of eucalypt burning in darkness as the sun comes up and dawn breaks over this beautiful continent – it’s a really uplifting sense of spirituality and the identity of this country.” No matter the location, the sense of spirituality and the significance of the moment is not lost on Janke. Last year he co-hosted the Sunrise Ceremony from Burleigh Heads in Queensland. “It was the same feeling, just a different location because it was over the ocean. And it was just stunning. To have that serenity in the morning before the day gets big and involves the rest of Australia. For me it’s a space that we sort of own.” The ceremony is simulcast on Channel 10, with Network 10 presenter and Whadjuk Noongar woman, Narelda Jacobs, co-hosting with Janke (the pair also hosts NITV’s current affairs program, The Point). “It is so moving,” Jacobs says. “I think we kind of cast our mind back to what it must have been like to be those first people to set eyes on white people for the very first time and not knowing exactly what they were.” Artwork by Gamilaroi and Nagarabal designer, Jeremy Worrall Both Janke and Jacobs say how difficult a day 26 January is for First Nations people and the importance of giving a space to acknowledge these feelings. “More and more people who are on their own reconciliation journey are realising the significance of that day and asking the question, why should we celebrate on that day?” Jacobs says. “The Sunrise Ceremony was designed to give people somewhere to channel their emotions. A lot of us wake up on that day, not knowing what to do. We know that we don’t want to celebrate but where is there a place that we can go? So that’s what the Sunrise Ceremony was designed for, to give people a chance to turn the TV on, listen to conversations and be able to hear the things that are on all of our hearts. And to have the time to be able to go deeply into what we’re all feeling.” At NITV and SBS, the Always Was Always Will Be programming in the lead-up to 26 January allows for an exploration of a divisive national event, with Indigenous voices leading the discussion. “Just by turning on the TV, you’re going to be educating yourself,” Jacobs says. “You know, it’s such an important education, just to be aware of that knowledge and to understand the reasons why there has been generations and generations of disadvantage that has been imposed on us.” Janke says listening to the Indigenous perspective is important for all Australians. “I really sense there’s a momentum and a shift in people’s thinking about January 26,” he says. “People have a hunger and desire to learn more about the true history of this country, and in some way, the realisation that the history that we’ve been taught has not been the true history of this country. For too long Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander history and achievement was denied from our historical texts. “And I think for me, hosting a show where people come to find those interesting points of history or discuss issues around Indigenous history, is a very valuable tool in changing people’s mindset and enabling people to have conversations with greater awareness. But also, it’s a great opportunity to maybe shift people’s thinking.” John-Paul Janke and Narelda Jacobs host The Sunrise Ceremony at 6.30am on 26 January Jacobs says: “For people who don’t know what to do on January 26, this is an option for you to be able to hear intelligent and culturally aware and knowledgeable people have probably one of the most important conversations about our national identity. “We look back at the history. We look at what’s happening now and we look towards the future. And while it is an emotionally charged, fairly sombre, moving morning [during the Sunrise Ceremony], there’s also so much hope in the conversations that we have, because the future is really exciting. What we’re doing is unifying the country, you know, in the conversations that we’re having.” As well as the Sunrise Ceremony (at 6am on 26 January), at 7.30pm that evening NITV is screening a concert – TikTok and NITV Present: First Sounds – that brings together a line-up of emerging and established artists in a first-time collaboration between NITV and TikTok. Janke says: “That’s the very essence of NITV. It’s the ability to bring those Indigenous voices – they can be well-known Australians, or they can be people who have been chipping away at community level for a long time – to the forefront, for the entire Australian nation to hear, listen to, celebrate and acknowledge.” NITV presents a selection of dedicated programming, special events and news highlights with a focus on encouraging greater understanding of Indigenous Australian perspectives on 26 January. Join the conversation #AlwaysWasAlwaysWillBeA serial prankster has been leaving a trail of novelty oversized googly eyes across metropolitan Adelaide, from fast food and liquor store mascots to one of the city’s most recognisable colonial monuments. The eyes first appeared in the early hours of 11 January, when a pair of suburban Dan Murphy’s and Kentucky Fried Chicken stores on opposite sides of the city were found sporting matching looks of bug-eyed confusion. Management of the Port Road Dan Murphy’s store sighed and shook their head when approached for comment. While the Eastwood KFC branch swiftly removed the eyes from its big bucket, at Dan Murphy’s the eyes remained fixed to its founder’s face for several days – perhaps in quiet recognition of the prankster’s audacity, or because staff had yet to procure a tall enough ladder. After circulating on various local social media channels, the prank went viral when Twitter user @rAdelaidegrl shared the images to her feed. “I only tweeted it because it made me laugh at the time, thought it might make some of my overseas friends laugh too, and never thought it would gain traction like it has!” she told Guardian Australia. “I do actually live in Adelaide, though, and thought it was a very Adelaide thing to do.” The big googly eyes, which appear to be readily available online for around $10 a pop, were seen again when a van belonging to a Jim’s Mowing franchisee was spotted with telltale dilated pupils peeking out from beneath the bucket hat. On Monday night, the mysterious artist hit another famous colonel – William Light, the man widely credited with selecting the location of the South Australian capital in 1836 and laying out the city’s streets and parklands. That plan, and the hilltop statue overlooking the city, have come to be known as Light’s Vision. So known is Light among many South Australians that since 2016 Adelaide’s city council has opened its meetings with an acknowledgement of Light’s Vision, sandwiched between an acknowledgement of the Kaurna people, whose country the city was built upon, and the Lord’s Prayer. The monument was also referenced in Paul Kelly’s 1985 song Adelaide (“I spilled my wine at the bottom of the statue of Colonel Light”). It’s not the first time the 115-year-old statue has been a target; in June 2020 the messages “no pride in genocide” and “death to Australia” were scrawled in red across the statue’s plinth, part of a wave of colonial monuments around the world that were amended or uprooted by activists in the wake of Black Lives Matter protests. Adelaide’s then-deputy mayor condemned the act and proposed installing CCTV around the statue, a plan that never eventuated. “Colonel Light’s googly eyes have been removed,” Lord Mayor Sandy Verschoor told Guardian Australia on Tuesday. “However, I think we all need a laugh at the moment and the googly eyes appearing around Adelaide have certainly given people a chuckle. “We’ll certainly ‘keep an eye’ on things and, as always, we don’t condone graffiti, offensive messages or property damage.” For South Australians, the googly eyes have provided a welcome respite from rolling headlines about rising Covid-19 case numbers, aged care home outbreaks and widespread ambulance ramping in a state that has remained relatively virus-free for nearly two years. One social media commenter likened Light to Jebediah Springfield, the founder and namesake of The Simpsons’ hometown, whose statue was vandalised by Bart Simpson in an early episode. Another invoked F Scott Fitzgerald, comparing the boggle-eyed visages of Colonel Sanders and Dan Murphy’s to the billboard advertising the work of optometrist Doctor TJ Eckleburg, which looms ominously over the characters in The Great Gatsby. In Fitzgerald’s novel, the billboard is a metaphor for the eyes of God casting judgment over the murky morality of 1920s America. At the time of writing, it is unclear what deeper meaning can be gleaned from the vacant stares of colonels Light and Sanders – but one can’t help but read a new air of accusation in Light’s eternally outstretched arm.The US and Russian foreign ministers will hold talks in Geneva on Friday in a development that a US official said suggested that “perhaps diplomacy is not dead” in the efforts to fend off a new Russian attack on Ukraine. With the White House warning that such an attack could come “at any time”, the US secretary of state, Tony Blinken, will fly to Kyiv on Wednesday and Berlin on Thursday to consult with the Ukrainian government and European allies before the meeting the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov. It comes as Nato also offered Russia a fresh round of talks. “The fact that Secretary Blinken and Foreign Minister Lavrov agreed to meet on Friday in Geneva suggests that perhaps diplomacy is not dead,” a senior state department official said. “We will certainly know a lot more after that engagement on Friday.” At the end of last week, after three sets of discussions in Europe that produced no progress, a senior Russian official suggested that diplomacy could be at a dead-end. Since then tensions have continued to rise, with movements of Russian troops and heavy weapons westwards from the far east, and into Belarus. “We’re now at a stage where Russia at any time could launch an attack on Ukraine,” said the White House spokeswoman, Jen Psaki. Nato was not notified of the Russian military exercises in Belarus, a US official said, noting that the troops were in “numbers beyond what we’d expect in regard to a normal exercise”. “What it represents is an increased capability for Russia to launch this attack – increased opportunity, increased avenues, increased routes,” the official said, questioning how much control Belarus leader Alexander Lukashenko – weakened by popular opposition to his rule – had over events. “The question is: Where do their authorities at this point end and where do the Kremlin’s begin? And that is very uncertain.” “Russian military plans to begin activities several weeks before a military invasion is something we’ve been watching closely and our assessment has been that could happen anytime between mid-January and mid-February,” a senior state department official said. On Tuesday, the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, echoed US claims that there was a “significant Russian presence of intelligence operatives inside Ukraine” and that it was “absolutely possible” they were planning “incidents, accidents, false flag operations”. Nato has invited Russia to a fresh series of talks to discuss European security and arms controls as the alliance scrambles to avoid a possible Russian attack on Ukraine. “The main task now is to prevent a military attack on Ukraine,” Stoltenberg said after a meeting with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz. “We are willing to listen to their concerns but we will not compromise on core principles. We must remain clear-eyed about the prospects of progress but … will make every effort to reach an agreement.” A senior European official confirmed that the coming month is seen as the most likely time for a Russian offensive, if Vladimir Putin takes the decision to attack. “We all have the same assessment because it’s thought that the ground will be too muddy after mid-February,” the official said. “For a highly capable army, winter is actually very helpful.” Blinken will meet Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and other senior officials in Kyiv on Wednesday. In Berlin, the secretary of state will meet with members of the new German coalition government as well as representatives of the “trans-Atlantic quad”, which also includes the UK and France. Those talks will be focused on preparing for the Lavrov meeting and working on a concerted response to any Russian attack. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has not said definitely if the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany would be suspended if Russia does attack, and there are reports that the threat of cutting Russia off from the Swift international payments system may have been quietly shelved. A senior European diplomat said that no final decisions had been made on Swift. “The aim being to really hinder and restrict Russia’s access to the global economy, so all those things – access to capital, access to banking – they remain on the table,” the diplomat said. “They have varying degrees of difficulty and vulnerability, so we need to do a proper assessment of what the Russians might do in response to each and any of those measures, and then work out which one is likely to be the most effective taken in the round.” In Kyiv, Blinken is due to talk to US embassy staff about their contingency plans in the event of a Russian attack. “We are conducting normal contingency planning, as we always do, in terms of our embassy and US citizens in Ukraine,” a state department official said. “That is normal any time we see a security situation severely deteriorating, as we are seeing in Ukraine.” The US senator Chris Murphy, who has been holding talks with Ukrainian leaders on a congressional delegation visit to Kyiv, said: “I think Ukraine is ready. Ukraine is battle tested. “This is a country that knows how to fight, but my worry is that Putin is living in some hermit hole, having been convinced by a small set of bleary-eyed advisers that he’ll be greeted as a liberator when he heads for the Dnieper.” The talks in Geneva follow inconclusive meetings last week between the US and Russia, as well as a rare meeting of the Nato-Russia Council, where Russia tabled uncompromising demands about the future security architecture of Europe, including legally binding guarantees that neither Ukraine nor Moldova will be allowed into Nato. Moscow wants a pullback of Nato troops from close to the Russian border and an end to some intermediate nuclear weapons in Europe. The fresh invitation to talks from Nato may be a last-ditch attempt to show Putin that dialogue will give him substantive progress on arms controls that he can sell to a domestic audience, and that by comparison a military intervention represents an incalculable political risk for him. But Nato and Russia appear far apart on the agenda for the talks. Standing alongside Stoltenberg, Scholz said: “We all want stable and constructive relations with Russia. We have no interest in permanent tensions.” He added there were difficult considerations about how to sequence the issues in any talks with Russia. He also came under pressure to say whether he regarded the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany as a purely commercial contract. He implied the project would stop if there was an invasion by saying he stood by an agreement Germany signed with the US last year. The Stoltenberg offer came as the German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, met her Russian counterpart, Sergey Lavrov, in Moscow. Baerbock said it was hard to see the buildup of Russian troops as anything but a threat to Ukraine and that her country was prepared to pay a high price to defend its values. Baerbock also called for an urgent return to dialogue on the future of Ukraine through the Normandy Format, the four-way dialogue between Germany, Russia, France and Ukraine. Lavrov said he would welcome US involvement in the Normandy Format, claiming it was impossible at present to persuade Ukraine to examine the necessary issues, including the legal status of the Donbass, the separatist region within Ukraine. Lavrov defended the right of Russia to move its troops within its borders and demanded the promised written answers from both Nato and the US to Russia’s call for a rewriting of European security architecture including legally binding guarantees that neither Ukraine or Moldova will be admitted to Nato.A pastor from a megachurch in Tulsa, Oklahoma, faced a wave of criticism online over video of him rubbing spit on a worshipper’s face. During a sermon on Sunday, Michael Todd, a 34-year-old lead pastor at Transformation church, spat into his hand twice. “Receiving vision from God might get nasty,” he said, before turning to the man on the stage. The incident came about 40 minutes into a two-hour service, when Todd discussed Mark 8:22-25, a Bible passage in which Jesus restores a blind man’s sight in the village of Bethsaida by rubbing spit on to his eyes. The parishioner in Tulsa was identified as Todd’s brother, Brentom Todd. When Todd rubbed his hands on to his brother’s face, the audience let out an audible gasp. Todd responded: “How you just reacted is how the people in your life will react when God is doing what it takes for the miracle.” As clips went viral, Todd faced a wave of criticism online. Many condemned his actions as an ill-advised publicity stunt at a time when Covid-19 cases continue to rise across the US. Just in the last 14 days, according to the New York Times Covid-19 tracker, cases rose by 287% in Oklahoma alone. “The acts that Pastor Mike Todd committed today during his Sunday service Transformation Church were absolutely disgusting,” one user wrote on the church’s Facebook page. “I usually am not quick to attack people online but he has got to be held accountable for rubbing his spit in another person’s face. Pastors have to be held to a higher standard.” Another wrote: “I found your demonstration demeaning and gross. Your message was loud and clear without rubbing your spit all over a brother’s face.” On Twitter, a user wrote: “What is the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] going to do about Mike Todd?” Todd tweeted an apology, saying in a video his actions were “disgusting” and a “distraction”. He was passionate about delivering hope to people, he said, “so much so that I try to do extreme things”. “That was a distraction to what I was really trying to do,” he said. “I was really trying to make the word come alive and for people to see the story. But yesterday it got too live, and I own that.” Todd went on to say that he had called his brother. “He was bald before I spit on him,” he said, “and he’s still bald today. So no miracles here … so next time I’ll rethink and do something differently.” Todd has previously worked with the Oklahoma governor, Kevin Stitt, to hold a statewide day of prayer for those affected by Covid-19.That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today’s Covid blog. Please join me on our latest live feed here where I’ll be focusing a little more on the coronavirus crisis across Asia, Australia and the Pacific. We also expect to hear new announcements regarding Plan B Covid measures across England after British prime minister Boris Johnson meets with his cabinet on Wednesday morning. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. New Zealand has temporarily cut off the only pathway home for overseas citizens and visa holders, citing the risk of the Omicron variant. Officials announced on Tuesday evening that new spaces in the country’s managed isolation and quarantine system (MIQ) would not be released. The Covid-19 response minister, Chris Hipkins, said on Wednesday that while the pause was “temporary” there was no date for when spaces would again be available – meaning New Zealand’s border would be closed for an indeterminate time to citizens without an existing booking. “Pausing the next MIQ lobby is a temporary position while MIQ is under extreme pressure from New Zealanders returning with Omicron,” he said. Read the full story here. The mood of Conservative MPs hardened against Boris Johnson on Tuesday night, with open talk of how to oust the British prime minister and who should succeed him as he gave a disastrous interview claiming not to have lied over Downing Street parties. A string of Tory MPs from various ranks and wings of the party said they believed there would be enough letters to trigger a leadership contest after the publication of the Sue Gray report into allegations of lockdown breaches. Johnson was trying to shore up his support in the parliamentary party after it emerged a group of a dozen or so of the 2019 intake had met in the office of Alicia Kearns to discuss his future as prime minister. After the meeting – dubbed the “pork pie putsch” as Kearns’ constituency contains Melton Mowbray – one MP said there were about 20 letters, “some sent, some in draft”. There needs to be 54 letters submitted to trigger a confidence ballot against the prime minister, who met some of the new cohort on Tuesday evening. Read the full analysis here. Returning to Boris Johnson’s fight to salvage his premiership for a moment. With all the commotion over Westminster parties and the future of the prime minister, you may have lost track of how the Covid crisis is unfolding in the UK. Johnson will attempt to change the national conversation by announcing the end of Plan B Covid measures. The PM is expected to instruct millions to return to workplaces across England as he tries to placate furious MPs with a review of Covid restrictions that could end all rules introduced to combat Omicron. The cabinet will meet on Wednesday morning to examine Covid data and review plan B restrictions imposed in December amid the rapid spread of the variant, with Johnson set to update the Commons later in the day. While an official statement said decisions remained “finely balanced”, ministers are widely expected to approve the end of current advice for people to work from home where possible and the use of vaccine certificates to enter venues like nightclubs and sports stadiums. This would happen from Monday 26 January, the pre-set review point for the plan B measures. It is also possible, if considered less likely, that the cabinet could drop the final plan B restriction which mandates masks on public transport and in shops. This move in particular would please many Conservative backbenchers, especially those in the influential Covid Recovery Group. Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as my colleague Tom Ambrose calls it a night in London. I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news from Sydney. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The country’s most populous state of NSW has recorded 32 deaths and 32,297 new cases while Victoria reported 18 Covid deaths and 20,769 new cases as hospitals move to emergency measures. Australia’s chief medical officer says the daily death toll will continue to rise for several weeks. Boris Johnson is expected to announce an easing of England’s coronavirus restrictions as he battles to save his premiership. The prime minister and his cabinet will examine the latest Covid data on Wednesday morning before making a statement in the Commons on Wednesday afternoon, PA Media reported. England’s Plan B measures – which include guidance to work from home, the use of the Covid pass and mandatory mask-wearing in shops and on public transport – are set to expire on 26 January. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, told MPs on Tuesday that he was “cautiously optimistic that we will be able to substantially reduce restrictions next week”. No final decisions have yet been made, although any attempt to extend the restrictions beyond the cut-off date would trigger a fresh confrontation with Tory MPs, something the prime minister would wish to avoid as his position has already been weakened due to the row over Downing Street parties. Asked whether restrictions would be lifted during a visit to a hospital on Tuesday, Johnson said: “We’ve got to be careful about Covid. We’ve got to continue to remember that it’s a threat.” The United Nations is preparing for distanced relief operations in Tonga to avoid a Covid outbreak in the Pacific island nation that is reeling under the impact of a volcanic eruption and tsunami, an official said on Wednesday. All the homes on one of Tonga’s small outer islands have been destroyed and three people have so far been confirmed dead, the government said in its first statement after Saturday’s devastating eruption. With communications badly hampered by the severing of an undersea cable, information on the scale of the devastation so far has mostly come from reconnaissance aircraft. Fiji-based UN co-ordinator Jonathan Veitch said in a media briefing that the agency will conduct most operations remotely, and may not send personnel to the island. “We believe that we will be able to send flights with supplies. We’re not sure that we can send flights with personnel and the reason for this is that Tonga has a very strict Covid-free policy,” Veitch said. Tonga is one of the few countries that is Covid free and an outbreak there would disastrous, he said. The tiny island nation has 90% immunisation coverage both in adults and also younger people over the age of 12, Veitch said. The Omicron variant may cause less severe disease on average, but Covid deaths in the US are climbing and modellers forecast 50,000 to 300,000 more Americans could die by the time the wave subsides in mid-March. The seven-day rolling average for daily new Covid deaths in the US has been trending upward since mid-November, reaching nearly 1,700 on 17 January — still below the peak of 3,300 in January 2021. Deaths among nursing home residents started rising slightly two weeks ago, although still at a rate 10 times less than last year before most residents were vaccinated. “A lot of people are still going to die because of how transmissible Omicron has been,” said University of South Florida epidemiologist Jason Salemi. “It unfortunately is going to get worse before it gets better.” The worst of the coronavirus pandemic — deaths, hospitalisations and lockdowns — could be over this year if huge inequities in vaccinations and medicines are addressed quickly, the head of emergencies at the World Health Organization said on Tuesday. Dr Michael Ryan, speaking during a panel discussion on vaccine inequity hosted by the World Economic Forum, said “we may never end the virus” because such pandemic viruses “end up becoming part of the ecosystem.” But “we have a chance to end the public health emergency this year if we do the things that we’ve been talking about,” he said. The Associated Press reported: WHO has slammed the imbalance in COVID-19 vaccinations between rich and poor countries as a catastrophic moral failure. Fewer than 10% of people in lower-income countries have received even one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. Ryan told the virtual gathering of world and business leaders that if vaccines and other tools aren’t shared fairly, the tragedy of the virus, which has so far killed more than 5.5 million people worldwide, would continue. “What we need to do is get to low levels of disease incidence with maximum vaccination of our populations, so nobody has to die,” Ryan said. “The issue is: It’s the death. It’s the hospitalisations. It’s the disruption of our social, economic, political systems that’s caused the tragedy — not the virus.” Ryan also waded into the growing debate about whether Covid should be considered endemic, a label some countries like Spain have called for to better help live with the virus, or still a pandemic — involving intensified measures that many countries have taken to fight the spread. “Endemic malaria kills hundreds of thousands of people; endemic HIV; endemic violence in our inner cities. Endemic in itself does not mean good. Endemic just means it’s here forever,” he said. The Biden administration on Tuesday quietly launched its website for Americans to request free at-home Covid-19 tests, a day before the site was scheduled to officially go online. The website, CovidTests.gov, now includes a link for Americans to access an order form run by the US Postal Service. People can order four at-home tests per residential address. It marks the latest step by Joe Biden to address criticism of low inventory and long lines for testing during a nationwide surge in Covid-19 cases due to the Omicron variant. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said the website was in “beta testing” and operating at a “limited capacity” ahead of its official launch. The website will officially launch mid-morning on Wednesday, Psaki said. There were isolated reports of problems relating to the address verification tool erroneously enforcing the four-per-household cap on apartment buildings and other multi-unit dwellings, but it was not immediately clear how widespread the issue was. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has advised against travel to 22 nations and territories because of a rising number of Covid cases. The countries include Israel, Australia, Egypt, Albania, Argentina and Uruguay. The CDC raised its travel recommendation to “Level Four: Very High,” telling Americans they should avoid travel to those destinations, which also include Panama, Qatar, the Bahamas, Bahrain and Bolivia. Spain’s coronavirus infection rate dropped for the first time in two-and-a-half months, health ministry data showed on Tuesday. The latest figures suggest the Omicron variant’s rapid-fire advance may be slowing, according to the Reuters news agency. Even as Spain reported over 94,400 new cases, the rate as measured over the preceding 14 days fell to 3,306 cases per 100,000 people from a record 3,397 cases on Wednesday, the first decline since 2 November when it was below 50. The seven-day rate fell even more sharply, to 1,522 from 1,657 per 100,000. Infections had climbed without interruption amid mass testing, turbo-charged by Omicron’s elevated transmissibility and large swathes of the population mixing over Christmas. Hospital admissions remain well below those seen in earlier waves, however, thanks to Spain’s high vaccination rates. Hello, I’m Tom Ambrose and will continue to bring you all the latest Covid news as it happens over the next few hours. We begin with the news that Paraguay’s president Mario Abdo has tested positive for Covid and has mild symptoms from the virus. The country’s health ministry confirmed the development in a tweet today. It comes as the South American country has seen a spike in cases driven by the Omicron variant. “We inform that the President of the Republic, Mario Abdo, tested positive for Covid-19 today,” the ministry said. “The president has mild symptoms and will continue to maintain preventive isolation in accordance with the provisions of the current health protocols.” A brief recap of events so far: In France, 464,769 new cases have been registered in the past 24 hours – a global record increase. Italy’s cases have jumped to 228,179 from 83,403 a day earlier. Omicron measures in Scotland will be lifted on Monday, Nicola Sturgeon has announced. This includes restrictions on indoor live events, table services in hospitality and distancing in indoor public places. The UK has reported 94,432 new Covid cases and 438 deaths. There were more than 900 Covid deaths in England and Wales in the first week of January. The ONS records a 58% rise on the previous week but figures are artificially high due to Christmas bank holidays. Lateral flow tests will no longer be free for people in the UK by the end of June, according to a document seen by Reuters news agency. France’s education minister is facing calls to resign after it emerged he had announced Covid protocol for schools while he was on holiday in Ibiza. That’s all from me, bye for now. My colleague Tom Ambrose will continue to post coronavirus updates here. France has registered 464,769 new Covid-19 infections over the last 24 hours, official data showed on Tuesday, the highest ever-recorded tally since the start of the pandemic, reports Reuters. Official figures show coronavirus deaths in hospital have increased by 288 to 100,339. Rapid Covid tests in Britain will no longer be free for people in the UK from the end of June, according to plans reportedly drawn up by health officials. A document seen by Reuters news agency shows the ending of free testing has been pushed back from earlier in the year due to the emergence of the Omicron variant. One source said the target could move again if the virus throws up another “curveball” such as a worrying new variant. The Department of Health has declined to say what the tests cost, citing commercial contracts. One source has said they could charge £30 for a pack of seven. The document says officials are now working on the premise that an online ordering system should be ready at the end of June to direct most people, excluding key workers and some others, to providers of paid-for LFTs in what is described as a “ramp down of the Universal Testing Offer”. “We will continue to provide free tests as long as necessary. It is one of the most important lines of defence, alongside our vaccines programme,” a government spokesman said when asked about the new date. Education secretary Nadhim Zahawi recently called for the UK to show the rest of the world how to move from pandemic to endemic Covid, as he suggested it would be helpful to cut the isolation period to five days to ease workforce shortages. With the move from pandemic to endemic Covid, the Sunday Times reported free LFTs could be limited to high-risk settings such as care homes, hospitals and schools, and to people with symptoms. This was set out as an eventual aim by the government’s winter Covid plan, which said at some stage the government’s provision of free lateral flows would end and “individuals and businesses would bear the cost”. Zahawi told Sky News this was “absolutely not where we are at”, with 425m lateral flows available for January to help identify cases in the Omicron wave. Pressed on whether the government had plans to scrap the free tests, he said: “Absolutely not. Absolutely not. Absolutely not.” In the US, pandemic modellers are predicting a wave of Omicron deaths in the coming weeks. AP reports: The fast-moving omicron variant may cause less severe disease on average, but Covid-linked deaths in the U.S. are climbing and modellers forecast 50,000 to 300,000 more Americans could die by the time the wave subsides in mid-March. The seven-day rolling average for daily new COVID-19 deaths in the U.S. has been trending upward since mid-November, reaching nearly 1,700 on 17 January — still below the peak of 3,300 in January 2021. Covid-19 deaths among nursing home residents started rising slightly two weeks ago, although still at a rate 10 times less than last year before most residents were vaccinated. If the higher end of projections comes to pass, that would push total US deaths from Covid-19 over 1 million by early spring. Despite signs omicron causes milder disease on average, the unprecedented level of infection spreading through the country, with cases still soaring in many states, means many vulnerable people will become severely ill. “A lot of people are still going to die because of how transmissible omicron has been,” University of South Florida epidemiologist Jason Salemi told AP. “It unfortunately is going to get worse before it gets better.” Morgues are starting to run out of space in Johnson County, Kansas, said Dr Sanmi Areola, director of the health department. More than 30 residents have died in the county this year, the vast majority of them unvaccinated. But the notion that a generally less severe variant could still take the lives of thousands of people has been difficult for health experts to convey. “Overall, you’re going to see more sick people even if you as an individual have a lower chance of being sick,” said Katriona Shea of Pennsylvania State University, who co-leads a team that pulls together several pandemic models and shares the combined projections with the White House. She says Omicron will likely drive the surge in deaths. New evidence from nearly 70,000 patients in Southern California suggests omicron is causing milder illness than delta. A study, posted online and cited during a recent White House briefing, found patients with Omicron had a 53% lower risk of hospitalisation with respiratory symptoms, a 74% lower risk of ICU admission, and a 91% lower risk of death. The study, which has not yet been peer reviewed, comes from researchers at Kaiser Permanente and University of California, Berkeley. “It’s hard for me to say straight out it’s good news,” said study co-author Sara Tartof, a Kaiser Permanente research scientist. “Maybe there’s good news in the sense that if you are infected your chance of becoming severely ill are decreased, but from a societal perspective it’s a very heavy burden for us. It remains a serious situation, and we need to maintain practices and behaviours we know protect us.” It’s the question bugging us every time we leave the house. Which mask is best to wear during the Omicron outbreak? Are cloth masks still effective? Earlier in the coronavirus pandemic, the public was encouraged to wear reusable cloth masks or surgical masks, while P2/N95 respirators were not recommended for community use. But the Omicron variant’s increased transmissibility has prompted the question: should you consider switching your reusable mask for a respirator instead? Guardian Australia produced this helpful explainer... Italy reports 228,179 coronavirus cases on Tuesday. That compares with 83,403 cases a day earlier, according to the health ministry. There were 434 Covid-linked deaths, almost a 50% increase from the 287 logged on Monday. So far, Italy has registered 141,825 Covid-related deaths since the pandemic began, the second-highest toll in Europe after the UK and the ninth highest in the world. The country has reported 9.02m cases to date. Here’s a stark reminder of the potential long-lasting impacts of Covid, including on mental health. Sam Unsted, an editor at Bloomberg news, offered this anecdote of his experience with Covid. “So for anyone also suffering with the fatigue and brain fog, I’m there with you. Be kind to yourself,” he writes. Vaccine developers should tailor jabs to multiple variants, said the EU drugs regulator. Reuters reports: The European Union drugs regulator said pharmaceutical companies should work on more than one upgraded Covid-19 shot, not only tailored to the fast-emerging Omicron variant but also versions that address a combination of variants. Head of vaccines strategy Marco Cavaleri said it is “important not to exclude any options”. Vaccine makers including BioNTech-Pfizer, Moderna and the alliance between AstraZeneca and Oxford University are working on a redesign of their established shots to tackle Omicron, which is becoming dominant in many regions. BioNTech boss Ugur Sahin last week questioned the need to develop products tailored to more than just Omicron because immunity against Omicron has been shown to protect people against preceding virus variants. “Omicron infection and an Omicron vaccine will most likely, with a high probability, also boost immune responses against all existing variants,” Sahin said in an analyst call as part of JP Morgan’s virtual healthcare conference. “What is the value if we now combine a potential Omicron vaccine with another variant as the Omicron vaccine alone would most likely do the job?” he added. In pictures: Berlin rolls out portable cabins for Covid testing as Germany reaches 8m reported cases Covid jabs made using mRNA technology do not cause pregnancy complications for expectant mothers and their babies, the EU’s drug regulator said today, following a detailed review of several studies. Billions of doses of mRNA vaccines have been administered across the globe since the Covid-19 outbreak began. Reuters reports: The review based on studies involving around 65,000 pregnancies at different stages did not find any sign of higher risk of complications, miscarriages, preterm births or severe side-effects on the unborn babies from mRNA jabs, the European Medicines Agency said. Pfizer and BioNTech, as well as Moderna, currently supply such vaccines to the European Union. While the EMA acknowledged there were some limitations in the data, it said results were consistent across studies. “The benefits of receiving mRNA Covid-19 vaccines during pregnancy outweigh any possible risks for expectant mothers and unborn babies,” the agency said. The UK has reported 94,432 new positive Covid-19 cases and 438 more deaths within 28 days of a positive test. That compares with 84,429 cases a day earlier. The latest figures bring the death toll to 152,513. More than 73,200 booster jabs were administered in the past 24 hours, meaning 36,546,583 people have received a third vaccine dose - a total of 63.6% of the eligible population. The Omicron wave is slowing: what lies on the other side? In the latest Science Weekly podcast, our science correspondent Nicola Davis talks about what we can expect in the weeks and months to come, and whether a second ‘exit wave’ could be here in the summer. Abu Dhabi has announced it will ban visitors who have not had their booster jab from entry to the city, as the United Arab Emirates reports a surge in Covid cases driven by the spread of Omicron. People entering the capital of the UAE must show a ‘green pass’ confirming their vaccination status, said the government health app. Visitors are no longer considered fully vaccinated unless they have received a booster at least six months after their second dose. Those wishing to enter Abu Dhabi must also have tested negative for the virus within the last two weeks to maintain their ‘green’ status. More than 90% of Abu Dhabi’s population are vaccinated, health authorities have said. The UAE has seen daily cases jump from about 50 a day in early December to more than 3,000 a day this week. The country has reported 2,195 deaths involving Covid as of Monday. In the UK, Boris Johnson has claimed “nobody warned me it was against the rules” for a drinks party to be hosted in Downing Street during the first lockdown, but also refused to deny the possibility he could resign should he be censured by the inquiry into rule-breaking. The prime minister, speaking publicly for the first time in almost a week, said he “hoped people would understand the circumstances we were operating in” at No 10 during the first lockdown. In the interview, Johnson confirmed he had been interviewed by the senior civil servant Sue Gray for her inquiry into lockdown parties. She is expected to report next week. Restrictions brought in to combat the Omicron variant before Christmas will be lifted across Scotland from next Monday, with nightclubs reopening, social distancing rules in bars and restaurants shelved and large indoor events resuming. The public are being urged to remain “cautious” about socialising in larger groups, to continue to work from home and use face coverings, while vaccine passports remain in use for large-scale events. First minister Nicola Sturgeon said that the latest data “gives us confidence that we have turned the corner on the Omicron wave”. Confirming a significant fall in the number of new positive cases, Sturgeon said that on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday of last week, 36,526 new positive cases were recorded through PCR and lateral flow tests, compared with 20,268 cases reported this Sunday, Monday and today. With hospital admissions and admissions to intensive care falling, Sturgeon said the data suggests Omicron peaked in the first week of January and that “we are now on the downward slope of this wave of cases”. On Monday, the limit on numbers at outdoor public events was lifted. The remaining statutory measures introduced in response to Omicron – limits on indoor public events; the requirement for one-metre physical distancing between different groups in indoor public places; the requirement for table service in hospitality premises serving alcohol on the premises; and the closure of nightclubs – will be lifted from next Monday. From Monday, 24 January, the guidance asking people to stick to a three household limit on indoor gatherings will also be lifted. Before the statement, opposition parties and business groups called on Sturgeon to ease restrictions more quickly. The Scottish Hospitality Group pointed to Scottish government research that suggested that the number of people visiting bars and restaurants has fallen while the number mixing in each other’s homes has risen. Global tourism inched back in 2021, with Europe and the Americas showing the strongest recovery, but is still a fraction of pre-pandemic levels, said the World Tourism Organisation on Tuesday (UNWTO). After 2020, the worst year on record for tourism, there were faint hopes the industry would regain footing in 2021. But all indicators show it has barely improved. Global tourism arrivals have tumbled to less than a quarter of what they were in 2019, and industry professionals are not expecting a full recovery before 2024, according to a report by the UN agency. Rising vaccination rates and the easing of travel rules did allow a small rebound in the second half of 2021, though the spread of the Omicron variant close to Christmas triggered another dip in both travel bookings and industry optimism. “The pace of recovery remains slow and uneven across world regions due to varying degrees of mobility restrictions, vaccination rates and traveller confidence,” the report said. Southern Mediterranean Europe, Central America and the Caribbean reported the biggest increases in tourist arrivals compared with 2020, but were still respectively 54%, 56% and 37% below the 2019 numbers. Tourism in the Asia Pacific has suffered the most, with visitor numbers down by 94% compared with pre-pandemic levels. Global tourism’s direct gross product rose 19% in 2021 from 2020 to $1.9tn, the report said, as each tourist spent more and stayed longer than in 2020. But the tourism industry’s revenue still barely surpassed half its 2019 levels. About 64% of tourism professionals polled by the UNWTO in December do not expect a full recovery before 2024 or later – up from the 45% polled in September, when perspectives for travel revival had not yet been marred by Omicron. “The recent rise in Covid-19 cases and the Omicron variant are set to disrupt the recovery and affect confidence through early 2022 as some countries reintroduce travel bans and restrictions for certain markets,” the report said. Will tourism survive the pandemic? And what kind of world will there be without it? A terrific long-read by Christopher de Bellaigue digs into the consequences for our planet and societies. Two close aides of Pope Francis have both tested positive for coronavirus, Vatican officials said on Tuesday. AP reports: Cardinal Pietro Parolin, who serves as the Vatican’s secretary of state and the pope’s No 2, has “very light” symptoms, while archbishop Edgar Peña Parra is asymptomatic, officials said. There was no immediate comment on their last contact with Pope Francis. It wasn’t clear if Francis has received a booster shot, which has been administered to his predecessor, Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI. These are the first confirmed Covid cases so high up in the Vatican hierarchy since the pandemic began. Russia will halve the isolation period for infected people to seven days, AP reports. Here’s another update from Russia, where daily cases have more than doubled in the past week – from about 15,000 on 10 January to 31,252 on Tuesday. Officials have sounded the alarm about the rising spread of cases, but so far haven’t announced any nationwide curbs to stem it. Deputy prime minister Tatyana Golikova, who runs the country’s coronavirus taskforce, said health officials were “optimising our approaches to quarantine and testing of our citizens, including shortening the quarantine period to seven days”. Currently, people who test positive need to isolate for two weeks, with a mandatory follow-up test on day 11. Golikova added that other policy changes will be adopted in the coming days, without going into details about what these changes might be. She didn’t say why the government is cutting the isolation period. Moscow’s mayor has extended coronavirus curbs and says there will be tough weeks ahead with Omicron, reports Reuters. Sergey Sobyanin announced on Tuesday he will extend Covid-19 home-working rules and guidance to protect elderly people until 1 April as the city prepares for a sharp rise in infections with the Omicron variant. “Given the rapid and wide spread of omicron, it is clear that the workload of outpatient clinics will increase sharply,” he said. “For clinics to cope with their increased work load, more doctors have been put on duty … We have a few difficult weeks ahead of us.” Moscow imposed rules from late October to the end of February requiring people over 60 to stay at home unless they were vaccinated or had recovered from Covid, and obliging businesses to move at least 30% of staff to remote work. Russia’s Covid death toll stands at more than 670,000, the second highest in the world behind the US, according to official data. Let’s quickly dip into some of the top stories from our UK Covid and politics blog, hosted today by Andrew Sparrow: Boris Johnson insists he did think the gathering in No 10 garden was a “work event”, PA Media reports. Chancellor Rishi Sunak said he stands by Johnson’s account of the parties. The PM says in an interview with Beth Rigby no one told him the No 10 party was against the rules. No 10 says PM did not lie to MPs – but that he accepts lying to parliament would be a resignation matter. The government has won its legal bid to overturn a ruling that a contract given to a company whose founders were friends of former adviser Dominic Cummings was unlawful, PA Media reports. Johnson won’t rule out having to resign following the publication of Sue Gray’s report. Our lobby reporters have been watching the Downing Street scandals closely. Catch up on all the government party revelations – and the fallout here: Our Paris correspondent Angelique Chrisafis reports on the PR blow to the French government: France’s education minister is facing calls to resign after it emerged he had announced a strict Covid-testing protocol for schools shortly before the start of the January school term while he was on holiday in Ibiza. As French teachers and parents struggled to prepare children’s return to school amid France’s fifth wave of Covid, Jean-Michel Blanquer had flown to the Spanish island known for its beautiful beaches and party culture for a four-day holiday over the new year, the investigative website Mediapart reported. The revelation that Blanquer was on holiday in Ibiza at one of the toughest moments for schools and parents has created a public relations disaster for the government. Teachers’ and parents’ unions have called for a second nationwide strike on Thursday after tens of thousands of teachers took part in a one-day strike last week. The strict testing and isolation rules were unveiled by Blanquer in an interview with Le Parisien newspaper on 2 January, hours before classes were to resume after the holiday break. Mediapart revealed that the interview had taken place by video from Blanquer’s holiday in Ibiza, from which he flew back on the afternoon of Sunday 2 January in time for the start of the new term the next day. Le Parisien said its journalists had not known the minister’s location. Blanquer was not breaking any laws – there were no Covid restrictions stopping travel to Spain and ministers had been asked to remain in Europe, two hours from Paris. But it has presented the government with an image problem as political campaigning is under way for the spring presidential election. “There is a real gap between what Ibiza represents and what school staff were going through at that moment just before the start of the school term,” said Guislaine David, of the SNUipp-FSU teachers union. She said it would deepen the “already big divide” between the education ministry and teaching staff. Other French political figures have poured scorn on the minister, which you can delve into here: Poland’s health officials say the country has entered a new Covid wave and predict it will peak in mid-February with at least 60,000 new infections per day, the country’s highest infection rate so far in the pandemic. AP reports: Waldemar Kraska, the deputy health minister, said on Tuesday that the highly transmissible omicron variant now accounts for 19% of the samples nationwide that have been sequenced, though 50% are in the Pomerania province along the Baltic coast in the country’s north. If the health ministry’s predictions prove correct, the rate of infection in the coming wave would be more than double that of the third wave of the Covid-19 pandemic in the spring of 2021. Just over half of Poland’s 38 million people (56.5%) are vaccinated, and the death rate is significantly higher in proportion to the population – risking potential strain on the country’s health system. Poland recorded 19,652 cases of coronavirus and 377 deaths on Tuesday. Kraska said that almost 80% of those deaths were among unvaccinated people. “These are deaths that we could have avoided if these people had been vaccinated,” he said. Given Omicron’s high transmissibility and the low levels of vaccination across broad swaths of the country, Poland expects cases to keep climbing. Health minister Adam Niedzielski said there were other forecasts which predict new infections reaching 120,000 new daily cases or even higher. “We have to say that the fifth wave is becoming a fact and we can expect increases in the near future,” Niedzielski said on Monday. He said that the healthcare system is exposed to “the risk of a very high burden”, one that Poland has not yet faced during any of the infection surges to date. The death rate in the central European nation has now reached 102,686. News of Japan’s plans to declare a state of quasi-emergency broke earlier. Here’s our Tokyo correspondent, Justin McCurry, with the latest on the country’s Covid measures. Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, is poised to declare a quasi-state of emergency in Tokyo and several other regions after the country reported the highest number of new coronavirus cases since the start of the pandemic. Kishida is expected to make a formal announcement this week, giving local governors the power to ask bars and restaurants to stop serving alcohol and close early and residents not to travel across prefectural borders. Japanese authorities do not have the legal power to impose shorter operating hours or restrictions on people’s movements, but businesses that refuse to cooperate can face fines. Japan reported more than 30,000 new infections on Tuesday, well above the previous record of almost 26,000 last August, just after Tokyo had hosted the summer Olympics. The Japanese capital reported 5,148 new cases – a more than fivefold increase from the same day last week – while Osaka recorded 5,396 infections. The measures will reportedly go into effect on Friday in Tokyo and 12 other prefectures and end on 13 February. Okinawa and two other prefectures are already under quasi-emergency measures following outbreaks at US military bases that spread to local civilian populations. The Omicron variant appears to be driving the latest surge in cases in what officials are describing as a sixth wave. “The Omicron variant is clearly different from existing variants. It is crucial to take effective measures that suit its characteristics,” the government’s chief health adviser, Shigeru Omi, told reporters after meeting Kishida. The chief cabinet secretary, Hirokazu Matsuno, acknowledged that infections were spreading at an “unprecedented speed”, adding that there were concerns over pressure on hospitals if cases continued to rise dramatically. Tokyo’s occupancy rate of hospital beds for Covid-19 patients reached 23.4% on Tuesday – occupancy would have to reach 50% to trigger a full-blown state of emergency. About 80% of Japan’s 125 million population is double vaccinated, but only around 1% has received a booster shot. The government has promised to speed up boosters, but most people will have to wait until March or later under the current schedule. Weekly registered deaths involving Covid have risen after reporting delays over the Christmas period, ONS figures show. In the first week after New Year, 922 death certificates mentioned Covid-19. This is up 58% on the previous seven days, but the ONS says the rise is partly because of delays caused by bank holidays during Christmas and New Year. 12,262 deaths were registered in England and Wales in the week ending 7 January – a rise of 3,785 compared with the previous week, but 7.6% below the five-year average (950 fewer deaths). In the latest week, around one in 13 (7.5 per cent) registered deaths mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate. Russia has so far recorded 1,682 cases of the Omicron variant, as authorities brace for a new wave of infections, reports Reuters. Deputy prime minister Tatiana Golikova said on Tuesday that Russia has recorded 1,682 cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant across 42 regions, as authorities brace for a significant rise in infections. Omicron has pushed case figures to record highs in parts of western Europe and the US but the variant has been slower to hit Russia. Coronavirus cases in Russia have been steadily rising in the past week, and officials have warned the rapid spread of Omicron will lead to a surge in infections. Anna Popova, head of Russia’s public health watchdog Rospotrebnadzor, said last week that daily new cases might reach six-figure levels. The country’s state coronavirus task force registered 30,726 new infections on Monday – twice as many as just a week ago and the highest daily tally since early December. The task force has also reported 670 deaths. Russia’s state coronavirus task force has registered over 10.8m confirmed infections and 321,990 deaths since the start of the pandemic. Russia’s state statistics agency, which uses broader counting criteria, puts the death toll much higher, saying the overall number of virus-linked deaths between April 2020 and October 2021 was over 625,000. Greetings from London. I’m Georgina Quach and I’ll be at the helm for the next eight hours. As always, feel free to get in touch with comments, story tips and suggestions. Email: georgina.quach@theguardian.com Twitter: @georginaquach A quick snap from Reuters here confirming that Japan’s prime minister Fumio Kishida has said he plans to impose a state of quasi-emergency, meaning stronger Covid-19 curbs on dining and gatherings, on 13 regions including Tokyo from 21 January to 13 February. The Chinese city of Tianjin reported fewer Covid-19 cases on Tuesday after mass testing and locking down some areas appears to have to curbed an outbreak of the highly transmissible Omicron variant. National Health Commission (NHC) official He Qinghua said on Saturday the risk of the Tianjin outbreak spreading to other areas was gradually declining. China’s postal service has ordered workers to disinfect international deliveries and urged the public to reduce orders from overseas after authorities claimed mail could be the source of recent coronavirus outbreaks. Thailand will lower its Covid-19 alert level and is considering easing more restrictions to boost its economy, its health minister said. Romania reported 16,760 new cases of Covid-19 on Tuesday, the biggest single-day rise since October. Germany is reporting a further 74,405 confirmed coronavirus cases and 193 deaths, according to the Robert Koch Institute. The figures are a significant jump on cases recorded at the end of the last week. Poland is experiencing a fifth wave of Covid-19 infections, the health minister said on Monday, warning that the spread of the Omicron variant could send daily case numbers soaring to levels not yet seen in the country. Boris Johnson’s fight to salvage his premiership continues to somewhat overshadow the Covid crisis unfolding in the UK. Rebel Tories are upping pressure on the PM to quit over the Downing Street parties scandal, while deputy prime minister Dominic Raab has been forced to concede that lying to parliament a resigning matter, amid claims that Johnson has misled MPs. Prof Andrew Hayward, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) in the UK, has said of future prospects for the pandemic that “we may still get quite big winters of infection but not the sort of level where we can justify wholesale societal closedown. So I think it is genuinely an optimistic picture, but we’re still not quite there yet.” Abu Dhabi has announced it is requiring people entering the city to show proof of booster shots. New York City and some north-eastern US states appear to be seeing rapid decreases in their numbers of Covid-19 cases in recent days, raising the possibility that the Omicron wave has now already peaked in some parts of the US. Four inmates at an Arkansas jail in the US have filed a lawsuit against the facility and its doctor after they said they were unknowingly prescribed ivermectin to treat Covid-19 as a form of “medical experimentation” despite US health officials warning that the anti-parasitic drug should not be used for that purpose. Australia reported a record daily death toll on Tuesday with 74 deaths. It is the highest daily toll of the pandemic for Australia to date. The Tennis Australia board has come out in support of its under-pressure chief executive, Craig Tiley, while acknowledging it “deeply regrets” the distraction the Novak Djokovic deportation saga caused other Australian Open players. Andrew Sparrow has all the latest UK politics and Covid news on his live blog. I am handing over this international Covid live blog to Georgina Quach. I’ll see you tomorrow. Incidentally, if like me, you are fascinated by Hong Kong authorities deciding that hamsters might be a potential Covid infection risk, late last year, science correspondent Linda Geddes had a look for us at how scientists are studying which animals can and cannot be infected with the novel coronavirus that sparked the global pandemic. It is well worth your time. Read Linda Geddes’ report here: From hippos to hamsters – how Covid is affecting creatures great and small Hong Kong has ordered thousands of hamsters be surrendered for “disposal” after traces of Covid-19 were found on 11 animals in a pet shop. The order includes pets that were bought days before Christmas be handed over, with a warning not to “kiss or abandon them on the street” as Hong Kong and mainland China attempt to sustain a zero Covid strategy, attempting to suppress all outbreaks internally while maintaining tight border controls with the outside world. Authorities announced on Tuesday that traces of the virus were detected on 11 hamsters out of 178 hamsters, rabbits and chinchillas tested at the Little Boss pet shop and associated warehouse in Causeway Bay while investigating the city’s first untraceable Delta variant diagnosis in more than three months, in a 23-year-old store employee. Two employees were also confirmed to have the disease, including one who cleans out the animal cages and handles the hamsters. In response, they ordered the immediate suspension of hamster sales and imports of all rodents. An estimated 2,000 hamsters, including any bought since 22 December, must be handed over, local media reported, and the owners must report for testing. Read more of Helen Davidson’s report here: Hong Kong to cull thousands of hamsters after Covid found on 11 Indonesia recorded 1,362 new Covid-19 cases today, report Reuters, making it the biggest single one-day increase for the country since 8 October. Thailand will lower its Covid-19 alert level and is considering easing more restrictions to boost its economy, its health minister said on Tuesday, in response to a slower infection rate. Among measures being considered are establishing more “sandbox” areas for tourists, who can skip quarantine if they stay in specified areas for seven days and undergo two Covid tests. Nightclubs, pubs and bars will remained closed for now, however, health minister Anutin Charnvirakul told reporters, adding the Covid-19 alert level will be lowered to 3, from 4, on the government’s 5-level system. New Sandbox areas could include Chiang Mai, Chonburi, Khon Kaen and Samut Prakan provinces, he said. Reuters report that the scheme, a calibrated move to rebuild Thailand’s decimated tourism sector, currently operates in Phuket, Phang Nga, Krabi and Koh Samui. Andrew Sparrow has launched his live blog for today, leading with Dominic Raab saying that Dominic Cummings is talking nonsense about Boris Johnson and the Downing Street parties. You can find that here. I’ll be continuing here with global news about coronavirus. The Chinese city of Tianjin reported fewer Covid-19 cases on Tuesday after mass testing and locking down some areas appears to have to curbed an outbreak of the highly transmissible Omicron variant. A key port in northern China, the city reported 18 domestically transmitted cases with confirmed symptoms for Monday. That marks the lowest daily number in a week. National Health Commission (NHC) official He Qinghua said on Saturday the risk of the Tianjin outbreak spreading to other areas was gradually declining, as new cases in the past three days were mainly in people who had been quarantined. Reuters reports that Tianjin’s caseload remains smaller than many outbreaks overseas, but it has made it harder for locals to leave town, sealed up higher risk communities and launched multiple rounds of testing among its 14 million residents, under China’s guideline to quickly curb any flare-up as soon as possible. The central Chinese city of Anyang, which detected Omicron in an outbreak that it said could be traced back to a person arriving from Tianjin, reported 94 local symptomatic cases for Monday, the highest daily count since 8 January. Anyang has stepped up its curbs over the weekend, demanding residents not to leave their communities or villages at will. Romania reported 16,760 new cases of Covid-19 on Tuesday, the biggest single-day rise since October. The European Union’s second-least vaccinated state, just under 41% of Romania’s population is fully inoculated amid distrust of state institutions and poor vaccine education. The number of new infections was approaching the record high of 18,863 daily cases seen in October, official data showed, but hospitalisations were still relatively low. Sixty-five people died of the virus within the last 24 hours. Reuters note that Romania has shortened the isolation and quarantine periods for Covid-19 positive people, their direct contacts and untested travellers from high-risk countries to varying lengths depending on whether they are vaccinated. Professor Andrew Hayward, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) in the UK, has told Times Radio he agrees that the “pandemic will end and we will move to a situation where we’re living with the virus continuing to transmit but causing much less disruption”. He added: “It will tend to, I think, settle into a seasonal pattern - we may still get quite big winters of infection but not the sort of level where we can justify wholesale societal closedown. So I think it is genuinely an optimistic picture, but we’re still not quite there yet.” “It doesn’t do the virus any good to become increasingly severe. In fact, it looks like the Omicron variant, by becoming more transmissible, that it’s also become less severe, and we would hope that’s the general direction of travel.” PA Media quote him saying that in future not everyone will need booster vaccines, adding: “I think the people that we might want to think about boosting the most are the same as flu really – people with chronic illness and elderly people – and we’ll probably move into a sort of more regular annual vaccination programme, or it may not even need to be that frequent. We need to wait for the evidence on that.” Dominic Raab, the UK’s deputy prime minister, has moved a little closer on the BBC’s Radio 4 Today programme to suggesting that a prime minister who had misled parliament might feel obliged to resign. In his earlier appearance on Sky News he dismissed this as a “hypothetical” and would not be drawn on it. Jonathan Ashworth, Labour’s shadow secretary for work and pensions, has been on Sky News this morning. He said: Not only Boris Johnson has he broken the rules, he also makes the rules. And we’ve had party after party after party at Downing Street. And not only that he was beamed into our front rooms night after night standing at podiums, telling us not to socialise outdoors, while at the same time doing the exact opposite of what he was telling us all we weren’t allowed to do. It would have been obvious that as soon as you go into a garden when there’s trestle tables, with bottles of rosé and sausage rolls or whatever else, that’s pretty obvious that is a party, and he should have brought it to an end. And he should have said to his staff “I’ve never want to see anything like that ever again.” William Hague says – former Conservative leader of course, not a Labour politician, absolutely not Labour – he says culture is set at the top. And this culture goes back to Boris Johnson. A rather cutting observation on one aspect of deputy prime minister Dominic Raab’s media appearances in the UK this morning The Tennis Australia board has come out in support of its under-pressure chief executive, Craig Tiley, while acknowledging it “deeply regrets” the distraction the Novak Djokovic deportation saga caused other Australian Open players. The Jayne Hrdlicka-led board, which has been quiet throughout the two weeks of the scandal, finally broke its silence on Tuesday evening to note it “respects the decision of the immigration minister and the finding of the federal court of Australia” in cancelling Djokovic’s visa and then dismissing his bid to have it restored. Read more of Emma Kemp’s report here: Tennis Australia board breaks silence to ‘commend’ Craig Tiley following Novak Djokovic saga Abu Dhabi has announced it is requiring people entering the city to show proof of booster shots. The government’s health app said earlier this week that people entering the city in the United Arab Emirates must show a “green pass” confirming their vaccination status. The app says that visitors are no longer considered fully vaccinated unless they have received a booster at least six months after their second dose. Associated Press reports that those wishing to enter Abu Dhabi also must have have tested negative for the virus within the last two weeks to maintain their “green” status. Another interesting quote from Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization’s special envoy on Covid-19, this time about testing. PA Media quotes him telling BBC Breakfast: I do think that it’s going to be difficult to read too much into the numbers right now with the shift to more and more people using auto-testing and self-reporting. Quite honestly, I know numerous people who’ve got Covid have picked it up on auto tests, who are not telling the authorities – not because they don’t want to be known or anything like that, it’s just simply they’ve got other things to do and they’re getting on with their lives. So, we just need to be careful with the numbers and, most importantly, it’s looking to see what’s happening in hospitals and whether or not death rates are starting to climb again. I do think wearing masks, especially in crowded places, is really important. I do think physical distancing is important. I do think keeping yourself isolated if you’ve got Covid symptoms can save lives and other people. Here’s the Mirror’s online political editor Dan Bloom with a less cleaned-up transcript of that priceless exchange between Sky News’ Kay Burley and deputy prime minister Dominic Raab again: Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization’s special envoy on Covid-19, has repeated his message from yesterday that the situation in the UK “gives us grounds for hope” but continued to urge caution. He told BBC Breakfast this morning: “The situation in the UK. It gives us grounds for hope and I’m personally very pleased to see that. The goal that we’re all aiming for is a situation where this virus is present, but life is organised so that it is not disrupted. PA Media quotes him saying: We also need to be humble, this virus is continuing to evolve and we’re never quite sure that we know exactly where it’s going to go next. We need real honesty – it’s just no good anybody suggesting that the situation is rosier than it really is. That’s why I’ve been careful. I’m saying I can see where the end is, I can see light at the end of the tunnel, but I really do anticipate right throughout the world a bumpy journey ahead during 2022. New York City and some north-eastern US states appear to be seeing rapid decreases in their numbers of Covid-19 cases in recent days, raising the possibility that the Omicron wave has now already peaked in some parts of America. In New York City, the rolling seven-day average of new cases was less than 28,000 a day on 16 January, down from an average of more than 40,000 on 9 January. Similar patterns were being observed in the state as a whole and other nearby regions. “The Covid forecast is improving … the Covid clouds are parting,” said Kathy Hochul, the New York governor, in a statement on Sunday after releasing figures that showed positivity rates in the state are falling sharply. “Overall, the prognosis, the forecast, for Covid is much brighter than it had been before.” Read more of Edward Helmore’s report here: New York and other north-eastern US states see a rapid fall in Covid cases There’s a raft of economic news about the UK out today, indicating a further bounce back from the Covid impact. My colleague Graeme Wearden has the details here. He says: The UK’s unemployment rate has dropped again, as employers continue to add workers to their payroll … but wages are now lagging inflation again. China has been an outlier in asserting that Covid-19 can be transmitted via cold-chain imports such as frozen meat and fish, and parcels through the mail, even though the World Health Organization has played down the risk, and scientists say that airborne transmission is by far the likeliest route of infection. Nevertheless, with one Omicron case being discovered in Beijing ahead of the Winter Olympics, Chinese authorities appear to be doubling-down on this message. China Post has been reminding recipients of overseas mail to disinfect the contents “in a timely manner” with stickers pasted on parcels. Associated Press notes that state broadcaster CCTV said late on Monday in a social media post “Minimise purchases of overseas goods or receiving mail from abroad. Be sure to protect yourself during face-to-face handovers and wear masks and gloves; try to open the package outdoors.” Deputy prime minister Dominic Raab has refused to be drawn on whether a prime minister found to have misled the House of Commons should resign. However, he did say about Boris Johnson and the Downing Street party saga that “I’m confident he’s been straightforward with the House of Commons.” He told Sky News: I’m not going to speculate on hypothetical scenarios. What I am going to do is recognise the importance of public frustration with any perception and any reality of double standards. Let Sue Gray do her job. That’s the right thing to do. He described coverage and claims about parties at No 10 as “loads and loads of frenetic commentary”. “That’s why you have Sue Gray looking at this,” he said, “so you can have a proper investigation into the facts, and then full transparency and accountability.” On Sky News, deputy prime minister Dominic Raab has been asked if he witnessed a drinking culture at No 10 when he was running the country while Boris Johnson was in hospital in Covid. He said: The thing I would say is that people were working extremely long hours, and so it doesn’t surprise me if they were people, as you see in other walks of life, having a glass of wine or beer at the end of the very long week. Asked if that wasn’t against the rules at the time, he replied: “Not in a work setting.” The deputy prime minister then got himself into a bit of a tangle, telling Kay Burley: I’ll tell you something, OK, because I think it’s important, and I can only talk to what I know. And what I saw. And incredibly, I mean, there was speculation that the 20 May party was held in my honour to thank me, and it was just ridiculous. She immediately picked up on this, asking “Was it?”. Raab said “No, of course not, ridiculous.” “So it was a party on 20 May, then?” asked Burley. Raab immediately went back to saying that it was just “a claim that was made”. He defended staff at Downing Street, saying: You asked me for my personal experience, and what I’m telling you is I think that the conditions in a crucible-like context, in a pandemic, the likes of which we’ve never seen before. All of my exposure, direct and personal, was to an incredibly hard-working team. The deputy prime minister, Lord Chancellor and secretary of state for justice, Dominic Raab, is doing the media round for the government in the UK. He’s on Sky News at the moment, and he is very much trying to push the line that what people really care about is the cost of living, the vaccine and booster programme, and that his constituents barely mentioned the prime minister and the Downing Street parties at the weekend when he was out canvassing. He has said “The prime minister has been very clear” that Dominic Cummings is not telling the truth in his claims that Boris Johnson knew about an email inviting people to a party. He said he would not be drawn into the “soap opera”. Dave Penman, the general secretary of the FDA union for civil service managers, has been on the BBC’s Radio 4 programme this morning. He told listeners that the row over lockdown parties at Downing Street was “no doubt damaging to the reputation of the prime minister. But I think also, increasingly, it is damaging the reputation of the civil service in government.” He said: When I say it is damaging, yesterday I was approached by a pretty reputable American broadcaster, asking about the drinking culture of the civil service. And I think there’s a real danger here that what has been clearly a fairly dysfunctional culture at No 10 when it comes to to Covid rules and breaking them, starts to look like a broader culture across the civil service. And some around the prime minister are running that defence, but it’s very damaging and it’s not true. Here is a catch-up if you need it on the latest Covid figures in the UK. There were 84,429 new Covid cases recorded yesterday, that is slightly up on the day before, but that is quite usual for a Tuesday due to the lag in counting the weekend numbers. Over the last seven days there have been 700,366 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK, which means cases have decreased by 41% week-on-week. That seven-day average has been on a downward curve since 1 January. It is worth noting, as illustrated by John Burn-Murdoch of the FT here, that the ONS sampling data also shows cases falling, suggesting it is probably not just a dip in testing numbers that are causing new case numbers to fall. There have been 1,845 deaths recorded in the last week, with 85 added to the tally yesterday. Deaths have increased by 38.7% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have decreased by 2% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 19,345 people in hospital with Covid in total, of whom 746 are in ventilation beds. According to the government’s figures, the peak of hospitalisations during the pandemic was in January 2021, with 39,254 patients in hospital. Hello from London, it is Martin Belam here. I see everything in the news over the last couple of days appears to have some special operation codeword like “Operation Save Big Dog” or “Operation Red Meat” and now “Operation Rinka”, so welcome to “Operation Live Blog” I guess? I’ll bring you the key lines from the morning TV and radio interviews in the UK over the next couple of hours. Deputy prime minister Dominc Raab is on duty this morning. I’m fairly certain that the lines “I can’t comment because I wasn’t there” and “I can’t comment because we need to wait for Sue Gray’s investigation” will be quite prominent. London mayor Sadiq Khan and Labour’s shadow work and pensions secretary Jonathan Ashworth are also on media duties. While we are in the European region, Germany is reporting a further 74,405 confirmed coronavirus cases and 193 deaths, according to the Robert Koch Institute. The figures are a significant jump on cases recorded at the end of the last week. Ukraine is reporting another 8,558 new confirmed coronavirus cases for Monday, according to a statement from its ministry of health. Another 188 deaths were also recorded. More than 15 million Ukrainians have received at least one dose of the Covid-19 vaccine. Four inmates at an Arkansas jail in the US have filed a lawsuit against the facility and its doctor after they said they were unknowingly prescribed ivermectin to treat Covid-19 as a form of “medical experimentation” despite US health officials warning that the anti-parasitic drug should not be used for that purpose. The Arkansas chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union filed the lawsuit on behalf of the men last week against Washington county jail, Washington county sheriff Tim Helder and jail physician Dr Robert Karas. Last August, Helder revealed that the drug had been prescribed to patients with Covid-19. “The lawsuit charges the defendants for administering ivermectin to incarcerated individuals without prior informed consent as to the nature, contents, or potential side effects of the drug,” the ACLU said in a statement last week. Read the full story here. Hello, it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog for the next hour or so before my colleague Martin Belam brings you all the morning news rounds from London. Boris Johnson’s fight to salvage his premiership continues to somewhat overshadow the Covid crisis unfolding in the UK. Rebel Tories are upping pressure on the PM to quit over the Downing Street parties scandal, with one backbencher naming the plan “Operation Rinka” in reference to the dog killed in the Jeremy Thorpe affair in the 1970s. Others are stepping up pressure on colleagues to submit letters of no confidence in the prime minister. The fury comes after John Griffin, the taxi firm tycoon who has given £4m to the Tories since 2013 and one of the Conservatives’ most generous donors, called on Johnson to resign and stand again for the Tory party nomination. Griffin is at least the fifth donor to publicly raise concerns over the Downing Street parties scandal. And with all the commotion over Westminster parties and the future of the prime minister, you may have lost track of what is happening elsewhere in the world. On the other side of the pond, Australia recorded its deadliest day of the pandemic on Tuesday, with 74 deaths across the country. New South Wales reported a record 36 deaths along with 29,830 new cases; Victoria reported 22 deaths and 20,180 new cases, while Queensland reported 16 deaths and 15,962 cases. NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, warned on Monday that a higher death toll over the coming days was likely, while NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, lamented the new record, saying it was a “very difficult day”. If you’ve just joined us on the blog – or you’re waking up over in the UK – here is a quick rundown of the latest developments. Downing Street has denied claims by Dominic Cummings that Boris Johnson was told in advance staff were holding a drinks party in the No 10 garden in the midst of the first Covid lockdown. Japan is also set to halt implementation of its so-called vaccine-and-testing package, a government system that checks whether people have been vaccinated twice or have proof of a negative test in order to access a range of public activities, sources told the Japan Times. China’s postal service has ordered workers to disinfect international deliveries and urged the public to reduce orders from overseas after authorities claimed mail could be the source of recent coronavirus outbreaks, Agence France-Press reports. Hong Kong police have arrested and charged two former Cathay Pacific flight attendants over allegations they broke the city’s coronavirus rules. Almost two-thirds of British adults feel the government should share coronavirus vaccines with the world rather than deliver additional boosters domestically, polling suggests. Poland is experiencing a fifth wave of Covid-19 infections, the health minister said on Monday, warning that the spread of the Omicron variant could send daily case numbers soaring to levels not yet seen in the country. Australia reported a record daily death toll on Tuesday with 74 deaths. It is the highest daily toll of the pandemic for Australia to date. Moderna is aiming to launch a single booster vaccination that will protect against both Covid-19 and flu within two years, its chief executive said, adding that data for Omicron-specific jab will likely be available in March. Another curious story to emerge from Australia concerns a coffee roaster that has come under fire for offering free rapid antigen tests with purchase orders over $159.99 as the country battles a shortage of tests. In a text message sent out to “special VIP customers,” St Ali in Melbourne offered two free rapid antigen tests if customers bought $159.99 worth of coffee or merchandise from their online store. “We’ve been fortunate to secure a limited number of Rapid Antigen Tests for our staff, families and friends. As a special VIP customer, we’d like to extend these to you too,” they said in the text. The coffee roasters were also offering pulse oximeters, hand sanitiser, and contactless thermometers for sale via their website, alongside bags of coffee, filters and Champagne. The roasters faced a fierce backlash to the text message, amid national shortages of rapid antigen tests and reports of price gouging and exploitation by some businesses, and have since retracted the offer. Here are some more details from Guardian reporter Mostafa Rachwani surrounding Australia’s deadliest day of the pandemic. The country’s most populous state of New South Wales reported a record 36 deaths along with 29,830 new cases; Victoria reported 22 deaths and 20,180 new cases, while Queensland reported 16 deaths and 15,962 cases. NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, warned on Monday that a higher death toll over the coming days was likely while NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, lamented the new record, saying it was a “very difficult day”. Japan’s Osaka prefecture is set to record about 6,000 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, an official with knowledge of the matter told the Kyodo news agency earlier today. The figure which would surpass the previous all-time high of 3,760 set on Sunday. Japan is also set to halt implementation of its so-called vaccine-and-testing package, a government system that checks whether people have been vaccinated twice or have proof of a negative test in order to access a range of public activities, sources told the Japan Times. Restrictions on activities such as dining and spectator attendance limits were to have been eased however the government is reportedly now considering placing Tokyo and 10 prefectures under a Covid quasi-state of emergency with plans to recommend a halt of the vaccine-and-testing package. The decision will go to a government advisory panel as early as Wednesday, according to sources. Japan’s daily case count totalled 20,991 on Monday, surpassing 20,000 for the fourth consecutive day. Of Monday’s figures, Tokyo accounted for 3,719 new cases, more than quadrupling the total from a week ago. China’s postal service has ordered workers to disinfect international deliveries and urged the public to reduce orders from overseas after authorities claimed mail could be the source of recent coronavirus outbreaks, Agence France-Press reports. In recent days, Chinese officials have suggested that some people could have been infected by packages from abroad, including a woman in Beijing whom authorities said had no contact with other infected people but tested positive for a variant similar to those found in North America. China Post on Monday published a statement ordering workers to disinfect the outer packaging of all international mail “as soon as possible” and requiring employees handling foreign letters and packages to receive booster vaccine shots. The postal service also asked the public to reduce purchases and deliveries from “countries and regions with a high overseas epidemic risk” and said domestic mail should be handled in different areas to prevent cross-contamination. The coronavirus is spread through small liquid particles exhaled by infected people. Both the World Health Organization and the US Centers for Disease Control have said the risk of being infected from contaminated surfaces is low and becomes less likely as time passes, while the CDC has said there is a 99% reduction in virus traces left on most surfaces within three days. Downing Street has denied claims by Dominic Cummings that Boris Johnson was told in advance staff were holding a drinks party in the No 10 garden in the midst of the first Covid lockdown. The prime minister’s former chief adviser said he was prepared to “swear under oath” that Johnson was lying when he told MPs he had not known beforehand about the “bring your own bottle” event on May 20 2020, PA Media reports. In the Commons last week Johnson admitted spending 25 minutes at the gathering saying he had believed “implicitly” that it was a work event. However, Cummings said both he and another senior official had challenged Martin Reynolds, the prime minister’s principal private secretary who sent out invitations to around 100 staff, as to whether it was within the rules. He said he believed that Reynolds then checked with Johnson who had agreed the event should go ahead. When he tried to raise the issue with the prime minister directly he said his objections were brushed aside. Cummings wrote in his blog: I said to the PM something like: ‘Martin’s invited the building to a drinks party, this is what I’m talking about, you’ve got to grip this madhouse’. The PM waved it aside. The events of May 20 alone, never mind the string of other events, mean the PM lied to Parliament about parties. Not only me but other eyewitnesses who discussed this at the time would swear under oath this is what happened.” Hong Kong police have arrested and charged two former Cathay Pacific flight attendants over allegations they broke the city’s coronavirus rules. The statement did not name the airline but the two – reportedly men aged 44 and 45 – were later confirmed by leader Carrie Lam as being former staff of the airline. Lam alleged on Tuesday “there is evidence showing they have violated [epidemic regulations]”. The announcement comes after Cathay Pacific said in January it had fired two aircrew who were suspected of breaching Covid-19 protocols. Police said the pair had returned to Hong Kong from the US on 24 December and 25 December and then “conducted unnecessary activities” during their home isolation period. They both later tested positive for the fast-spreading Omicron strain. They have been released on bail with their case to be heard in separate courts on 9 February. If convicted, they could face up to six months in prison and a fine of up to HK$5,000 ($642). They were discharged from hospital after treatment, according to local media. Read the full story here. Almost two thirds of British adults feel the government should share coronavirus vaccines with the world rather than deliver additional boosters domestically, polling suggests. Most adults understand that “we need to vaccinate the world to end the pandemic at home”, according to a survey for the ONE Campaign, which works to end global poverty and disease. They also feel that the disparity in vaccination levels between rich and poor countries is both “unwise and unfair”. Some 2,186 UK adults were surveyed by Savanta ComRes online between January 7 and 9. The results, as reported by PA Media are below: 63% said that, if new variants were likely in countries with poor vaccine access, the UK should prioritise ensuring the vaccine is available everywhere over giving people a second booster. 65% said it is unfair that significantly fewer people in low-income countries are fully vaccinated than those in high-income countries. 53% said they would be willing to forgo a fourth dose so a vulnerable person or frontline worker in another country could receive their first. 72% say the UK should make ending the global pandemic its top priority, with a similar proportion agreeing that the UK economy will continue to suffer unless the virus is beaten everywhere. Respondents also agreed that uneven access to the vaccine is a “moral failure” (66%); that the UK should rapidly speed up delivery of doses it has promised to share (70%); and that the UK should stop buying more doses than it needs (64%). The UK delivered more than 30 million vaccines internationally last year. It has committed to donate 100 million doses around the world. While we are in the Asia region, South Korea has confirmed another 4,072 coronavirus cases and 45 daily deaths in the past 24 hours, according to the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. There are 543 people in critical condition, with an average of 463 new admissions per day. The intensive care bed utilisation rate stands at 28%. Thailand is reporting a daily rise of 6,397 confirmed coronavirus cases and 18 deaths, according to recently released government data. The government is also considering reviving a scheme that allows tourists to visit with only minimal quarantine. The “Test and Go” scheme, which was introduced late last year, was suspended when the Omicron variant emerged. With India’s Omicron-driven third wave firmly under way, the New Delhi government has, along with other restrictions, limited wedding guests to 20, dealing a huge blow to India’s traditional wedding season, which runs from November to March. Thousands of families are in the agony of uncertainty, with most of the arrangements paid for, either in full or in part. In pre-pandemic times, some December weekends could see more than 20,000 weddings taking place in the capital in a single day, choking the roads with traffic. It is in this November-March period that the industry makes the bulk of its money because the weather is more temperate. Read the full story from our reporter in Delhi, Amrit Dhillon, here. China has reported another 171 new confirmed Covid-19 cases for Monday, 17 January, according to a recently released statement by the National Health Commission. The figure is down from 223 a day earlier, according to government data. Of the new infections, 127 were locally transmitted, down from 163 a day earlier. The other new cases were imported. The new locally transmitted cases were in Henan, Tianjin, Guangdong, Beijing and Shaanxi, the NHC said. The country also reported 33 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, up from 28 infections a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636. Poland is experiencing a fifth wave of Covid-19 infections, the health minister said on Monday, warning that the spread of the Omicron variant could send daily case numbers soaring to levels not yet seen in the country. While daily case numbers have fallen since early December, the European Union’s largest eastern member has had little respite since the fourth wave, regularly reporting over 10,000 new infections per day amid low vaccine take-up and limited restrictions on public life. “We predict that the peak of infections will be in mid-February and that peak is about 60,000 cases a day,” Adam Niedzielski told a news conference. The highest number of daily cases reported since the pandemic began was 35,251 on 1 April, 2021. Niedzielski said that he expected figures released on Tuesday to show in excess of 20,000 daily cases. On Friday, 13 of the 17 members of Poland’s Medical Council advising the prime minister on Covid-19 resigned, condemning what they said was a lack of scientific influence on policy. One of the members who resigned, Dr Konstanty Szuldrzynski, told TVN24 on Monday that the death rate in countries where stricter restrictions had been enforced had been lower than in Poland, and that the fifth wave would put the health service under enormous strain. “We are going into the next wave of Omicron completely unprepared,” he said. “Please remember that the huge death rate in Poland is not just related to the low percentage of vaccinated people but also to the fact that we have a very outdated health system.” The country of around 38 million has so far reported 4,323,482 cases of the coronavirus and 102,309 deaths. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog today as we unpack all the latest Covid developments from across the world. I’ll be reporting to you from Sydney and my colleagues from London will take over a little later in the day. Case numbers are just coming in across Australia this morning, confirming the country has hit a new bleak pandemic milestone. A record 74 deaths have been reported from the country’s two most populous states of NSW and Victoria with 36 deaths and 22 deaths respectively. It’s the highest daily toll of the pandemic for Australia to date. The Omicron outbreak has continued to push up hospitalisation rates to record levels with more people in hospitals and intensive care than at any other time during the pandemic even as daily infections eased slightly. On the other side of the world in Poland, the European Union’s largest eastern member says it is currently battling a fifth wave of Covid-19 infections, with cases expected to hit record levels in coming weeks. Health minister Adam Niedzielski warned that the spread of the Omicron variant could send daily case numbers soaring to levels not yet seen in the country. “We predict that the peak of infections will be in mid-February and that peak is about 60,000 cases a day,” he told a news conference on Monday. Here’s a comprehensive run-down of all the latest global developments: Europe: Covid booster shots will be offered to children in England aged 12 to 15 who are most at risk from coronavirus, NHS England has said. People in England are also now able to end their coronavirus isolation after five full days in the latest change to self-isolation guidance. Greece has imposed a vaccination mandate for people over age 60. The EU should continue to suspend strict fiscal rules to help debt-mired countries such as Italy until the pandemic is over, the new chairman of the German parliament’s powerful EU affairs committee has said. A return to global pre-pandemic employment levels could take years, a UN report revealed. French teachers’ unions have called for a second major strike this week to protest the government’s Covid testing and isolation protocols, which they say are severely disrupting classes. France’s parliament has given final approval to the government’s latest measures to tackle Covid-19, including a vaccine pass contested by anti-vaccine protesters. Uzbekistan has reported 1,037 new daily Covid cases, the highest number on record. Kazakhstan reported a record 13,523 cases on Sunday, and the Kazakh government has announced middle and high school students in the country’s three largest cities would study remotely until the end of March. The chairman of Credit Suisse, António Horta-Osório, has resigned after the Swiss bank reportedly found that he had broken Covid-19 quarantine laws. Asia: The number of Covid-19 cases across China reached the highest level since March 2020 on Monday, as the country reported a daily rise of 223 new infections. Several cities in China are now on a high Covid alert in preparation for the lunar new year holiday travel season when hundreds of millions of people are expected to travel around the country. Cities such as Luoyang in central China and Jieyang in the south now require residents to report details of their trips in advance. Chinese authorities are urging citizens not to order goods from overseas, claiming a recent Omicron infection detected in Beijing came from an international package sent from Canada. There is not a strong scientific basis to the claim, according to experts. Beijing Winter Olympics tickets will not be sold to general public in latest Covid setback. Japan will bring forward its Covid vaccination booster shots by as much as two months while also considering placing 11 prefectures, including Tokyo and its surrounding area, under a quasi-state of emergency to curb a rapidly accelerating sixth wave of infections. Hong Kong police have arrested and charged two Cathay Pacific flight attendants for allegedly contravening Covid regulations. Thailand is considering bringing back a quarantine waiver for vaccinated visitors, its health minister said on Monday, as part of a proposed easing of some Covid measures later this week. Americas: Travellers to Hawaii may soon need to have supplemented their vaccinations with a booster does in order to visit the islands without having to quarantine. Middle East: Israel cuts Covid isolation to five days for asymptomatic people. Medical: The chief executive of Pfizer, Albert Bourla, has said that while the coronavirus will continue to circulate for many years to come, this current wave should be the last to have to lead to restrictions. Moderna is aiming to launch a single booster vaccination that will protect against both Covid-19 and flu within two years, its chief executive said. A fourth shot of Covid vaccine raises antibodies to even higher levels than the third jab but it is not enough to prevent Omicron infections, according to a preliminary study in Israel. Moderna CEO says data for Omicron-specific jab likely available in March. Please feel free to get in touch with me if you have a story or tips to share. Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: samantha.lock@theguardian.com Twitter: @Samantha__LockLocal authorities in Papua New Guinea are calling for calm, after the country announced its first case of the Omicron variant. Authorities announced on Tuesday the case was a man who came to Papua New Guinea in December from South Africa, after travelling through London and Hong Kong. He initially tested negative with no symptoms upon arrival in the country. “Given the period for the man’s travel, it is unclear when or where he contracted the Omicron strain, however given its incubation period of three days– it is likely he acquired it after departing South Africa,” said David Manning, national pandemic response controller. “Contact tracing has been undertaken, and no further close contact infections have been identified. But considering the timeline surrounding the man’s movement, the government is working from the assumption that the Omicron variant is now active in Papua New Guinea.” The man, who was vaccinated, is now fully recovered. Manning said “the key message for our people is not to panic, but to do the right thing and reduce the speed of the spread”. Papua New Guinea has one of the lowest rates of vaccination in the world, with less than 3% of the total population vaccinated. Recent statistics from the National Control Centre, indicate that only 229,000 people have been fully vaccinated, out of a population of roughly 9 million. About 290,000 people have received at least one dose. Last year, the Lowy Institute in Australia conducted modelling that predicted PNG would take five years to vaccinate just a third of its population. Despite low first and second dose rates, the country recently announced the approval and availability of booster shots of the Covid-19 vaccine. “The medical and scientific advisory committee have now advised that there is overwhelming evidence that a Covid-19 booster shot is prudent even for people who are fully vaccinated, as an additional layer of protection,” Manning said. “The booster shot is important for people who have compromised immune systems or other underlying health conditions, and the elderly. But also, more generally, people who had their primary vaccination more than six months ago should receive a booster dose to enhance effectiveness.” More than 36,000 Covid-19 cases have been recorded in Papua New Guinea since the start of the pandemic to date, with close to 600 known deaths. However, it is believed that the true number of cases is far higher, with incredibly low testing rates and widespread stigma about Covid-19. The country suffered a huge surge of Covid-19 cases in October last year. Hospitals were pushed to the brink and morgues were overflowing, leading the government to conduct mass burials. The country’s health care system has long been plagued by shortages of drugs, funding, an ailing infrastructure and a severe lack of health workers. Cases have since declined. The Taurama Aquatic Centre run by the St John Ambulance in Port Moresby, which assists cater for the mild to moderate cases has stopped seeing patients around December and the chief executive Matt Cannon said that while St John Ambulance had not transported any Covid patients in the last two weeks, they were “on standby if there is any further surge.”Scott Morrison has denied misleading Australians about whether his government is detaining refugees at a Melbourne hotel, insisting he “answered to the best of my knowledge at that time”. The prime minister on Wednesday acknowledged people recognised as refugees were among those held at the Park hotel – where tennis star Novak Djokovic was also briefly detained – but insisted he had never suggested there were no refugees there. On Monday he told a radio host: “It’s not clear that to my information that someone in that case is actually a refugee.” Morrison came under fire over the “grossly misleading” comments, with Elaine Pearson, the Australia director of Human Rights Watch, saying on Monday: “It’s an outright lie to say that these people are not refugees, when most of them have had their refugee status formally recognised for years.” Guardian Australia understands there are 25 refugees and seven asylum seekers currently held in the hotel. In an interview on Monday focused on the Djokovic case, the 2GB host Ben Fordham pointed out that the tennis star “was kept in a Melbourne hotel that also holds asylum seekers that have been denied visas”. Fordham asked: “There are refugees in that same hotel who have been detained for more than nine years, and taxpayers fork out millions of dollars to keep them in limbo. How is that acceptable?” Morrison replied: “Well, the specific cases, Ben, I mean, it’s not clear that to my information that someone in that case is actually a refugee. They may have sought asylum and been found not to be a refugee and have chosen not to return.” Morrison did not specifically concede that there were also refugees detained there. People who were not found to be refugees and who would not return home “can’t enter Australia”, he said. During a media conference in Canberra on Wednesday, Morrison was asked whether he would apologise for the comments, and whether it was appropriate that some refugees had been held in detention for more than eight years. Morrison replied: “I didn’t make a statement that every single person was, who is in that place, was not a refugee. I said that was to my understanding the case with some people who were there.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He said there were “people in a range of situations” and he was “happy to add to that information”. “The suggestion that I said they were all found not to be refugees, that’s not true – that is not what I said. It was a question in a radio interview, I answered to the best of my knowledge at that time. In quite a number of cases that was indeed the case. “There were people in detention who are not owed protection under the refugee convention and our rules.” Morrison said others who were owed protection “arrived in Australia illegally by boat”. Under international law, it is not illegal to seek asylum. Under the Refugees Convention – to which Australia is a party – a refugee is someone who has a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion. Australia is obliged not to return refugees to places where they would face persecution, under a principle known as non-refoulement. When pressed on Wednesday about the status of the 25 people at the hotel found to be refugees, Morrison said: “They’re all in various stages, various stages, of the pathway to where they will ultimately be located.” Morrison said it was “confirmed to me this morning, that those who are there, with some obvious exceptions who arrived more recently, are people who came to Australia, illegally entered Australia by boat”. Morrison said the government was “not wavering” on what he thought had been a bipartisan position “that someone who illegally entered Australia by boat will not be offered permanent settlement here”. “The vast majority of people who are going through this process are actually out in the community. But there are some cases which are very sensitive and have very specific reasons as to why they would be there.” He said some of the refugees were “on the pathway to the United States” – a reference to the resettlement deal struck between the Turnbull government and the Obama administration. Morrison said he was “aware of one particular individual” who had been the focus “of a lot of attention” who was “on such a pathway”. “I would be encouraging them to take up that permanent option that is available to them in the United States,” the prime minister said. Mehdi, a refugee held in the Park hotel who fled Iran aged 15, said on Wednesday: “I suspect he’s talking about me. I have taken that option. I am waiting for you to let me go. And why must we wait in detention?” Mehdi – who uses only one name – arrived in Australia by boat in 2013. His claim for protection under the Refugees Convention was formally recognised in 2014 while he was held by Australia on Nauru. Pearson, of Human Rights Watch, said most of those held in the hotel had been granted refugee status after it was “established that they simply can’t return to their country”. She said Australia had a long track record of trying to cast doubt on the claims of people who seek asylum. “If you look at who’s being detained, it is men who have been shunted from one centre to another, in Australia or offshore, for more than eight years. At what point in time do you say they have suffered enough? They can’t simply continue to be used, for the rest of their lives, as a symbol of deterrence. They need to be allowed to move on with their lives.”Rural concession card holders may miss out on rapid antigen tests as small town pharmacists are caught between a government scheme that requires upfront investment in stock and wholesalers stipulating large minimum orders. Under the government’s scheme announced last week, pharmacies have to pay for the tests first before being reimbursed only for the tests they use. Small pharmacies are also increasingly forced to pay for large numbers of orders stipulated by wholesalers. Robert Smith, sole pharmacist and owner of Merriwa Pharmacy in NSW, said wholesalers were asking for very large-scale minimum orders in the realm of $10,000 worth of stock. He said it was a lot of risk to carry for rural pharmacies servicing small populations who could become stuck with stock once the market gets flooded with tests. Joanne Loftus, proprietor and sole pharmacist of Northampton Pharmacy in Western Australia – a town with a population under 1,000 – said the entire wholesaling system seemed to be set up to support larger pharmacies. “The quantities that they’re wanting you to commit to are just way too big, they’re ridiculous,” she said. Smith said the risk is exacerbated because the details of who will need them and the numbers of how many he will need to order was unclear. Although the program is due to commence from 24 January, Smith is looking at delivery in mid-to-late February and is worried about his business not being able to absorb the loss if the government policy changes, “as we’ve seen with government policy changing very frequently”. Katie Stott is the coordinator of the Rural Pharmacy Network and manages the only pharmacy in the Tasmanian town of Dover, servicing a catchment area of 2-3000, together with her husband Fred Hellqvist. Stott said because of the way the concessional RATs scheme has been set up, itwas likely to create an inequitable situation. According to Stott, because RATs have not been listed under the pharmaceutical benefits scheme, it is not essential for wholesalers under their community service obligation to ensure timely access to those medicines for all pharmacies in Australia. A spokesperson from the Pharmacy Guild of Australia told the Guardian that “participation is not compulsory, and pharmacies will make their own decisions to participate subject to their ability to source RAT kits to be able to provide to eligible patients”. “People work in health professions in rural communities, they live amongst their patients and don’t want to let them down,” said Smith. “They want them to have access but there’s only a certain amount of risk they can carry.” Stott said “we’ve got concessional patients in our communities and if it’s not possible for us to obtain the stock at a reasonable price, then our communities will miss out because we won’t be able to make it viable”. She believed “the [Pharmacy] Guild has a role to play in ensuring the rollout is equitable”. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter For Loftus, the nearest pharmacy besides hers is 55km away in Geraldton and the need for patients who are eligible for the scheme – including elderly patients and people with comorbidities – to have to travel is “something you don’t want your most vulnerable patients to have to deal with”. Similarly, for many of Stott’s customers, the drive to the nearest pharmacy would be over an hour and not an option for the elderly. Rural pharmacies also often have limited public transport options available. A Department of Health spokesperson told Guardian Australia that “specific decisions in respect of stocking, supply and purchasing arrangements (including pricing and terms of trade) are a matter between the pharmacy and the wholesale distributor”. “The Department of Health has worked closely with the pharmacy profession including the Pharmacy Guild of Australia, the National Pharmaceutical Services Association representing wholesalers, and individual pharmacy banner groups to design and implement the program with a clear focus on ensuring that there are large numbers of pharmacies participating in the program across metro, rural and regional Australia.” “The commonwealth will work with stakeholders to monitor program uptake in the initial weeks, including access in rural areas,” the spokesperson said. Stott said “the government is reimbursing all pharmacies at the same rate so obviously if you can get a better deal it makes it more viable to deliver. This favours the banners and large groups”. There is also concern that those who can afford the bulk deals will be prioritised when it comes to distribution, which is already being seen according to Prof Trent Twomey, the national president of the Pharmacy Guild. Stott added that small rural pharmacies are “used to this situation … You’re right down the bottom of the chain”. According to her, the pattern of larger clients being prioritised over smaller rural pharmacies was already occurring at the beginning of the pandemic when numerous rural pharmacies experienced difficulties re-stocking essential PBS medications. “This is why we have no faith,” she said. Loftus agreed that rural pharmacies are at “the lower end of the scale all the time”. “We’ve already got workplace shortages, we’re already high cost of freight, high cost of everything to keep your business running. And it’s all just geared up towards major franchises. I feel as though it’s not about public health,” Loftus said. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityAs ever, Ash Barty the person was understated. And in customary style, Ash Barty the tennis player was ruthless. Another qualifier down, another round deeper into the Australian Open women’s singles draw. This time her victim was Lucia Bronzetti, an Italian ranked 142 places lower than the Australian world No 1. She snatched two games off the Wimbledon champion, which was one more than Lesia Tsurenko managed in the opener. But it is really splitting hairs when the scoreline ends at 6-1, 6-1. This was as routine as it gets for Barty, a 52-minute stroll in the sun at Rod Laver Arena. She rolled out the wicked serve, the backhand slice and the top-spin forehand and calmly, almost quietly, slipped the win into her satchel she hopes will be full to the brim come the end of next week. Next on the list on Friday is another Italian in 30th seed Camila Giorgi, before a potential fourth-round encounter with Naomi Osaka. “She [Giorgi] is an incredible ball-striker one of the most athletic girls out here,” Barty said. “Not afraid to stand on the baseline and put you under time pressure from the first strike. I will have to are have my running shoes on get the backhand slice out and bring in variation and see how it goes.” That variation was also on show on Wednesday, when Barty kept her opponent to seven points in the first five games and broke her five times en route to extending her unbeaten run in 2022 to six matches, having already won the season-opening Adelaide International. “I felt like we had a good preparation in Adelaide,” she said. “We played well, played throughout tough matches. [Coach] Craig Tyzzer is the master. He’s good in the business and spoilt to have him in my team. Grateful he has the tactical knowledge communication and the way we talk to each other is incredible. He’s going to love he’s on the big screen. I feel like our whole team works extremely well together. We’re enjoying our tennis and being able to produce some pretty good stuff.” The victory came on the Australian Open’s inaugural First Nations Day, of which Barty’s fellow Indigenous Wimbledon champion Evonne Goolagong Cawley is an ambassador. “She’s an incredible human being, I’m extremely lucky to call her a friend and know she’s only a phone call away,” she said. “We’re connected through our heritage. She’s an incredible woman who has paved a path and been able to guide so many of the Indigenous youth coming up in the last however many years through her work off the court. I love her to death.”When Melbourne woman Beth* called her fertility clinic on 10 January to arrange prepaid testing, she was told her procedure had been cancelled, and she would have to wait three months. Beth has been undergoing IVF for almost two years, and has had six unsuccessful transfers and two miscarriages in that time. It was hoped a biopsy, to be sent to Japan, would help to provide answers as to why she wasn’t getting pregnant. But on 6 January, Victorian health minister Martin Foley announced a ban on all non-urgent elective surgery – including IVF treatments – in metropolitan Melbourne and major regional cities, in an effort to free up health resources amid the Omicron wave. The latest quarterly data reveals 67,596 patients are on the elective surgery waiting list – which includes some cancer treatments and cardiac surgeries. Leading IVF providers Virtus Health and Monash IVF Group warned the new regulations, which came into effect on 12 January and will last three months, would have a “devastating effect” on patients who couldn’t afford to wait for treatment. The pandemic order halted all new stimulation cycles until further notice, while allowing current cycles, urgent surgeries, telehealth specialist appointments and preservation cycles prior to cancer treatment to continue. “There’s a lot of ups and downs, it’s a very emotional journey to go on,” Beth said. “It’s really devastating, I need those answers.” Turning 35 in May and living with polycystic ovary syndrome, Beth said she was acutely aware the quality of her eggs was starting to decrease, and she was reaching a stage where “it might just not happen”. “The quicker I can get testing done and get another chance makes such a difference. The backlog will mean clinics are having to play catch up for three months with patients who’ve missed those procedures … for some women, with medical conditions, myself included, I don’t have the option to wait, this is how I have to grow my family.” The premier, Daniel Andrews, on Wednesday flagged the possible easing of elective surgery restrictions for IVF and a range of other day procedures “as soon as possible” but could not provide a timeframe for when they would resume. “Let’s try and have them back up and running as soon as we can,” he said. “The most time critical procedures within an IVF journey are still happening but … I’ve heard ... just how challenging accessing it is. “It’s a very, very difficult process to go through for so many, the pandemic has made it even harder but we’ll work as hard as we can to try and get those day procedures back on and … I hope to be able to provide a positive update very, very soon.” Fertility Society of Australia president and Monash IVF medical director, Prof Luk Rombauts, said the industry had reached out to health authorities to find a way forward for the sector amid rising Covid cases. “While we understand the need not to add extra pressure on the health system during this difficult time, we can’t ignore the anguish and heartache that this has caused to so many of our Victorian patients,” he said. “It is particularly difficult for those patients who do not have time on their side, due to factors such as age and health conditions which are out of their control. “For some an extended period of time without IVF treatment may mean they will not achieve a pregnancy at all.” A Change.org petition calling for the reinstatement of IVF treatments in Victoria has gained more than 100,600 signatures online. “IVF is my only option of trying to have children,” one signee wrote. “I should not have that chance taken away and be told my treatment is considered elective. I didn’t choose to have PCOS, severe stage four endometriosis and adenomyosis. “These are all fertility-debilitating conditions and without IVF I have no hope having children. IVF is hard enough with having to worry about whether a cycle is going to be cancelled due to being classed as ‘elective’. IVF is not a choice.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Melbourne IVF medical director Dr Fleur Cattrall said IVF had continued safely during Victoria’s six lockdowns, including the Delta wave of the virus in 2020. “It’s been devastating to tell Victorian patients that they can’t start their IVF treatment for the next three months,” she said. “Many of these patients have already endured years of infertility struggles. Studies show the psychological impacts of living with infertility are comparable to the stress levels of patients diagnosed with cancer.” Other states including New South Wales have allowed IVF and fertility services to continue while suspending other elective surgeries. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said on Wednesday he believed there was “no choice” involved in infertility treatments, but it wasn’t a decision for the commonwealth to make. “It is a decision of the Victorian government and I appreciate the extreme pressure their hospital system is under and I can appreciate that this is a very difficult choice for the Victorian government,” he said. “But earlier on in the pandemic at national cabinet we said that IVF treatments were not elective procedures and should continue and I believe that should be done wherever possible and that should be such a last resort measure.” *Names have been changed to protect people’s privacyA rising Conservative rebellion against Boris Johnson that could see the prime minister ousted over the No 10 party scandals dominates the front pages. The manoeuvring by some Red Wall Tory MPs – dubbed the “pork pie putsch” – follows a disastrous interview given by Johnson in which he says he had not lied over the Downing Street parties. The Guardian leads with “Clamour to oust Johnson grows as Tory MPs plot confidence vote”. It says Conservatives are discussing how to push out the prime minister and who should succeed him. Tory MPs from various ranks and wings of the party said they believed there would be enough letters to trigger a leadership contest after the publication of the Sue Gray report, it said. Read the full story here. The Times has “Red wall Tory MPs team up to topple Boris Johnson”. The paper says Johnson faces a growing revolt as Conservative MPs elected in 2019 “openly plot” to remove him from office. It reports while the prime minister held meetings overnight with groups of the 2019 intake, whips were concerned the no-confidence threshold may soon be reached. The Mirror’s take is “Porkie pie plot to ditch PM”. As many as 20 of the 2019 Tory intake reportedly plan to submit letters of no confidence in the prime minister today, the paper writes, quoting one Tory as saying “His time has gone.” The Mail uses similar language with “Exposed: The ‘Pork Pie’ plot to topple PM” but the paper seems to offer the embattled prime minister some support. It says Plan B coronavirus curbs will be axed today and Britain is “basking in a post-Covid jobs miracle” but “panicking Red Wall MPs are turning on the man who got them elected”. The Telegraph also mentions the axing of Covid restrictions in its lead with “Plan B to be scrapped as PM faces plot from rebel MPs” alongside a picture of a downcast Johnson wearing a mask. The Express has “What a sorry state! New MPs plot to oust PM” saying Johnson apologises “TEN times for partygate” but still faces a rebellion. The i newspaper plays it straight with “Tory plotters in talks to topple Boris Johnson”. The Independent’s take is “No one warned me a party was against rules, says man who set the rules”. Its story says Johnson hung his head as he apologised in his first appearance since former aide Dominic Cummings claimed the prime minister was told the No 10 event was not work related. The Metro has simply “Nobody told me” alongside the now familiar picture of a masked Johnson and a shot of Cummings, reporting that the former aide will give evidence to the Gray inquiry into the events at No 10. The Sun offers up something different with its splash: “Strictly dancer Nadiya Bychkova has split from her footballer fiance”. Johnson’s troubles find a smaller spot under the masthead with the headline “Pork Pie plot to oust Bojo”.Australia and New Zealand have started to dispatch aid to Tonga, amid fears that relief workers could bring a “tsunami of Covid” cases to the Pacific Island nation that has so far recorded just one case of the virus. New Zealand has dispatched two naval vessels with relief supplies onboard. Defence minister Peeni Henare said they were expected to arrive in four days, though could arrive as soon as Friday if the weather holds. “Obviously [their number one task] will be to look towards how they can supply water. That’s been their number one priority,” he said. A New Zealand government update on Wednesday afternoon confirmed that no further deaths had been reported since the Tongan government’s announcement of three confirmed deaths – one Tongan woman, one Tongan man, and one British woman – on Tuesday night. Sophie Ford, international response coordinator for the Australian Red Cross, said the organisation was among a coalition of aid groups sending critical supplies for the relief effort, with a ship expected to leave from Australia on Wednesday. The HMAS Adelaide left Sydney for Brisbane on Tuesday and was due to depart for Tonga on Wednesday. Ford said the supplies include material to help provide temporary shelter and clean drinking water which may have been contaminated by the ash cloud. Tonga Red Cross is leading the local response and has prepared supplies stockpiled to support 1,200 households, but Ford said these will need to be replenished in the coming days and weeks to sustain the effort. However, Ford said aid groups were aware of Covid-19 restrictions that require people coming into the country to isolate for up to three weeks, and goods to be quarantined for days. “We’re really mindful that our response doesn’t bring any more problems,” Ford said. A senior Tongan diplomat in Canberra, Curtis Tuihalangingie, told the ABC that there were concerns of “a tsunami of Covid hitting Tonga” as humanitarian relief came to the country. Tonga has only one recorded case of Covid-19 throughout the pandemic and has maintained a strict quarantine control regime out of caution. Ford said Red Cross Australia has technical teams that will work remotely to support the local Tongan Red Cross response on the ground. “Many of those people have done deployments before so they have relationships with the existing teams on the ground,” Ford said. “Our job as internationals, I believe, is to back up those local responses: make sure we listen to what the people of Tonga say they need, and then give them it.” Australian prime minister Scott Morrison said on Wednesday afternoon he had not yet managed to speak to Tonga’s prime minister to receive a formal request for assistance, saying a telecommunications breakdown and ash clouds have made for a “very difficult environment to be operating in”. “Any time a Pacific nation has called on us for support, we have always said ‘yes’, and so, you know, I’ll be talking to the prime minister, I hope, later today, communications allowing, and we will run through whatever else they might need,” Morrison said. Though there were initial fears the eruption and resulting tsunami may have damaged Tonga’s main airport, these proved unfounded with teams of volunteers working to clear the runway. An update from the New Zealand government on said this work was expected to finish on Wednesday, with power having been restored, clean-up efforts under way and damage assessments taking place. Henare said a Hercules is on standby ready for when the runway at Tonga’s main airport is cleared of ash and declared safe. An international mobile phone network provider has set up a temporary system on Tongatapu, Tonga’s main island, using the University of South Pacific’s satellite dish. It is expected the undersea cable will take four weeks to be repaired, leaving the countries telecommunications system operating at 10% of it usual capacity. A statement released late on Tuesday night from the office of prime minister Siaosi Sovaleni confirmed the deaths of the three people and the destruction of every home on Mango Island, home to 50 people. Only two houses remained on the neighbouring island of Fonoifua. It described the eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha‘apai undersea volcano, 40 miles (65km) north of Tonga’s capital, as an “unprecedented disaster” that resulted in 15m waves.As owners of Ocean Ended, a beautiful restaurant located right on the water at Maroochydore on Queensland’s spectacular Sunshine Coast, we know quite a lot about riding waves. We’ve ridden the cash flow ups and downs that all small businesses do. We’ve adjusted our stroke as tourists flood in and flood back out again. We dived under the first pandemic wave in 2020, emerging stronger and more resilient after 11 weeks of lockdown, thanks to the federal government’s cash boost and jobkeeper programs, and higher spending by optimistic guests. And now our prime minister has told us to ride the Omicron wave, a catastrophic dumper created by state and federal governments that can’t be ridden by small business. We’ve closed our restaurant. Forever. My business partner, Paul Holmes, who opened the restaurant more than six years ago, is a restaurateur with 40 years’ experience. He has turned around countless floundering restaurants for others, traded through recessions and run his own successful restaurants. But he couldn’t save this business. No one could have. Our regulars came back in droves after the first lockdown. They supported local businesses, including ours. We had our best winter trading since we opened. But the closure of the “Pineapple Curtain” (the Queensland border), although popular with the state’s voters, has had the longer-term disastrous effect of vaccine hesitancy within the cloistered population. Post-jobkeeper lockdowns during the pandemic exposed the already high-level career insecurity in the hospitality industry, and then supercharged it. Our small business lost qualified and experienced chefs to mining, manufacturing, warehousing management and the food service industry – not to other restaurants. They wanted to be able to pay their mortgages and keep their jobs through lockdowns. When our head chef left for personal reasons on 12 September last year, we had to close our restaurant and let all our other staff go as we hadn’t been able to find a suitably experienced chef to replace him. By then, we’d already been looking for three months. We took another three months to find a fantastic head chef and a second chef who were pivotal in the rebuilding of our team. We nervously reopened on 10 December. During this search for a chef, there was an online pile-on by anti-vaxxers when we replied “It is the law” to an enquiry asking if the chef had to be vaccinated. We also had a surprising number of applications from people who had “done some cooking at a cafe for 12 months” and an unsurprising number of applications from chefs living abroad – outside our closed national borders. We’d used a welcome Queensland government grant to fund the increased wages necessary to secure these key staff members and to partially restock the restaurant. Paul had worked with the chef to create a smaller menu to help manage costs. He felt that we’d have to absorb the increase in the price of fresh produce, especially meat and fish, over the last 12 months. Spending per head had dropped noticeably on our return and although locals were pleased the border had opened, they were now nervous about catching Covid. You have to have a certain amount of good luck when running a small business. Some people say you make your own luck. They might be right. But the timing of the bad luck we had on the night we reopened was the beginning of the end. The kitchen’s exhaust fan motor seized that first night, making the temperature in our kitchen about 50C. We’d already limited guest bookings by half to just 25 people to allow our new kitchen team to cope with working together with a new menu in a new environment. In a Christmas miracle, we located a great air-conditioning mechanic who could diagnose the problem and replace the unit or repair the motor. Replacement would take until February due to international shipping delays (Covid) or he could retrofit a different unit by Christmas. We chose the latter. Unfortunately, the unit got caught up in trucking delays from Melbourne (Covid) and the new motor seized eight minutes after it was installed in late December, due to damage acquired from poor packing prior to transport (possibly not Covid). Our chefs worked for three weeks in great discomfort. The final nail in our coffin was hammered in on 7 January when the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, urged people to work from home if they were able and avoid socialising for the next six weeks. Cancellations went through the roof and bookings through the floor. You can’t run a restaurant in a ghost town. When one of our staff was declared a close contact of someone with Covid last Friday, we decided to decline the offer of the federal government to allow us to trade insolvent and have closed our once-$1m-turnover business. Thankfully, we’re walking away with no debt. Our landlord deserves special mention. He rang us before the first lockdown in 2020 and offered us a two-month rent holiday before any government had offered small business any support. And he has worked with us on making our rent affordable during the whole pandemic. He has been compassionate and generous throughout. The poor planning and poll-driven decisions by governments has defeated us. An economy – the real one that you’ll find in main streets, shopping centres and in tourist towns – collapses when citizens are too afraid to leave their homes and when small businesses all over the country close. Teresa Russell is a Sydney-based freelance writer and silent(ish) partner in Ocean Ended, a Sunshine Coast restaurant, now closed. Forever.Former senior New York Post journalist Michelle Gotthelf has launched legal action accusing the tabloid’s longtime editor-in-chief, Col Allan, of sexually harassing and verbally abusing her, including propositioning her for sex. In a complaint filed in the US federal court system on Tuesday, Gotthelf accused the Post’s owner, News Corp, Allan and the paper’s current editor-in-chief, Keith Poole, of breaching New York employment law by discriminating against her on the basis of her sex and retaliating against her when she complained. She also claimed Allan intervened in coverage of Donald Trump, demanding a story about the then president being accused of rape be removed from the paper’s website and calling the complaint “baseless shit”. Allan is an Australian who was formerly editor-in-chief of the Daily Telegraph in Sydney while Poole is an Englishman who has held senior roles at the Sun and Daily Mail. Gotthelf said Poole fired her last week, ending her 20-year career at News Corp. She said she suffered “severe mental anguish and emotional distress, including, but not limited to, humiliation, embarrassment, stress and anxiety,” and is seeking damages from News Corp, Allan and Poole. In her complaint, filed with the district court for the southern district of New York, she made allegations of misconduct against Allan that date back to 2007, when she alleged she was passed over for a promotion from deputy metro editor to metro editor in 2007 because Allan said he “wanted a strong man in the job”. Allan “instead promoted a substantially less qualified man” who “had little, if any, experience in non-business news and no experience running a newsroom”, Gotthelf claims. She said that from 2013 Allan had created a hostile work environment for her despite describing her as a “star”. “Mr Allan delighted in degrading Ms Gotthelf, and women generally, in front of her mostly male peers,” she alleged in the complaint. “For example, Mr Allan would refer to women in news stories as ‘skanks’ or ‘stupid women.’ He described a female NY Post editor as a ‘sneaky lesbian.’ He likewise told Ms Gotthelf that Mr Murdoch ‘doesn’t like many women’.” She alleged Allan also “despised the LGBTQ+ community”. “For instance, he refused to put New York’s historic legalization of same-sex marriage on the front page, asking, ‘What will these people be marrying next, animals?’” She claimed when she complained to her boss, he “acknowledged the abuse but shrugged, ‘Not much I can do.’” The sexual harassment allegedly peaked in 2015 when she alleged Allan propositioned her for sex, saying “We should sleep together”. Her rejection allegedly resulted in Allan becoming more abusive, refusing to make eye contact with her and scrapping her articles for no apparent reason. “On one occasion, he ripped up a list of stories that Ms Gotthelf had prepared and screamed at her to ‘get the fuck out’,” according to her complaint. She said she complained to HR, which she claims resulted in Allan being forced to “retire” from the paper after he was told of the complaint, despite the company’s promise it would be kept confidential. In early 2019, Allan was rehired as a newsroom consultant. Gotthelf said she negotiated a new employment contract in which News had promised she would not have to report to Allan, but she said this proved to be a “hollow” promise. “Not only was Mr Allan giving Ms Gotthelf directions, but he was also becoming more threatening and abusive,” she alleged. He allegedly ordered her to remove a June 2019 story in which a woman accused Donald Trump of raping her, calling the woman’s claims “baseless shit” and describing her as “the world[’s] unluckiest woman or a liar”. She said she complained to News Corp chief executive, Robert Thomson, and head of HR, Dana Ritzcovan, and was told that if Allan “tells you to do something, you do it”. She claimed she was effectively demoted in January when Poole was made editor-in-chief and her direct reporting line to the publisher was removed. Ahead of the appointment she met with Poole for lunch. Poole allegedly did not discuss her impending contract renewal but instead focused on asking about what “happened between you and Col”, she alleges. “Ms Gotthelf explained that Mr Allan had sexually propositioned her and that she did not want to go through that again,” she alleges in the complaint. “On January 12, 2022, only two months later, Mr Poole fired Ms Gotthelf without cause.” Gotthelf’s departure was announced to staff in an email sent on Tuesday. “I wanted to let you know that Michelle Gotthelf has departed The Post, effective January 15,” Poole said in the email, which was provided to Guardian Australia by a News Corp spokesperson on Wednesday. “I want to take this opportunity to thank her for all she has done during her 20-plus-year tenure here, and I hope you will join me in wishing her the best for the future.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In a separate statement, the News Corp spokesperson said: “Any suggestion of wrongdoing related to the management changes announced today is meritless.” She said Poole had no additional comment to make and she did not have contact information for Allan. Guardian Australia has been unable to contact Allan for comment. The defendants have yet to file a defence.The weather for today’s walk, judged according to Sir Francis Beaufort’s wind force scale, feels like force seven – a near gale. The relevant definitions seem to fit. “Whole trees in motion”? Branches of a gnarled mountain ash on the fellside, hunched in its own wind shadow after decades of bending before prevailing south-westerlies, clatter together as we passed. “Inconvenience felt when walking against the wind”? Something of an understatement: strong gusts bring us to a halt and send us staggering back on several occasions as we labour up the steep, stony track. It is a relief to finally lean over a wall, breathless, to admire the view that we have come to see: a panorama encompassing most of the upper dale, magnificent on any clear day, but exceptional this morning. Today’s gale seems to invest it with giddy energy, as if the ground under our feet is shifting – perhaps exertion and exhaustion have something to do with that. The north side of the valley is drenched in sunshine and swept by racing shadows of torn fragments of stratus drifting overhead, trailing rooster tails of fine rain that become ephemeral rainbows, dissolving and reappearing when the sun breaks through gaps in dark rain clouds behind us. The wall we rest against is encrusted with lichens in innumerable shades of green, yellow, orange and grey which always seem more vivid after rain. These strange amalgams of alga and fungus, ingrained into bare rock surfaces, first arrived here in the wake of the melting glaciers that sculpted this landscape. Winter is their season, wind their conveyance. An encrustation of Lecidea lithophila – the texture and colour of a ripe tangerine – is speckled with small, black, jam tart-shaped apothecia that release microscopic spores, destined to be whisked away across the valley, over the fells. The showers become heavier. We retreat downhill, holding on to our hats as the wind shoves us in the back. It seems to have moderated a little, perhaps to a strong breeze – force six: “Whistling heard in telegraph wires; umbrellas used with difficulty”; had we dared to raise one, it would have surely followed in the wake of those lichen spores. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe Tongan government has raised concerns about the tiny islands of Mango and Fonoifua islands – north-east of the main island of Tongatapu – which both suffered catastrophic damage from the tsunami and volcano eruption on Saturday. The Tongan government reported on Tuesday night that all houses had been destroyed on Mango Island, and only two houses remained on Fonoifua. The news came in the first statement released by the government since the disaster on Saturday, which damaged the undersea cable, cutting off communications between Tonga and the rest of the world. In the statement, the Tongan government said tsunami waves reaching up to 15 metres (49ft) hit the Ha’apai island group, where Mango is located, and the west coast of Tonga’s main island, Tongatapu. Residents were being moved to evacuation centres after 56 houses were destroyed or seriously damaged on that coast. Mango is located about 70km (43 miles) from the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano, which sent tsunami waves across the Pacific Ocean when it erupted with a blast felt more than 2,000km away in New Zealand. The Tongan prime minister also confirmed that there had been three recorded deaths from the disaster: a 65-year-old woman on Mango and a 49-year-old man on Nomuka island, as well as the 50-year-old British woman whose body was found on Monday. A number of injuries were also reported. On Monday, the UN detected a distress signal from Mango, prompting particular concern for their inhabitants; 36 people live on Mango. Aerial images prepared by the New Zealand defence force for the Tongan government, which were leaked on Tuesday, of Mango Island, showed that the small island had sustained “catastrophic damage”. “Catastrophic damage was observed with the entire village destroyed. Temporary tarpaulin shelters had been erected on the island’s higher areas. Debris was observed throughout the village,” said the annotated image. The Tongan government has started evacuating stranded residents in some outlying areas. Aid has been sent to Tonga, with two New Zealand naval vessels en route to the islands and due to arrive on Friday. An Australian naval vessel, also containing relief supplies, was due to depart on Wednesday. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, said he had spoken to his Tongan counterpart, Siaosi Sovaleni, and reassured him “Australia stands shoulder to shoulder with the Kingdom of Tonga”. “Australia has committed an initial package of $1m towards Tonga’s recovery effort,” Morrison said on Wednesday evening. “Two RAAF aircraft are ready to depart tomorrow with humanitarian supplies and telecommunications equipment, as soon as conditions allow. HMAS Adelaide is also preparing to depart from Brisbane with water purification equipment and additional humanitarian supplies.” Aid groups are particularly concerned with making sure safe drinking water was delivered to communities, as water supplies across Tonga were disrupted by layers of volcanic ash and salt water dumped on the islands by the eruption and tsunami. Katie Greenwood, the Pacific head of delegation for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), said: “Water supplies across Tonga have been severely impacted by ashfall and saltwater from the tsunami. It’s vital to restore access to safe drinking water as there is a mounting risk of diseases such as cholera and diarrhoea.” Tonga Red Cross emergency teams are providing people with clean water, tarpaulins, shelter tool kits, kitchen sets and other essential relief. Clearing the airport runway of ash is a priority for the government. The archipelago’s main Fua’amotu international airport was not damaged but the ash needs to be manually removed.On what was supposed to be the day after the Hobart Test, all was quiet. England had wrapped up an epochally anaemic Ashes defeat leaving enough spare days to squeeze in an embarrassing visit from police to the world’s meekest sunrise rager, telling off cricketers who had been drinking in their whites for longer than they had been required to play in them. The constabulary arrived to extinguish a cigar sparked by England staffer Graham Thorpe, who then decided to video the players present. It ended up at a newspaper within a day. As batting coach of a team that had just been bowled out for 147, 192, 185, 68, 188 and 124, among other embarrassments, you for one thing might be short of cigar-worthy moments, and for another might be inclined to keep your head down. But no. That’s not the way for England. The head coach, Chris Silverwood, will try to hang on, despite being made sole selector a year ago and getting every team wrong since. The director of cricket Ashley Giles, in one of those complex administrative jobs that apparently former Test cricketers are uniquely qualified to occupy, will try to hang on. The chief executive, Tom Harrison, will try to hang on – like his Australian counterpart James Sutherland after the sandpaper scandal, spruiking that his regime is uniquely suited to fix the problems it has spent years ignoring or exacerbating. And Joe Root, fine man, fine player, uninspired captain, will stay on, because everybody else’s batting is worse than his leadership. With a day or two for the head to clear, it is hard to know what to make of the Ashes. The needs of marketing demand that it be presented as the great rivalry, the biggest of the big, the two oldest teams in one of the few five-Test series remaining on the calendar. The reality is most often likely to underwhelm. The wallpaper now is always 2005, the promise of heights that seem recent enough to still be relevant. Since then, 2019 has been the most entertaining, proving that teams don’t need to be stacked with great players. Flaws can be as absorbing – they just need to be evenly distributed. Which means that after a series like the one we’ve just seen, it is reasonable to ask what is the point of England visiting Australia. Across four of the last five tours, the scoreline for the home side is 18-0 from 20 starts. Even the outlier series that England won 10 years ago only reversed the primacy, with three thrashings by an innings. Even among that desert of competitiveness, this year’s effort somehow stands out. The two whitewashes completed in 2006 and 2014 were over quality teams: names like Pietersen, Cook, Trott, Bell, Strauss, Flintoff and Collingwood in the order. The scorelines were notable because they involved good players being overcome, in one instance by Shane Warne and Glenn McGrath, in another by Mitchell Johnson’s fiercest hour. The class of 2022 did not have to be menaced out, or bounced out, or bewitched by spin. Their tailenders finished the tour as their top order had started it, giving away their stumps to all comers, part of a parade lacking all technique or temperament. Australia’s struggles in England, both with and against the swinging ball, have been as stark at times. Trent Bridge in 2015 is the nadir, but even 2019 would have been a thrashing had Steve Smith been any other player. In Australia’s favour for the next round in 2023 is that plenty of Australians have been playing county cricket in recent seasons and will carry on doing so. There is debate about whether the championship can produce England Test players, but it’s very useful for polishing up Australian ones. There has been recent talk about whether a reciprocal arrangement could see English players in the Sheffield Shield, but that is a much harder sell. Ten matches anywhere between October and April, six state sides, batting positions at a premium with 36 per round in the entire country. States want to use those to develop their own players, not those from elsewhere. They would take Root if he were available, but there is no clear gain in taking players without the record to demand it. Ultimately, all that can put some spice back into the southern contest is for England to do what they did before 2010: breed a generation of cricketers with the resilience to tackle the change in conditions and the siege feeling of the tour. Quite how to do that can only be solved by the insight and wisdom of … Ashley Giles? He played 54 Tests, so that must be right. The reality is that four years will spin by quickly, and English cricket is highly unlikely to have undergone a great structural change. Fans will do what all sport fans have learned to do: embrace innocence, ignore experience, and hope it will be different this time.André Leon Talley, the influential fashion journalist and former editor-at-large of US Vogue under Anna Wintour, has died at the age of 73. TMZ reported that Talley had passed away on Tuesday at a New York hospital, of an unknown illness. His death was later confirmed by his literary agent, David Vigliano. A larger-than-life character – and six foot seven inches tall – Talley was a pioneering figure in the fashion world, as known for his biting comments and flamboyant presence as the statement kaftans, hats and robes he frequently wore. In a career that spanned six decades, Talley used his position to champion diversity on the runway and behind the scenes in the fashion world. Designer and close friend Diane von Furstenberg was among those to pay tribute on Wednesday. “Goodbye darling André … no one saw the world in a more glamorous way than you did,” she wrote. “No one was grander and more soulful than you were.” Playwright Jeremy O Harris wrote: “For a little black gay boy who reached for the stars from the south there were few people I could look up to up there amongst the stars who looked like me just more fab except for you André. “For a generation of boys André Leon Talley was a beacon of grace and aspiration.” Born in 1948 and raised in North Carolina in the Jim Crow era, Talley was a lifelong advocate of fashion, recalling in his 2020 memoir The Chiffon Trenches how he would visit his local library to read copies of Vogue magazine, which came to embody a world in which “bad things never happened”. Speaking to the Guardian in 2020, Talley recalled students at his university stoning him as he crossed campus on Sundays to buy Vogue. His career in fashion began with an internship for former Vogue editor Diana Vreeland at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1974. Vreeland, impressed with his skills, introduced Talley to contacts at Andy Warhol’s Factory and Interview magazine, where he worked as a receptionist. He began writing for publications including W and the New York Times, but it was at US Vogue that he made his name, rising up the ranks to become the magazine’s news director, then creative director until 1995 when he left. He returned to the magazine three years later and remained the editor-at-large until 2013. Talley’s long working relationship with Vogue editor Anna Wintour would become the big selling point of his second memoir, The Chiffon Trenches, in which Talley took unsparing potshots at his former boss. Talley felt he had lost favour because “I had suddenly become too old, too overweight and too uncool”. Wintour, he wrote, was incapable of “simple human kindness” and “never really passionate about clothes. Power was her passion.” In the book he also detailed the sexual abuse he endured as a child, and the racism and sizeism he encountered throughout his life. He felt “at home” in the fashion world, he once told the Guardian, because “there were no victims, only high-octane egos”. In 2021 he was softer on Wintour, telling the Cut: “She’s the empress. She’s worked hard. She’s gone through many battles. She deserves everything they give her. At 72, to have that job, is very, very, very impressive. I wish her all the best.” Talley also served as a judge on America’s Next Top Model and, in 2008, became the Obama family’s fashion advisor. He interviewed Michelle Obama for Vogue when she stepped into the role of first lady in 2009, later calling her “the most fashionable woman in America”. But in 2020 he publicly criticised the Obamas for throwing a birthday party during the Covid pandemic, telling the New York Times: “I think the nouveaux riches Obamas are seriously tone-deaf … the Obamas are in Marie Antoinette, tacky, let-them-eat-cake mode. They need to remember their humble roots.” Talley never publicly defined his sexuality, calling himself “fluid”. He had never been in a relationship, he once said, something he attributed to being abused as a child. “I gave it all to my career,” he told the New York Times. “Diane von Furstenberg said, ‘He was afraid to fall in love,’ and I guess I was. I guess I was afraid, and I guess I was repressed. I grew up in a very strict household. But being in this world, moving around with all these incredible people … it was enough for me to have the friendship of Karl or the friendship of Yves Saint Laurent or the friendship of Azzedine Alaïa.” Talley wrote two memoirs and was the subject of the 2018 documentary The Gospel According to André. When asked if he would have been happier working outside of fashion, Talley said no. “My story is a fairytale of excess, and in every fairytale there is evil and darkness, but you overcome it with light,” he once told the Guardian. “I want every person I come across – the stranger on the street, the church member in the pew next to me – to feel love.”Meningitis B cases among students in England are rising sharply and exceeding pre-pandemic levels, according to a report by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). Meningococcal group B bacteria are a serious cause of life-threatening infections, including meningitis and sepsis. While most people recover, some can die. Others may suffer a permanent disability as a result, including brain damage, epilepsy, hearing loss, or the loss of limbs. During the pandemic, lockdowns used to curb the spread of Covid-19 also led to a decline in other infectious diseases. Meningitis rates were at a historic low until September last year, experts say. Since then, however, there has been a stark increase in meningitis B cases among adolescents and young adults in England. The rise in cases has been found “particularly in university students”, according to an early pre-print study by the UKHSA seen by the Guardian. “Between September and November 2021, IMD [invasive meningococcal disease] cases increased with group B disease in adolescents/young adults rising sharply and exceeding pre-pandemic levels,” the 11-page analysis of the most recent data available says. During that period, 41.5% of meningitis cases occurred among those aged 15 to 19, compared with 11.8% and 14.3% during the same period in 2018 and 2019 respectively, it adds. Importantly, the UKHSA report says, the number of cases in this age group during this period in 2021 (22) was higher than the corresponding periods in 2018 (16) and 2019 (19). Of the IMD cases confirmed among the 15- to 19-year-old and 20- to 24-year-old age groups in September to November 2021, 84.6% (22/26) were students registered at a further or higher education institution, the study found. Almost all the cases involved meningitis B. Experts said the rise in cases confirmed the risks of a post-lockdown infectious disease “rebound”, something charities including the Meningitis Research Foundation last year said could happen. “This early evidence of a sharp rise in MenB cases in teenagers and young adults, exceeding pre-pandemic numbers for those aged 15 to 19, is important to highlight,” said Linda Glennie, director of research, evidence and policy at the Meningitis Research Foundation. “Whilst the numbers may appear small, meningitis can have life-changing implications for anyone who contracts it, which is why monitoring any evidence of a rebound in cases is so vital. “The data published by UKHSA has highlighted that students, particularly those living on campuses, have a higher risk of meningococcal disease than their peers. It is essential that students, young people and their families remain vigilant to the signs and symptoms of meningitis and septicaemia. Meningitis progresses rapidly, so it’s critical to alert someone if ill, and to seek urgent medical advice.” The UKHSA paper suggests the rise in cases may be because of a combination of factors including high levels of transmission in young people, and an “immunity debt” sparked by the fact that lockdowns reduced the opportunities for meningococcal exposure and transmission among adolescents. “A lower level of immunity could be contributing to the sharp increase in IMD cases following the return to universities, however, serological study of this population would be needed to quantify any changes in immunity throughout the Covid-19 pandemic,” the report adds. Prof Ray Borrow, one of the paper’s authors and head of the vaccine evaluation unit at the UKHSA, said: “Whilst this is early data, it is crucial we continue to monitor all strains of invasive meningococcal disease given the impact social distancing and other Covid responses have had in limiting natural circulation, blocking both the benefits and harms of exposure to these bacteria, which can lead to a lack of immune stimulation within the population.”A former Guantánamo detainee is planning legal action against Priti Patel to try to restore his British passport, which was stripped from him eight years ago after two trips to Syria. Moazzam Begg’s application for a new passport was rejected in September 2021, even though a terror prosecution relating to his time in Syria collapsed in 2014, after which police said they accepted he was innocent. Frustrated by the delays and complaining of a lack of explanation, Begg, who works with the Cage advocacy group which campaigns to help people caught up in the “war on terror”, said he felt he had little choice but to apply for a judicial review. “I’ve met with leaders of countries and government ministers; the police have said I’m innocent; but all of that seems to count for nothing. When I met with Ken Clarke, the justice secretary, when the Guantánamo cases were settled [in November 2010], he said he would like to turn over the page, but that doesn’t seem to be the case,” Begg said. He said that if he were able to travel he would like to visit his daughter in Turkey, whose marriage he had not been able to attend, and to return to Bagram in Afghanistan, where he was held for a year before being moved to Guantánamo. “I saw two people there being murdered by US soldiers. Now the US has left I would like to go back and try and reinvestigate what happened, to try and visit the camp and the cells,” he said. Begg was arrested in February 2002 in Pakistan, handed to US forces, and detained at Bagram before being moved to Guantánamo Bay. During his detention he was interrogated by British and US intelligence officers but released without charge in 2005. The trips to Syria took place in 2012 and 2013, a time when armed resistance to the regime of Bashar al-Assad was beginning from a range of groups, but before the public emergence of Islamic State in 2014. Before his second visit, Begg said he was contacted by MI5. “I told them: ‘I am trying to investigate your role in working with Assad regime in the programme of renditions.’” It was, he said, part of his campaigning activity. After the conversation, Begg said, he met an MI5 officer and a lawyer at an east London hotel in October 2012. He said Security Service representatives made it clear that he was free to travel to Syria, where he stayed in opposition territory near Aleppo until April 2013. Nevertheless, his passport was taken from him in December 2013, as he returned to the UK from a trip to South Africa. Shortly after he was arrested on terror offences. A year later the prosecution case collapsed, undermined by secret material handed to the CPS. “They know from the probe they put in my car that I was totally against people who would go on to join Isis,” he said. Begg applied again for a passport in 2019. One was briefly issued in September 2021 but revoked four weeks later. The email revoking his passport was dated 2017 and addressed to a woman accused of passport fraud. “I think it was a cut and paste job, they were in a rush,” he said. “They gave no explanation.” Last month Begg’s lawyers sent a letter to the Home Office and the Passport Office putting them on notice of legal action in an attempt to get the decision overturned. Having had no reply, his team plan to launch an application for judicial review within days, supported by a crowdfunding campaign. Begg said he believed the government’s actions showed it did not consider him a full citizen, despite the prosecution case against him collapsing in 2014. “This government hasn’t tried to take away my citizenship,” he said. “But a passport is a sign of your nationality, the most unique identity document somebody has.”How could they be so careless? How do fishing vessels lose so many of their nets and longlines that this “ghost gear”, drifting through the oceans, now presents a mortal threat to whales, dolphins, turtles and much of the rest of the life of the sea? After all, fishing gear is expensive. It is either firmly attached to the vessel or, using modern technologies, easily located. I’ve asked myself these questions for a while, and I think I now have an answer. It comes from an unlikely source: a trawlerman working in Scotland. I’m not a fan of trawling, but I recognise that some operations are more damaging than others. He and his colleagues now appear to be pulling in more nets than fish. On trip after trip they catch vast hauls of ghost gillnets and longlines, often wrapped around marine animals. He has sent me his photos, which are so disturbing I can scarcely bear to look: drowned seabirds, decapitated seals and fish and crustaceans of many species, which died a long, slow death. Where are these nets and lines coming from? He believes they’re being deliberately discarded. I have checked his identity, but he wants to remain anonymous. Like other local trawlers, his boat brings its waste to land. The problem, he says, lies with large vessels, many from France and Spain, that spend four to six weeks at a time at sea. They don’t have enough storage space for the rubbish they generate: most of the hold is dedicated to frozen fish. Worn-out gillnets and longlines should be returned to port for disposal. But those he retrieves have a revealing characteristic: the expensive parts, those that can be reused – floats, weights and hooks – have been cut off. This, he believes, is a giveaway: if you find a net or line like that, it has been deliberately thrown overboard. He and his colleagues, he says, often watch French and Spanish boats landing plenty of fish in Scottish ports when “no rubbish is taken ashore by these vessels”. He estimates that a typical crew of 20 on a month-long fishing voyage would generate roughly 20 cubic metres of waste, aside from the fishing gear. Where is it? There might be a clue in some of the other rubbish his boat trawls up: bin bags full of French and Spanish food wrappers. As for the gear, he tells me that he sees boats come into port and “miles and miles of new gillnetting is put onboard – but none is taken ashore for discard”. The nets these boats use are enormous: every large vessel deploys between 50 and 70 miles of them. But gillnets tend to wear out quickly. The fisherman tells me, “the vessel I work on takes ashore approximately one cubic metre of discarded gillnets every four to five days on average.” That’s a lot of net. Gillnets have been banned from many waters because of their very high rates of bycatch, and their mysterious tendency to go missing. In Scotland, they are prohibited within six miles of the coast. But these boats work farther from the shore. Beyond 12 miles, my contact says, it’s “basically bandit territory for any vessel not UK-registered, as UK law does not apply”. He alleges that, while local boats are closely regulated, there is practically no monitoring of foreign, offshore vessels. Competition between national fishing fleets is an explosive issue, further charged by Brexit. At first I was wary of these claims, as I know how bitter the rivalry has become. But the photographic evidence speaks for itself, and his testimony is compelling. Moreover, it’s clear that there is a new mood among many of the local boats, which are now desperate to save their fisheries. Most of them are involved in the Fishing for Litter scheme, landing the discarded gear and other rubbish they catch. But this is likely to be a small fraction of the equipment being dumped. Unless active gillnetting and ghost fishing by discarded nets are stopped, my contact believes, the entire marine ecosystem is likely to collapse. He and other fishers “have written to the authorities until we are blue in the face”, but he says he has been repeatedly stonewalled. It’s a sign of desperation that he has come to me, a longstanding critic of his industry. When I approached the Scottish government, it told me: “We take protection of the marine environment seriously and are clear that any form of dumping and other illegal activities is completely unacceptable … We would encourage anyone with intelligence relating to suspicious activities by vessels to report this to us on our website.” But, as the Scottish government’s own report points out, “no data or studies” have been produced showing where the discarded gear is coming from. This is despite the fact that, in the north Highlands, commercial fishing gear accounts for 90% of the ocean plastic picked up by beach cleaners, and that entanglement in static fishing equipment is a major cause of death for minke and humpback whales in Scotland. There’s a reliable principle of public administration: if a government takes a genuine interest in an issue, it commissions researchers to study it. No data tends to mean no interest. There are similar issues all over the world. Gillnetting and the ghost fishing it causes have reduced the population of vaquita – the world’s smallest member of the whale and dolphin family, which lives in Mexico’s Sea of Cortez – to fewer than 20. Last week a young humpback whale was spotted in Antarctic waters, its dorsal fin severed, with nets cutting through the skin around its tail. As global seafood consumption has doubled in 50 years, the issue has become ever more urgent. Yet most governments propose to do nothing except “encourage” fishers and gear manufacturers to behave responsibly, without sanctions or incentives. No vessel should be allowed to leave port unless it has enough space to store all its rubbish. Mandatory deposit return schemes would ensure that fishers returned used gear to the manufacturers at the end of its life. All nets should be traceable to the boats that use them. While some equipment is bound to be lost accidentally, it’s not hard to spot patterns of deliberate disposal. But, like the fictional US president in the movie Don’t Look Up, the world’s governments, faced with ecological collapse, have again decided to “sit tight and assess”. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnist‘My initial reaction,” says Greg Arundell, with a laugh, “was no.” The actor had been playing Jacob Marley, the deceased partner of Ebenezer Scrooge, in a production of A Christmas Carol at Beaulieu Abbey. Then several of the cast, including Scrooge himself, came down with Covid. Director Abbey Wright pulled Arundell aside and asked him to step up and play the great festive miser. In preparation for anything going wrong, the entire cast already had roles they were ready to cover. But Scrooge was not one of Arundell’s. “I hadn’t learned it!” he says. “It wasn’t on my understudy plan.” However, persuaded to try out some scenes, he realised he didn’t need to look at the script very much. “Because I’d watched the show so many times, it had made its way into my brain.” He agreed to give it a go. So how was it? “I don’t really remember the first two shows,” he says. “They were an absolute blur.” They must have gone well, though: he played Scrooge for the rest of the run. “I don’t want to make a habit of it,” he says. “But it made me more confident, knowing I have the ability to do something like that.” As Omicron raged over Christmas, dozens of shows were cancelled. Were it not for intrepid actors like Arundell, far more would have had to shut down. “Understudies and covers are the people in the background,” he says. “Until they’re called upon, you don’t think about them. But they are the backbone of a show.” Some shows have covers or “swings” – performers offstage who can cover a wide range of parts in the ensemble, as opposed to understudies, who are part of the ensemble and can step up to play leads or supporting roles. After Christmas, when every one of the leads in the West End jukebox musical The Drifters Girl came down with coronavirus at the same time, the show was saved by covers. “It was amazing,” says Ethan Davis, who was able to make his West End debut as singer Johnny Moore in The Drifters Girl. “I’m an offstage cover,” he says. “So I’ll be in the dressing room during each show, just on standby. But I’ve now been on eight times in a week.” Without Davis and the other covers, The Drifters Girl could not have stayed open. “If you don’t have covers,” says Davis, “you don’t have a show.” Covers, he says, will generally find out whether they’re going to perform three to four hours before curtain-up. “But sometimes you might be halfway through a show and something happens on stage – they fall over, or their voice might not be feeling it. You’re sitting in your dressing room watching TV, and you hear over the Tannoy that you’re getting called on stage.” Isn’t that terrifying? “If it’s your first time,” he says, “you’re always on edge. But once you’ve done it a few times, it’s nothing too scary. You’re just doing your job.” For smaller productions and shorter runs, covers aren’t always an option. On Christmas Eve, Stacey Coleman had just finished her lead role in Jack and the Beanstalk at venues in Whitchurch and Ellesmere Port. “We were all in tears,” she says, “because it was just such a relief to have got through it.” After the show, which she had also directed, Coleman got a call asking if she could cover for Sleeping Beauty at the Northwich Memorial in Cheshire, since Covid had laid low some of the panto’s cast. Did that mean she spent Christmas Day learning Princess Aurora’s lines? “Yeah,” she laughs, “in between serving Christmas dinner to my family.” The part lasted until 29 December. Then, the next day, Coleman received another call, this time from Oldham’s Queen Elizabeth hall, which was having its own problems with Sleeping Beauty. Coleman had already stepped in there, playing Carabosse on a day off from Jack. Now they needed someone to play the comedy role of Wally. Other members of her Beanstalk cast had similar experiences, helping out with various productions by the same company, Anton Benson Productions. “We weren’t official understudies,” she says. “We hadn’t read the parts previously. Everyone who was lucky enough to be well just felt like, ‘It’s up to all of us to pull together.’ ” She kept saying yes because she knew how important it was to keep shows going. “I knew saying no would mean turning away hundreds of people, the show not opening. And [Christmas shows] are not like any other production, where you can reschedule in three weeks. Once Christmas is past, that’s it.” Putting on a good show with understudies, says Coleman, is all about team effort. “I couldn’t have gone on without feeling like everybody had our backs the whole time. It takes that to go on and cover. You can’t do it alone.” Justin-Lee Jones had a similar experience when he covered for the role of Sven – the all-singing, all-dancing reindeer in Frozen – on New Year’s Day in the West End. “You can only see the floor,” he says of the puppet contraption the actor wears to play the part. “You can’t look up, otherwise the reindeer’s head is going to stick up in the sky. There’s a lot of trust on stage between Sven and the other actors around you.” Jones is a swing: he covers for nine roles among the Frozen ensemble. “You get a text every day to say what the setup of the show is going to be,” he explains. “So, say a principal member is on holiday, a member of the ensemble would fill in for them, and then the swings have to cover all the gaps.” He knows the show inside out. Although he’s assumed a wide range of roles, New Year’s Day was his first as Sven. The part of the jolly reindeer is incredibly demanding, essentially requiring the actor to be in the muscle-shredding plank position for the entire time they’re on, with the longest scene lasting nine minutes. “You have stilts on your hands, like crutches,” Jones says. “Then you’ve got these extended feet which also have stilts, with an extension on your toes. As well as holding your own body weight, you’re also carrying the head, which weighs 10kg, then the rest of the body – and at times, a ukulele and an axe. It gets very hot in there, so there’s an air-con machine inside.” The role is generally shared between two performers, each doing four shows a week to relieve the intensity. When one was unable to perform, Jones got a text. “Because of the adrenaline of going on for the first time,” he says, it was OK. But in the next scene, after I’d calmed down, I was more aware of my body.” That’s when it started to hurt. “I was dripping with sweat, thinking, ‘It’s OK, it’s OK, this is for the kids!” He grins. “I do love the challenge. Only a certain person is going to be given Sven to cover.” Shows as big as Frozen can only happen because of the swings. “They have to learn so much so they can just slot in,” he says. “The audience shouldn’t notice anything different. The best compliment for an understudy is, ‘I didn’t notice you were on.’ ” Over the holidays, a clip of Hugh Jackman went viral. During the curtain call for The Music Man on Broadway, Jackman told the audience about his co-star for the evening. The leading role of Marian, usually performed by Sutton Foster, was instead covered by swing Kathy Voytko. Jackman applauded Voytko for stepping in with only a few hours’ notice – and Marian was only one of eight roles she was prepared for. To riotous applause, Jackman called swings and understudies “the bedrock of Broadway”. In the video, Jackman gets visibly emotional, telling the audience that it’s only their fourth preview. “Swings and understudies have not had a chance to learn,” he says. “They’ve watched from the corner of the room while we rehearse. Then five hours before a performance, they’re told, ‘You’re on.’ It humbles me. The courage, the brilliance, the dedication, the talent.” By celebrating these roles, Jones says, Jackman was speaking for a whole industry. “It felt like a nice highlight, showing what an unsung job it is. Most people have no idea that the reason they’ve been able to see a show is because someone else has learned this role and can do it at the drop of a hat.” He laughs. “My mum has three kids in this business – and even she doesn’t understand it properly.”Al Jazeera, the Qatar-funded media organization, has reportedly stopped creating content for its new conservative digital project in the US, Rightly. Four sources confirmed the news to Axios, which was the first to report it on Tuesday. In December, the company ended its show on the platform, which was being overseen by its editor-in-chief, Scott Norvell, a Fox News veteran. Al Jazeera launched Rightly last year to “provide fresh voices that are too often left out of the mainstream media a space to engage and debate the issues that matter most to them”, according to a statement released at the time. The surprise decision to launch such a project was met with objections from numerous Al Jazeera staff members, with many saying that its launch would “irreparably tarnish the network’s brand and work”. In an open letter to Al Jazeera management, staff members, including executive producers, presenters and correspondents wrote: “Media in the US is already polarised and the introduction of Rightly is not a solution but rather a deepening of the problem. “Those of us who work in the United States already face tremendous challenges, and our jobs will only be made more difficult now that we will be associated with promoting a political ideology,” the letter added. “This isn’t about politics, left or right, or diversity of perspectives … This is about journalism and continuing the network’s moral mission of uplifting marginalized voices, communities and stories. Rightly is a betrayal of that mission.” Last fall, the Department of Justice ordered AJ+, a US-based digital news network owned by Al Jazeera, to register as a foreign agent. In a letter sent to Al Jazeera, the DOJ said that the network, which produces short videos for social media, engaged in “political activities” on behalf of the Qatari government and thus needed to be subject to the Foreign Agents Registration Act. Al Jazeera said AJ+ was independent and should not need to register. Axios reported that Rightly staff members who worked on the show were given little warning that it would wind down. One staff member who worked on the show said it was explained as “a budgetary decision”. Brad Polumbo, a policy correspondent at the Foundation for Economic Education, who worked on Rightly, confirmed to Axios that it had closed. “I had a great experience there,” he said, adding: “It’s disappointing that it was cut short but we’ll still have that work we did as part of our portfolio and to be proud of going forward.” Michael Weaver, Al Jazeera’s senior vice-president of business and development and growth, said that the company was still evaluating the Rightly brand. “We’re constantly evaluating everything we put on the air,” he said, without specifying what products might be produced in the future from the brand.There could not be a better day to meet Sir Keir Starmer than last Wednesday. A few hours earlier, at Prime Minister’s Questions, Boris Johnson had apologised for his presence at a Downing Street party held during lockdown in a manner that was as ludicrous as it was humiliating. When the prime minister said that he didn’t realise the 30 to 40 people gathered in his garden boozing and eating food from a long table constituted a party, Starmer told him he had run out of road. “His defence that he didn’t realise he was at a party is so ridiculous that it’s actually offensive to the British public,” Starmer told the Commons. “Is he now going to do the decent thing and resign?” Not surprisingly, partygate has helped Labour to its biggest lead over the Conservatives since 2013. I half expect the leader of the opposition to be on a high. But I am not sure he does highs. Starmer is the anti-Johnson. While the prime minister appears to pride himself on being a feckless buffoon, Starmer is the straight man’s straight man – so solid he verges on stolid. He rises to greet me and offers an elbow by way of a handshake. He is wearing blue trousers and a pristine white shirt, sleeves rolled up. It is a metaphor as much as a sartorial statement. Starmer is always well briefed, as you would expect of a QC and a former director of the Crown Prosecution Service. Today is no exception. “I hear we’ve got a few things in common,” he says by way of introduction. “We both went to Leeds university. What did you do there? And did you live in Chestnut Avenue?” Why, I ask. “That’s where I lived.” As it happens, we were in the same year at university and I did live in Chestnut Avenue – although we didn’t know each other. A former housemate mentioned recently that Starmer came to our parties, but I don’t remember him. Starmer was exceptionally intelligent (he graduated with a first in law), handsome (in old photos, he looks like he has stepped out of an 80s indie band), a decent footballer (he turned out for the law department), a talented musician (violin, piano and flute) and active in Labour politics – yet somehow he had the ability to slip under the radar. He still has it. This may prove to be his strength as a leader – he became an MP, for Holborn and St Pancras in London, in 2015 and was Labour’s boss within a blink – but also his weakness. People ask who exactly Starmer is and what he really stands for. I ask if he thinks Johnson has got himself into even more trouble with his fantastical excuse that he didn’t initially know it was a party. “The cover-up isn’t worse than the crime, but the cover-up compounds the crime.” Starmer shuts his eyes and puts a hand over his forehead in deep concentration, as if digging out a file from the recesses of his mind. “Johnson’s now on his third defence. His first defence when we tackled him on this at the beginning of December was: ‘I’ve been assured there were no parties,’ and his second defence when the video came out was: ‘I’m furious there have been these parties; I’ve only just found out.’ And if the third defence is true, then obviously the first two are false – and that’s a major problem for him.” One problem for Starmer is that he still talks like a lawyer. It is the best part of two years since he won the Labour leadership election with a whopping 56% of the vote. Four months earlier, Johnson’s Tories romped to an 80-seat majority in the general election, after which Jeremy Corbyn resigned as the leader of a Labour party mired in an antisemitism scandal. I ask how much progress has been made since then. “We had to learn the lesson that we lost badly not because the electorate was at fault, but because it was us. And we needed to change our party. That was job No 1, starting with antisemitism. We had to tackle it and tear it out by the roots,” he says. Starmer makes his case calmly, systematically. “The next job was prosecuting the case that the government is not fit to govern and they should go. And that’s what we’re doing, ably assisted by the prime minister. That was a hard case to prosecute till we got through a good bit of Covid, and quite difficult to prosecute just after they’d won an election. The third bit is: if they’re not fit to govern, why are we the government in waiting? And for me that’s what 2022 is all about. That’s a long answer to your question.” Starmer is not a man for sexy soundbites. His office is huge and bland. With Corbyn, it was easy to play Through the Keyhole. His office was full of giveaways: file after ancient file documenting radical causes; Stop the War posters; a historical Islington Trade Council banner; multicoloured tequilas from Venezuela. Today, there is nothing that shouts Starmer. (Look carefully and you will find a mug that says “Keir” and a modest photo of his wife, Victoria, and their two children, a 13-year-old boy and an 11-year-old girl whose names he has not revealed to the press to protect their privacy.) This suits him fine. After all, he is not only positioning himself as the anti-Johnson, but also the anti-Corbyn. As so often, though, nothing is as simple as it appears. Starmer may play the arch-centrist now, but he stood on a radical platform to win the Labour leadership. He should be the leader the party has waited so long for – the working-class boy named after a Labour legend who rose to the top by dint of his ability. What could go wrong? Despite everything, people have found Starmer hard to relate to – starchy, metropolitan, dull and controlling. It is only now that he is beginning to cut through – and that is almost wholly because of Johnson’s behaviour. He gives me a potted history of the Labour party and general elections. “We’ve only really won three times. Obviously, Blair won three elections, but we won in 1945 with Attlee, in the 60s with Wilson and we won in ’97 and onwards with Blair. They were three very different leaders, but the one thing they had in common was an ability to glimpse the future and persuade people to come on a journey with them. None of those three said: ‘We’re going to manage the present better than the Tories.’ They all said: ‘There’s a different future out there and it’s better.’” It is a good point. With these three prime ministers (Starmer doesn’t mention Ramsay MacDonald, who led two minority Labour governments in the 20s), you could also sum up what they stood for in a second: Attlee’s welfare state, Wilson’s white heat of technology, Blair’s third way. How would you define Starmerism? The 59-year-old has a habit of leaning into you when making a point or setting out his values. He talks about growing up in Oxted, Surrey. He says his father, a tool maker, felt patronised when he told people he worked in a factory. That, he says, taught him the importance of “respect”. His own education at Reigate Grammar (which became an independent school when he was there and now charges £20,000 a year) was a lesson in the importance of “opportunity”, while family conversations about unpaid bills and his mother’s dependence on the NHS (she had a rare and debilitating type of arthritis known as Still’s disease) taught him about the need for “security”. They are powerful stories, but they don’t make for a political vision in themselves. “The broad frame is building a better Britain coming out of the pandemic,” Starmer says. “Now, what we mean by that is a Britain that is driven by security, opportunity and respect. Now, what I mean by security is …” Oh, come on, Keir, I say: three vague words aren’t going to win you an election. After Starmer published a 14,000-word essay on his vision in September, the Guardian’s Rafael Behr gave qualified praise for the words “security” and “opportunity”. “The problem is in the other 13,998, which suffocate decent ideas with platitude and entomb them in boilerplate,” he said. I ask Starmer, a former shadow Brexit secretary and ardent remainer, whether Brexit is done and dusted. “Yes,” he says. “Look, we’ve left the EU. There’s no case for rejoining, so we have to make it work. We are out and we’re staying out.” So that rules out a return to the single market or customs union under a Labour government? “Yes, it does. We’ve got to make Brexit work from the outside and not reopen old wounds.” If he wants to impress “red wall” voters, when he suggested introducing zero VAT on fuel, shouldn’t he have trumpeted the fact that this could not have been done if Britain was still in Europe? “Yes, possibly. Yes, we do have to show what we can now do that we couldn’t do when we were in the EU. Another would be to take advantage of supporting our sectors and industries in a more meaningful way. We could also have our own framework for trade deals that reflect our values. That is part of what I mean by making Brexit work.” His diary manager, Prentice, pops in to see if we want a cup of tea. “Very strong, Prentice please,” Starmer says. He segues to Labour’s September conference in an attempt to explain his vision. There is something biblical about the way he breaks down the days. “On the Friday at conference, we announced a housing policy that said: ‘We’re going to redefine affordable housing, because at the moment what’s deemed to be affordable housing is way out of the reach of many many families.’ On the Saturday, Angela Rayner [the deputy leader] announced the employment rights green paper – including sick pay from day one, flexible working and getting rid of fire-and-rehire. On the Sunday, we said: ‘We’re going to take the tax advantage available for public schools and put it into our state schools.’ “On the Monday, Rachel [Reeves, the shadow chancellor] steps up and says: ‘These are our fiscal rules.’ Then I come up on the Wednesday and say: ‘This is what the future looks like; this is where technology plays a part to change the health service.’” He finally pauses. “And then people say to me: ‘You have not put anything on the table, Keir!’ Honestly! There’s more than enough for the whole Labour party to unite around, and if anybody is maintaining the argument that we’re not spelling out some of the things that matter most in what we’re going to do, then they’re not listening to what we’ve said.” He takes another breath. “I accept that’s because we need to up our game in communicating.” There are plenty of positives, but I am still looking for the big idea. It is hard to imagine a Labour government going down in history for redefining affordable housing at the level of 30% of household income rather than 80% of average rents. Does he want a Labour government to be remembered for its green new deal? His face lights up. “Yes! I want to be remembered for bringing about profound change in the country, part of which is a green new deal.” Would it involve nationalisation? He gives me a look. “I think that’s the wrong question. The question is: will it deliver the next generation of secure, high-skilled, high-paid jobs in the areas that need them, consistent with our obligations in relation to the climate crisis? You need a government that sets the mission, that gives the certainty and support to allow that change to happen in a partnership with business.” Perhaps it is not surprising that Starmer has been dismissed by some as a “Blair tribute act”. He may say now that nationalisation is the wrong question, but 18 months ago it appeared to be the answer. In the 10 pledges he made as prospective leader, under common ownership he stated: “Public services should be in public hands, not making profits for shareholders. Support common ownership of rail, mail, energy and water.” What has brought about such a change of heart? Were the pledges made just to get him elected? “Firstly, there is a distinction between common ownership and nationalisation. There are different forms of common ownership and top-down nationalisation is not one I’ve ever thought is right.” He says he has always preferred co-ops and mutuals. Anyway, he adds, the world has changed since 2019 because of the pandemic, fuel prices and Brexit. (Later, I find footage of the Labour leadership rivals being asked to raise their hands if they would renationalise water and electricity – they all do.) He promised to unite the party with his radical agenda. Not only has he failed to do that, but he has made a point of not trying to do so. Membership has fallen by tens of thousands, not helped by the fact that many on the left have been kicked out of the party. I ask if he knew when he stood that he had no intention of standing by the radical agenda or the promise to unite the party. He argues that he has done much to unite Labour. “I was clear we would have to deal with antisemitism.” He says he has done so – and that it has united the party. “Don’t underestimate the extent to which the Labour party membership want to unite about winning, partifcularly at the moment. We’ve lost four elections in a row. We’ve not won an election since 2005. One thing Labour party members want is unity in winning.” Your critics call you Stalinist, I say; they claim you have zero tolerance of ideological difference. I mention three high-profile cases. Corbyn was suspended from the party for his reaction to the findings of the Equalities and Human Rights Commission’s report into Labour’s handling of complaints about antisemitism; the suspension is over, but the whip is still withdrawn. After spending most of his life in the party, the film-maker Ken Loach was thrown out for opposing what he described as a “witch hunt”. Finally, he sacked the leftwing shadow education secretary Rebecca Long-Bailey after she retweeted an article in which the actor Maxine Peake claimed incorrectly that the Israeli secret service had taught American police the tactic of kneeling on necks that killed George Floyd. (Peake later apologised for the claim.) “I said I was going to root out antisemitism in the party,” Starmer replies. “I meant it and followed through on it. And that meant doing tough things. And everything has followed from that.” It was vital to tackle antisemitism in the party, I say, but doesn’t he feel his reaction in these cases was heavy-handed? Wouldn’t it have been wiser to say he was displeased with Corbyn’s reaction to the report, rather than going to war with him? As someone Jewish with fairly well-attuned antisemitism antennae, I tell him I think Peake’s comment was anti-Israel, rather than antisemitic. He says the sackings and expulsions have all been related to antisemitism. That may be true, but at times you have to play six degrees of separation to get to the antisemitism. For example, party members have been suspended for discussing Corbyn’s suspension after Labour’s general secretary, David Evans, barred them from doing so. Has Starmer surprised himself by how tough he has been? “No,” he says. He takes me back to his previous jobs. “Don’t underestimate how hard it is to sit in a cell with someone in the Caribbean who’s about to be hanged and take a critical decision about their case – the result: if you win, he lives; if you lose, he dies. Or the difficult stuff at the CPS, where we’re working on massive terrorist operations with the security and intelligence services on a live operation.” This is when he starts sounding ruthlessly – and promisingly – prime ministerial. You sense he feels that if there was collateral damage from the antisemitism scandal, so be it. He is happy talking toughness all day long – prosecuting grooming gangs, deciding whether the mother of a man who went to Dignitas should be prosecuted, running a staff of about 7,000. I am looking at him as he talks. Despite the immaculate quiffed hair and white shirt, he has something of the street fighter about him – smaller than you might expect, broad, fit as a butcher’s proverbial. Look, he says, he came into politics late and he didn’t do so to mess about. Is his late entry an advantage, I ask. “It means I’ve got a huge amount of experience I bring into politics. It means I’ve not got years of being within this group in politics or that group within politics. I haven’t got time for that. I. Haven’t. Got. Time. For. That.” Does that give him a sense of urgency? “I’ll tell you what it gives me a sense of … if there’s a problem, identify what it is and fix it. Don’t walk around it, talking about it, brilliantly, articulately, great oratory. Who cares? Stop talking about it; fix the bloody thing. If I’ve brought anything from my working life before into politics, it’s that sense of: stop talking about the problem; fix it.” Last week, it was reported that Corbyn was considering launching a “Peace and Justice” party to run at the next general election. Would that pose a threat to Labour? “No, I have confidence in the offer that Labour will put forward for the next general election, and in my leadership to persuade people of it.” *** We catch up five days later, on Monday evening. Starmer seems even more enraged by Johnson’s behaviour than he was last week. “It’s quite extraordinary that the prime minister has gone into hiding. It’s now in the public interest he’s gone, because he’s lost his moral authority, not just in relation to key messages on the pandemic, but all the other important issues – the cost of living, energy bills, waiting lists, an NHS seriously under strain and Russian troops massing on the Ukraine border.” Despite a busy week, Starmer has managed to take part in a 50-minute podcast for The Athletic on his favourite subject – football. He is an Arsenal fan, reckons he goes to at least one match a week, still plays 90-minute matches with old friends and their children and could chat football for ever and a day if politics didn’t get in the way. He has found out I am a Manchester City fan and tells me about the time he was going out with a girl from Manchester, how often he went to watch City play at Maine Road and how he could never get his head around the strangely coloured urinals. Meanwhile, the Daily Mail has accused him of breaking lockdown rules, showing him in an office campaigning in last May’s disastrous Hartlepool election drinking a bottle of beer with other people present. Starmer says he has nothing to apologise for. “No rules were broken – work rules at the time permitted the activity. I follow the rules at all times. I’m a former chief prosecutor – honesty and decency are non-negotiable for me.” There is something that still baffles me. Starmer is a serious man from a working-class background and Johnson is an Old Etonian clown, yet the public appears to have found the latter easier to relate to – at least until now. Does he think the knighthood, received for services to the criminal justice system and law, alienates people? “I don’t think so,” he says, voice rising slightly. “I’m proud of the honour bestowed by the Queen and, if I think of my own family, it is a mischaracterisation of millions of families to think that somehow it’s a problem to have been knighted by the Queen for having done something.” So what is the problem, then? “I think it has genuinely been very difficult through the pandemic to communicate and engage with people. On relatability, I just want a fair crack of the whip. When you see someone with a crowd, you see what they are like. All of that has been robbed for me for the first year and a half of me being leader of the Labour party.” The contrast between him and Johnson raises another question, he says. “Do you want a prime minister who thinks being prime minister is a branch of the entertainment industry, or do you want someone who is serious about politics? I came into this to change lives.” He updates me on the last week in the Commons. “One of the developments since we spoke is Operation Save Big Dog!” He is talking about the Johnson-led campaign to save Johnson. “It seems to me it consists of scrapping the BBC, sacking junior staff and handing out honours to failed Tory ministers.” He pauses. “When you look at Operation Save Big Dog, they don’t want to save Johnson, they want him rehomed.” Another naff one-liner. But I am thinking of Starmer the plumber, the man who wants to get things fixed. Sure, it is going to be a mighty struggle to win over the left, while younger generations still show little sign of warming to him. But the toughness and the knowledge he brings from a life outside politics have to be assets. If he can reclaim some of the radicalism that got him elected and demonstrate that he is as committed to social justice as he was in his days as a lawyer, Starmer could be a contender.A landmark study has described the way primary school pupils are taught to read in England as “uninformed and failing children”, calling on the government to drop its narrow focus on phonics. Researchers at UCL’s Institute of Education say the current emphasis on synthetic phonics, which teaches children to read by helping them to identify and pronounce sounds which they blend together to make words, is “not underpinned by the latest evidence”. They claim analysis of multiple systematic reviews, experimental trials and data from international assessment tests such as Pisa suggests that teaching reading in England may have been less successful since the adoption of the synthetic phonics approach rather than more. The UCL researchers are among 250 signatories to a letter which has been sent to education secretary Nadhim Zahawi, calling on the government to allow for a wider range of approaches to teaching reading, which would allow teachers to use their own judgment about which is best for their pupils. The use of synthetic or blended phonics to teach reading in schools in England has been the subject of ferocious debate since it was backed by former education minister Michael Gove, who introduced a phonics screening check for all children in year one (aged five or six) to check pupil progress. In synthetic phonics, children begin by pronouncing individual sounds in words and are then encouraged to blend them together to make words. For example “s-t-r-ee-t”. Supporters say it has had a positive impact on literacy, and point to significant long-term benefits for disadvantaged pupils. Critics say phonics training only helps children to do well in phonics tests – they learn how to pronounce words presented to them in a list rather than understand what they read – and does nothing to encourage a love of reading. England’s Pisa reading scores are virtually unchanged since 2006. The report outlines three key approaches to the teaching of reading. As well as the government’s preferred approach using systematic synthetic phonics, there is a whole-language approach, where the focus is on real texts, the emphasis is on reading for meaning and any phonics teaching is non-systematic. The third approach is “balanced instruction” which balances the different approaches. Prof Dominic Wyse, co-author of the UCL study, said: “Teaching children to read and to make sense of texts is crucial to improving their life chances and is one of the most important tasks of primary schools and early-years settings. “Although there are some strengths to England’s current approach to teaching reading, our new research shows that the government’s policy is uninformed because it is not underpinned by the latest robust evidence.” Wyse went on: “For the first time in more than 100 years we see that a balanced-instruction approach to the teaching of reading is no longer the norm in England. The majority of teachers are now reporting the more frequent use of the narrower synthetic phonics approach. “Our view is that the system doesn’t give teachers enough flexibility to do what they think is best for their pupils, nor to encourage pupils to enjoy reading.” Co-author Prof Alice Bradbury said research had showed that teachers feel pressured by the compulsory screening check. Results from a survey of 2,200 teachers found synthetic phonics was their main focus for teaching reading. All but one of the 936 comments from the survey were negative about the screening test, while one teacher described having to “live and breathe phonics” and another appealed for “reflection on the mass of skills involved in reading rather than solely focusing on phonics”. “Policy changes have led to changes in teaching, including more time being spent on phonics, the separation of phonics from other literacy activities, and a reliance on a small number of phonics schemes,” said Bradbury. “This is an important shift in how children are taught to read, a shift which is not underpinned by the research evidence.” Dr Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said the phonics check should be abolished. “When it comes to detailed questions of teaching children to read, ministers should accept that government does not know best. It would be more responsible for them to trust research evidence rather than to follow their own prejudices and instincts.” A Department for Education spokesperson said systematic phonics teaching had been proven the world over to be the most effective method of teaching children to read. “Since the introduction of the phonics screening check in 2012, the percentage of Year 1 pupils meeting the expected standard in reading has risen from 58% to 82%, with 92% of children achieving this standard by Year 2.”More than 1,200 students in Oakland, California, have signed a petition saying they would stay home this week unless school administrators provide additional Covid protections, including more N95 masks, weekly testing and better social distancing – or a shift to virtual learning. On Tuesday, three district campuses were closed because students and teachers, in solidarity, stayed home. At a news conference today, the Oakland Unified School District (OUSD) spokesperson John Sasaki said that attendance numbers would not be available until tomorrow, but the district was expecting more than a thousand students to stay home. The district said it was providing free tests and masks and had implemented other safety protocols including air purifiers, but students and teachers have alleged inequities in the distribution of resources between schools in more and less wealthy neighborhoods. The protest comes as schools across the country have struggled with the latest, Omicron-fueled wave of the coronavirus pandemic. In recent weeks, students in New York City, New Jersey, Chicago, Washington DC and elsewhere have launched protests and petitions as well, demanding improved safety measures. Districts, meanwhile, have faced immense pressures from parents and politicians to keep school campuses open as the US enters its third year of the pandemic. Students and teachers around the US have complained of inconsistency in schools’ coronavirus policies and a chaotic return from winter break. Last week, students from several New York City schools walked out, demanding virtual learning options, and a video of hundreds of masked, Brooklyn Technical High students filing out of class went viral. “I think the number one emotion I feel is just frustrated,” Favour Akingbemi, 17, a senior at Washington Preparatory high school in South LA, told the Guardian earlier this month. Nearly three of Akingbemi’s four high school years have been defined by Covid-19. “It’s upsetting that we’re still stuck in this pandemic,” she said. As students stage walkouts over a lack of high-quality masks and coronavirus tests, the Biden administration today announced that it had distributed that last of its $122bn Covid-19 relief funding for schools from the American Rescue Plan. “I am proud that, with the approval of these plans, states have 100% of their funds and robust plans to help schools remain open and help students thrive,” said the education secretary, Miguel Cardona. Cardona also echoed calls from Joe Biden to keep public schools open. “We know what it takes to keep our schools open safely for in-person learning, and these funds will help us achieve that goal,” he said. But students in Oakland and around the country are alleging that resources have not been distributed equitably. Moreover, in the face of the highly-transmissible Omicron variant, students and teachers who are immunocompromised or live with elderly or immunocompromised family members say that they still feel unsafe attending class in person. “Teaching is already a stressful job. Doing so when I’m fearing for my life and for students’ lives and the lives of their families is just on a different level,” Joanne Yi, a teacher at Augustus Hawkins in South Los Angeles, told the Guardian this month. Safety concerns and mandated quarantines for exposed students are among the reasons the Los Angeles Unified School District recorded 130,000 student absences last week with only a 66.8% attendance rate.There are caves where ethereal golden-green lights glow on the ground like emeralds. These light displays are from a luminous moss called Schistostega pennata, known as goblin’s gold, a name that conjures up legends of cave-dwelling creatures. But in daylight, the magical green glow vanishes. The moss is superbly adapted to life in the dark. When its spores germinate they grow filaments that fan out, scavenging for any faint light they can find. Cells on the surface of the moss are covered with tiny lenses that focus any dim light deep down into the bottom of the cells where chloroplasts move around to harvest any pinpricks of light. The fluorescent green glow of the moss comes from the chloroplasts as they absorb most of the light but reflect green light, while some of the light focused inside the cell is also reflected out. The moss can grow into huge colonies in the dark and cover cave floors in a luminous green light. And by growing in dark places, it gains a huge advantage by avoiding competition with other plants that cannot survive in such dingy light.A set of ancient gold and silver tubes dating to about 5,500 years ago and unearthed in North Caucasus in Russia could be the world’s oldest surviving drinking straws, experts have claimed. The eight thin-walled tubes, each more than a metre in length with a narrow perforated tip, were found in the largest of three compartments containing human remains, discovered during the excavation of a mound near Maykop in the summer of 1897. The tubes, now in the Hermitage Museum in St Petersburg, date to the fourth millennium BC, and were made of segments joined together. Four of the tubes also feature gold or silver bull figurines that have been slid on to them. Experts have previously suggested the tubes may have been used to support a canopy used in the funeral procession, or that they were sceptres. A team of experts in Russia, however, said they were likely to be straws for drinking beer from a shared pot. “If correct, these objects represent the earliest material evidence of drinking through long tubes – a practice that became common during feasts in the third and second millennia BC in the ancient near east,” the researchers wrote. Writing in the journal Antiquity, the team suggest the items are drinking straws “designed for sipping a type of beverage that required filtration during consumption”. The researchers say their theory is backed by evidence including depictions on seals from Iran and Iraq dating to the fifth to fourth millennium BC of people using straws to drink, while in the third millennium BC “banquet scenes showing groups of people sipping beer through long tubes from a shared vessel became popular in Mesopotamian art”. The authors add that a reed stem, wrapped in gold foil, as well as two metal drinking tubes, were previously found in the grave of the woman known as Queen Puabi in the Royal Cemetery at Ur, dating to about 4,500 years ago. The tubes’ perforated tip is consistent with detachable metal straw tip-strainers used on the ends of reed straws in the Levant and Mesopotamia in the second millennium BC. “The set of eight drinking tubes in the Maykop tomb may therefore represent the feasting equipment for eight individuals, who could have sat to drink beer from the single, large jar found in the tomb,” the authors wrote. The team said they found evidence of barley starch in the tip of one of the tubes, although the finding is not conclusive proof of the presence of a drink such as beer. “The position of the tubes alongside the body emphasises both the importance of the feast in the funerary rite and the high social rank for someone who throws a banquet,” said Viktor Trifonov, first author of the research from the Russian Academy of Sciences. Prof Augusta McMahon of the University of Cambridge, who was not involved in the research, said the work was very convincing, adding that the proposed purpose was fancy but functional. “Beer in the past was probably ‘chunky’ with sediment, and filter straws were a necessary implement,” she said, adding they were well known in Mesopotamia during the third to second millennia BC. “These drinking straws reveal the importance of past communal eating and drinking as a powerful creator of social connections, as feasts and parties are today,” she said.The part of communal work-life I miss most is gallows humour. This can only be forged in really crap jobs, and they don’t come much worse than call-centre work. I’ve done a fair bit, cold-calling for rubbish products, financial services and charities. Call centres are offices, but also open prisons. Managers keep track of the number and length of your toilet breaks. They count how many calls you attempt each minute, so you can’t slack off. When some poor sap does pick up, they sometimes listen in. You would only know this after you got taken to one side and asked why you hadn’t attempted to flog the cash-strapped pensioner some side plates. Your continued employment was always at stake. We all suffered the same dilemma. On the one hand, crippling financial need; on the other, our souls. Yet an atmosphere of Stasi-like distrust can really juice one’s rebellious instincts. These call centres were frequently staffed by actors (one of whom is now Hollywood royalty, starring in Marvel films for presumably more than £10 an hour). We were young, had the gift of the gab and could work off-script, which made sales conversations less robotic, and often more lucrative. If skiving was off the table, there were other plays. Seeing a potential customer with an amusing name pop up on your computer screen was a highlight. “GOOD MORNING, MR BELLY!” you would trill, a decibel notch above normal. This let people around you know that high jinks were afoot, without alerting managers who were patrolling the floor. “It’s pronounced Bee-lay,” the mark would sigh. Then the game was finding the most ludicrous way into the conversation you could get away with. “Would you describe your days as donkey-less?” I once deadpanned, on a charity job. “That is, would you care to adopt an ass?” The trick was to quickly segue into drier, scripted information, so they wouldn’t catch on, and bosses couldn’t accuse you of not doing the job. We received a lot of abuse on these calls, even when we went by the book. If someone was really wringing you out, the thing to do was grow maddeningly polite, pouring oil on their fire. While murmuring in an understanding manner, we would be pantomiming larger, more truthful reactions for the benefit of friends sitting opposite. Sometimes we would change accents halfway through a call to throw off someone who was screaming. That was high-risk, though. Better to opt for our chief modus operandi: creative mispronunciation and intentional thickness. “Is this … the School for Sacred Courgettes?” you might ask, if you were trying to get in touch with say, Scolaire du Sacré-Coeur de Jette. (Not a real example – I’m just showing you how it worked.) I feel bad about it now, of course. These were essentially prank phone calls, as beneath us as the work itself. Yet as our only recourse, they restored to the job a perverse dignity and vitality. I don’t know how it works if you are not in an office – without pals to vent to, to make you laugh, do the frustrations of a working day simply accumulate? Surely it’s less fun if your work husband is your actual husband? I’ve been working from home for 10 years; I’m familiar with its boredoms. I almost look forward to receiving cold calls – though these days it’s usually a robot. Cowards. If it is a person, I make sure I never lose my temper. I’ve been where they are. Besides, “Mr Salamander” sounds pretty cool.When Joe Biden finished delivering a televised update on the administration’s coronavirus response last week, aides began to usher the press towards the exit as reporters shouted questions. Biden declined to answer. “Folks, we’ll talk about that later,” he said. Then came a question from NBC’S Kelly O’Donnell he couldn’t ignore: “Maybe a press conference soon, Mr President? We would look forward to that.” “Me too,” he replied. The next day, the White House announced that Biden would hold the 10th press conference of his presidency, far fewer than any of his recent predecessors during their first year in office. It was scheduled for Wednesday, on the eve of his first anniversary as president. When Biden steps up to the lectern, he does so facing myriad challenges and setbacks – and a press corps eager to ask him about all of it. His domestic agenda is stalled in the Senate, where his push on voting rights legislation has also hit a wall; inflation is the highest it has been in nearly four decades; and the supreme court rejected the administration’s vaccine-or-test mandate, a key part of his plan to combat the pandemic, now in its third year. The goodwill Biden enjoyed early in his presidency has mostly dried up, as his approval rating has fallen to 42% from 53% when he took office, according to FiveThirtyEight’s average of public polls. But it also comes amid the growing calls from journalists and press freedom advocates for Biden to engage more directly with reporters. In a sharp shift from Donald Trump, Biden has said journalists are “indispensable to the functioning of democracy”, which the president has repeatedly warned is under threat at home and abroad. Yet press access to the president has been limited. Last week, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) released a report grading the president’s approach to the media at home as well as his administration’s support for press freedom globally during his first year in office. Titled Night and Day, the report praised the Biden White House for an “almost complete reversal of the Trump administration’s unprecedentedly pervasive and damaging hostility”, which it said “seriously damaged the news media’s credibility and often spread misinformation around the world”. Yet the report criticized the president for his limited availability to journalists. As he ends his first year, Biden has held fewer press conferences and participated in fewer interviews than nearly all of his recent predecessors. Biden has held just nine formal news conferences during his first year, according to research compiled by Martha Joynt Kumar, director of the White House Transition Project. Trump had held 22 and Barack Obama 27 at the same point in their presidencies. Only Ronald Reagan, whose public appearances were scaled back following an assassination attempt in March 1981, held fewer press conferences during his first year. But Reagan did 59 interviews that year, compared with Biden, who has only done 22. Trump, who labeled the media the “enemy of the American people” and once praised a congressman who assaulted a reporter, did 92 interviews during his first year. Many of those interviews were with friendly outlets, but they also included the major networks and media organizations he frequently impugned, such as the New York Times and ABC News. Biden does field questions more frequently than his predecessors, but takes fewer of them, according to Kumar’s tally. These impromptu exchanges with reporters often follow scheduled remarks or public appearances. “For the president, it is a question of how do you use your time?” Kumar said. “And for Biden, he has wanted to use his time negotiating privately on his policies.” She expects Wednesday’s press conference to mark the beginning of a more public phase for the White House, as it tries to build support for Biden’s agenda before next year’s midterms. Asked about Biden’s relative lack of one-on-one interviews and formal news conferences, White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, pushed back, arguing that the president interacted with the press frequently and questions from reporters multiple times per week. “I think the American people have seen him out there, answering questions,” she said. “He will continue to be. That’s an important part of his engagement with the press and the public.” Due to the brief nature of his interactions, and his tendency to make mistakes when speaking extemporaneously, Kumar said Biden relies heavily on his cabinet and his team to communicate the White House’s agenda. “Biden doesn’t feel the need to talk all the time,” she said. “From his viewpoint, it’s not just the president but the whole administration and Biden is willing to let them speak in his stead.” It is a stark contrast to the Trump years, when the president regularly contradicted his team and press briefings were irregular, hostile and rife with falsehoods. One of Trump’s press secretaries, Stephanie Grisham, refused to hold any briefings at all. “We got used to the Trump way of communicating,” she added, “but Biden is very different.” After four years of attacks on the press by the former president and his team, Biden saw resetting relations with the media as a “big priority”, Psaki said. “Our objective is to – has been to – re-instill normalcy and engagement with reporters, whether we agree or disagree, whether there is a partisan tilt to an outlet or not,” she said. “And I think we have conducted ourselves accordingly.” Press briefings and fleeting exchanges with the press are not stand-ins for hearing directly and at length from the president, said Leonard Downie Jr, author of the CPJ report and a former executive editor of the Washington Post. “It is still the only opportunity for large numbers of the press who cover Washington and cover the administration, who are knowledgable about what they’re doing, to be able to ask questions and follow-up questions in depth,” Downie told reporters. Downie acknowledged the drawbacks of a press conference: the potential for political theater, grandstanding by reporters and filibustering by the president. Yet he said events present a “valuable” opportunity for Americans to hear directly from the president – and for the world to see a leader field tough question from a free and independent press. The CPJ report credited the Biden administration for taking steps to protect press freedoms, but cautioned that more work was needed. Biden restored the editorial independence of the United States Agency for Global Media, home of the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe, deeply undermined by the Trump administration. Hours after his inauguration, Biden dismissed the agency’s Trump-appointed chief executive. In July, the attorney general, Merrick Garland, issued a memo banning federal prosecutors from using subpoenas, warrants or court orders to obtain reporters’ telephone and email records in leak investigations, placing sharp new limits on a practice used by both the Trump and Obama administrations. And a spokesman for the Department of Justice told Downie that its investigations into the local police departments in Minneapolis, Louisville and Phoenix would include law enforcement’s treatment of journalists covering Black Lives Matter protests. Yet despite Biden’s pledge to lead the most transparent administration in the nation’s history, journalists and experts interviewed for the CPJ report said there had been “little improvement” in the responsiveness of government agencies to journalists’ requests for information and that “too many briefings and conversations” with administration officials are conducted on “deep background” and unattributable. Press freedom advocates told the CPJ that the White House’s actions have “fallen short” of its lofty rhetoric. In the report, they faulted the administration for failing to extract Afghan journalists during the chaotic US military withdrawal, as well as for failing to hold the Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, accountable for the murder of the Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi. It also raised concerns among press freedom advocates with the Department of Justice’s 2019 decision to extradite the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange under the espionage act, which they warn could set a “dangerous precedent for use against journalists trying to do their jobs”. “We as press freedom advocates and journalists need the United States to stand up and affirm … the first amendment values freedom of the press,” said Robert Mahoney, CPJ’s deputy executive director. “It cannot do that credibly on the international stage if press freedom is not fully respected at home in the United States.”Pretty Hard Cases 9pm, Alibi “I’m like Marie Kondo, cleaning up the streets one gang at a time.” Sam protests when fellow detective Kelly calls her “Karen” after a failed drug raid (“Only a Karen would report that”). But, realising they’re after the same bad guy, they pair up in this 13-part comedy-drama cop series – a fast-talking, low-stakes watch with easy laughs and some tender moments when focusing on their home lives. Meredith MacNeill and Orange Is the New Black’s Adrienne C Moore star. Hollie Richardson Paul O’Grady: For the Love of Dogs 8pm, ITV Melting hearts with Mr O’Grady tonight: a poodle with separation anxiety, a plummer terrier with extreme guarding issues, and a young, smelly bulldog with a bad case of cherry eye. HR Inside the Factory 9pm, BBC Two Gregg Wallace and Cherry Healey continue to be professionally amazed by industrial manufacturing in this episode focusing on Dr Martens boots. Machines clank, foremen deliver monologues and Wallace tries to play the cheeky chappy – with mixed results. “You look like a natural skiver!” he tells one woman. Her job? A leathermaking process called skiving. Alexi Duggins Britain’s Most Expensive Houses 9pm, Channel 4 The final episode in this nosy series wraps things up with a poke around one of London’s most expensive properties – a £75m Knightsbridge home that belonged to prima ballerina Margot Fonteyn – as well as a £3.6m seaside mansion. Ah, life’s not fair. HR Mandy 10pm, BBC Two Diane Morgan’s high-haired genius reaches new levels of silliness this week with another double episode that sees her examining fatbergs and explaining deadly curses. Last in the series (but look out for Morgan’s other comedy creation, Philomena Cunk, who returns in a new BBC series later this year). Hannah Verdier Jimmy Carr’s I Literally Just Told You 10pm, Channel 4 Forget the cosiness of Pointless. This head-wrecking £25,000 quiz, which wraps up its initial run tonight, strives to keep its four contestants off balance so they will struggle to correctly recall details of things that have just happened. If the concept seems chaotic and a little bit cruel, zinger-king Carr has been a capable ringmaster. Graeme Virtue Film choice Mass (Fran Kranz, 2021), 3.20am, Sky Cinema Premiere Four parents meet in a room in a church to talk about an incident several years earlier, when the teenage son of one couple murdered the other pair’s son in a school shooting. Fran Kranz’s intense film is an ostensibly simple drama, theatrical in its single-setting, real-time setup, but shot in intimate closeup and red raw emotionally. Martha Plimpton and Jason Isaacs, as the victim’s mum and dad, and Ann Dowd and Reed Birney, playing the killer’s parents, give devastating performances. Running the gamut of grief, they ask hard questions – how much do you really know your children? Are you to blame for their actions? Is forgiveness possible after such trauma? – and find no easy answers. Simon Wardell Live sport Premier League Football: Leicester v Tottenham 7pm, BT Sport 2. From the King Power StadiumA worker at a warehouse supplying Australian supermarkets says managers were not prepared for the Omicron onslaught, resulting in long shifts and stress among workers covering for absent colleagues due to the pandemic. The employee in the supply chain serving Coles, who asked not to be identified due to fear of reprisal, said about a quarter of staff were off work due to Omicron. He said most of those had Covid-19, rather than being forced to isolate due to being a close contact of a positive case. “A lot of pressure is put on us to try and pick up the slack,” he said, which involved “longer hours and weekends” as well as morning shifts that start earlier. “For instance, we usually start at 6am but a lot of the times … a lot of the staff start at 2am.” High levels of staff absence in supermarket supply chains, coupled with high demand due to panic buying, have emptied shelves of staples including some meats, vegetables and medical supplies including painkillers. Coles’ chief operations officer, Matt Swindells, said Coles did plan in December by recruiting more workers and buying additional stock but the impact of Omicron was “materially greater than the contingency plan anyone could put in place”. “The sheer scale and rate of impact of Omicron, even with all that mitigation in place, has been the single biggest disruption that the industry has seen through all of Covid,” he said. The supermarket group had about 110,000 staff before Christmas and has increased this to about 130,000 in a recruiting program that has included asking former Coles workers to return and streamlining training to speed up getting people on the floor. The secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Sally McManus, said workers across the country were going into the third year of the pandemic “under incredible stress, and are dealing with higher rates of infection and more colleagues being sick than ever before”. “It’s an incredibly difficult and dangerous time in Australian workplaces,” she said. As a result of the crisis, conditions within the warehouse were the most difficult seen so far in the pandemic, the warehouse worker said. “There’s been more tension, I think, more anxiety in people – that I’ve never seen before, including myself. Because so many people around me that had Covid … and then they ring me up the next day and said all, you know, I had Covid, and then I have to worry about my family.” About a month ago health and safety officers warned management “that they will get to be in a position where they need to furlough out a lot of people”, he said. “They said, well we’ll get to that bridge when we get there, and we’re there now. And they’re in the shit.” He said the situation was far worse than during the early days of the pandemic in 2020, when panic buying stripped supermarket shelves of toilet paper and other essentials but warehouses were close to fully staffed. “When we went through the panic buying that was just insane, because we really didn’t need to do it,” he said. Workers in the warehouse wear masks for their entire shift while doing the physically demanding job of picking goods and packing them on to trucks. They are also required to take a rapid antigen test every morning and to re-test if it is positive because RATs are less reliable than the more time-consuming PCR test, which has to be performed by a medical professional. This can result in being tested up to three times a day, the worker said. They were previously required to isolate for a week if a close contact tested positive. However, last week, Scott Morrison said governments had agreed to loosen the rules for essential workers, including those in the food supply chain, in a bid to reduce staff shortages and get goods back on retail shelves. Unions opposed the move, saying it put the health and safety of workers at risk. The Coles supply chain worker said he did not think it would work anyway. “Not in my opinion, no, because of the fact that all the people that I talk to when they give me feedback, they’re all positive.” Swindells confirmed that about 90% of those off work due to Covid had the virus. The warehouse worker said that in addition to staff forced to stay away because they had Covid, several were staying home because they did not want to get vaccinated. “They’re dipping into their long service leave and their entitlements – they can’t access sick leave because they’re not actually sick,” he said. Swindells said the number of people off work because they refused to get vaccinated was only about 2% of the workforce. He agreed that the Omicron wave was the most difficult yet and said it was difficult to know when it would peak. Coles learned to cope with panic buying during the first wave in 2020 and dealt with staff absences concentrated on 12 locked-down local government areas in NSW during last year’s Delta wave, he said. “In Omicron, it’s just an absence of team across the entire supply chain,” he said. “We’ve never had that before. And that’s really what’s probably caused a a bigger problem that’s going to run for longer because the recovery from that requires multiple parts of the supply chain to get things together.” McManus said new health and safety assessments were needed in all workplaces “to ensure that everything that can be done to stop the spread of Omicron is being done”. “Once the federal government can secure a useable supply of rapid antigen tests we will also need these provided free to workers in the vast majority of workplaces,” she said. “These tests are the key to keeping people safe and reducing the burden on our healthcare system.”Top story: Johnson’s No 10 ‘a culture that needs changing’ Good morning from me, Warren Murray. You’ve got mail, and so has the 1922 committee. There is open talk among Conservative MPs of removing Boris Johnson as prime minister after he gave a disastrous interview claiming not to have lied over Downing Street parties. It is thought more likely than not there will be a confidence ballot: “Letters are coming from the left and from the right, from Brexiters and remainers,” said one MP, “because what is slowly dawning on people is that there’s not a policy issue; this is a mindset, a modus operandi and culture that needs changing.” Christian Wakeford, a 2019-intake MP, revealed he had submitted a no confidence letter on Tuesday; a day that gave us the “pork pie putsch” of MPs elected in 2019. They met in the office of Alicia Kearns – whose constituency contains Melton Mowbray – to discuss Johnson’s future as prime minister. Johnson has defended himself against claims from Dominic Cummings, his former aide, that he lied to parliament about believing a garden party in the first lockdown was a work event. “I can’t believe we would have gone ahead with an event that people said was against the rules … nobody warned me it was against the rules, I am categorical about that – I would have remembered that,” Johnson told Sky News. Cummings has claimed that two officials warned the prime minister. * * * Plan B easing likely – In a difficult prime minister’s questions today, Boris Johnson is expected to try again to change the national conversation away from his party problems by announcing the end of Plan B Covid measures, instructing millions to return to workplaces across England and dropping the requirement of vaccine certificates to enter venues like nightclubs and sports stadiums. The cabinet will meet this morning on the subject. In Scotland, restrictions brought in before Christmas are to be lifted from next Monday, the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has said. Meanwhile researchers have said more than two-thirds of the common side-effects people experience after a Covid jab can be attributed to the nocebo effect, an opposite version of the placebo effect, rather than the vaccine itself. Stay up to date with our Covid live blog. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; Boris Johnson’s promise of next-generation fast broadband to most homes by 2025 is under threat as rural areas and remote towns and villages miss out, says parliament’s spending watchdog. It says the pledge relies too heavily on commercial internet providers who prefer to make easy money by servicing urban areas. &gt; The US congressional committee investigating the 6 January 2021 Capitol attack has issued subpoenas to some of Donald Trump’s top lawyers including Rudy Giuliani. Separately, Trump’s second attorney general, William Barr, is to publish his memoirs in March. &gt; California prosecutors have filed two counts of vehicular manslaughter against the driver of a Tesla on Autopilot who ran a red light, slammed into another car and killed two people in 2019. &gt; A human rights lawyer has filed a torture complaint against the new president of Interpol, Ahmed Nasser al-Raisi. The Emirati major general is accused by human rights groups of involvement in torture and arbitrary detentions. &gt; More than 100 members of the global super-rich are calling for governments around the world to “tax us now” to help pay for the pandemic response and tackle the gulf between rich and poor. * * * Begg seeks passport back – The former Guantánamo detainee Moazzam Begg is planning legal action against Priti Patel to try to restore his British passport, which was revoked eight years ago after two trips to Syria. A terror prosecution relating to Begg’s time in Syria collapsed in 2014, after which police said they accepted he was innocent. Begg was arrested in February 2002 in Pakistan and ended up in Guantánamo before being released without charge in 2005. He works with the Cage advocacy group which campaigns to help people caught up in the “war on terror”. Begg said his trips to Syria in 2012 and 2013 were part of his campaigning activity, and he was told by MI5 that he was free to travel there, but his passport was taken in December 2013 as he returned to the UK from a trip to South Africa. * * * Meningitis resurgent – Meningitis B cases among students in England are rising sharply to exceed pre-pandemic levels, according to a report by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). Meningococcal group B bacteria are a serious cause of life-threatening infections including meningitis and sepsis that can cause brain damage, epilepsy, hearing loss, the loss of limbs, and death. Linda Glennie from the Meningitis Research Foundation said: “The data published by UKHSA has highlighted that students, particularly those living on campuses, have a higher risk of meningococcal disease than their peers … Meningitis progresses rapidly, so it’s critical to alert someone if ill, and to seek urgent medical advice.” * * * Straws buried in field forever – A set of ancient gold and silver tubes dating to about 5,500 years ago and unearthed in North Caucasus in Russia could be the world’s oldest surviving drinking straws, experts have claimed. The tubes, each more than a metre in length with a narrow perforated tip, were found in an excavation near Maykop in the summer of 1897. The relics, now in the Hermitage Museum in St Petersburg, date to the fourth millennium BC, and were made of segments joined together. A team of experts in Russia said they were likely to be straws for drinking beer from a shared pot. Today in Focus podcast: Year of the squeeze Households across the UK will see rising prices and stalling wages strain their budgets in the year ahead, money and consumer editor Hilary Osborne reports. Some families are already feeling the pinch. Lunchtime read: ‘Fix the bloody thing’ With Labour ahead in the polls and the prime minister on the ropes, Keir Starmer is riding high. But can he finally connect with the country? The former lawyer talks to Simon Hattenstone about Boris Johnson’s parties – and his own plan to win power. Sport Thomas Tuchel diagnosed a severe case of fatigue among his suddenly struggling Chelsea players after their 1-1 draw at Brighton on Tuesday night and aims to arrest it by giving them two days off before the weekend. At the Australian Open so far today, Ash Barty has put herself another round deeper into the women’s singles draw with a 6-1, 6-1 demolition of Lucia Bronzetti. Rafael Nadal has just beaten Yannick Hanfmann 6-2, 6-3, 6-4. Plenty more to come from Melbourne, including Naomi Osaka versus Madison Brengle right now, so keep up with it all at our live blog. New Zealand’s limited-overs tour of Australia has been postponed indefinitely due to uncertainty over when the visitors would be able to return home due to Covid-19 protocols. The tour from 24 January to 9 February was to comprise three one-dayers in Perth, Hobart and Sydney and a Twenty20 match in Canberra. The McLaren chief executive, Zak Brown, has warned there is no guarantee Lewis Hamilton will race in Formula One in 2022 after the seven-time champion controversially lost the 2021 title to Max Verstappen. Competitors at the Beijing Winter Olympics will face an “Orwellian surveillance state” in China and could put themselves in danger if they speak out in support of the Uyghur Muslims, human rights and athlete advocacy groups have said. Business Asian shares have been falling in cautious trading today after stocks on Wall Street sank to a new low for the year. Tokyo, Shanghai, Seoul and Sydney were lower while Hong Kong edged higher. Expect the FTSE to open around 30 points lower. A pound brings $1.36 and €1.20 at time of writing. The papers We have another separate report on today’s front pages – the gist of it follows. The Guardian leads with “Clamour to oust Johnson grows as Tory MPs plot confidence vote”. Emma Raducanu’s successful Australian Open debut grabs the picture slot. The Times has “Red wall Tory MPs team up to topple Boris Johnson”. The Mirror’s take is “Porkie pie plot to ditch PM” – the paper quotes one Tory as saying “His time has gone.” The Mail has “Exposed: The ‘Pork Pie’ plot to topple PM” but seems to offer the PM some support, saying Plan B Covid curbs are being axed and Britain is “basking in a post-Covid jobs miracle” yet “panicking Red Wall MPs are turning on the man who got them elected”. As you might expect the Express is more shrill: “What a sorry state! New MPs plot to oust PM” saying Johnson apologises “TEN times for partygate” but still faces a rebellion. The Telegraph also mentions the axing of Covid restrictions in its lead with “Plan B to be scrapped as PM faces plot from rebel MPs” alongside a picture of a downcast Johnson wearing a mask. The i newspaper plays it straight with “Tory plotters in talks to topple Boris Johnson”. The Metro has simply “Nobody told me”. The Sun is out of step with its peers: “Strictly dancer Nadiya Bychkova has split from her footballer fiance”. Johnson’s troubles find a smaller spot under the headline “Pork Pie plot to oust Bojo”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendFour alleged members of the Nigerian mafia have been arrested in southern Italy after a young sex trafficking survivor spoke out against them. The men, who were arrested in Palermo and Taranto in the early hours of Tuesday, allegedly belong to the feared Black Axe, a cult-like criminal gang that emerged in the 1970s at the University of Benin, according to police. Investigators in Palermo who led the operation said the woman, who is also Nigerian, was forced into prostitution after taking part in an occult ritual bound up with traditional spiritual beliefs, known as juju, which bond victims to their traffickers and to any debts they will incur. “The suspects were charged with slavery, human trafficking, kidnapping and pandering [recruiting prostitutes],” the police said. The woman, whom investigators said was convinced by a Pentecostal cleric to report her captors to police, had been imprisoned, raped, blackmailed and forced into prostitution to pay a debt of about €15,000 (£12,500). Before she left Nigeria, like many other victims of sex trafficking, the woman had been made to undergo a traditional oath-taking ceremony involving complicated and frightening rituals often using the women’s blood, hair and clothing. Those carrying out the ritual, which has been found to have a profound psychological impact on victims, make it clear that failure to pay off those debts will result in terrible things happening to the woman and her family. The abuse of religious and cultural belief systems in Nigeria has proved a deadly and highly effective control mechanism for traffickers recruiting women destined for the sex trade in Europe. A hugely profitable and well-organised criminal industry has been operating between Italy and Nigeria for more than two decades but the UN’s International Organization for Migration says it has seen a rise in the number of potential sex-trafficking victims arriving in Italy by sea in the past few years, lured by the promise of work in the country. According to a Save the Children report last year Italy had 2,040 victims of sex trafficking – 716 of whom were registered in 2020 – with the majority of them Nigerian. Father Enzo Volpe, a priest in Palermo who has been helping Nigerian women for nine years, told the Guardian: “These women are terrified of the threats and the violence perpetrated by their captors. They fear not only for their lives but also for those of their families back in Nigeria.” “The problem,” said Volpe, “is that behind the slavery of these women there is a real mafia with members operating across the continent, who have total control over their victims.” Last year, Italian police arrested 30 people suspected of belonging to the Nigerian Black Axe mafia, which has been operating in many regions of the country, among them its suspected 35-year-old leader in Italy. • Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999 in England and Wales, 0808 801 0302 in Scotland, or 0800 0246 991 in Northern Ireland. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlA few times a day, off the Faroe Islands’ coast, the crew of the Jákup Sverri marine survey ship test the water, measuring its salinity, temperature and oxygen at different sea depths. But they also look for something else. Durita Sørensen, a laboratory technician, holds up the contents of a special net to demonstrate. If the water is greenish, it contains a lot of phytoplankton, the plants at the base of the oceanic food chain. But if it is red or brown, as in Sørensen’s net, the haul is one rung higher up the ladder: zooplankton. “This is calanus, or Calanus finmarchicus,” she says, indicating the tiny red creatures. “This is what they are interested in making fish oil [from] as a food supplement for humans.” Zooplankton is a crucial part of the Atlantic Ocean ecosystem. And calanus – known as Reyðæti in Faroese or “red plankton” – is one of the most important and populous varieties. In 2020, the Faroese fisheries ministry gave five companies the right to fish for up to 25,000 tonnes of it each. There is no factory yet on the Faroe Islands for processing the tiny red creatures into fish oil, but entrepreneurs are hoping it will soon become big business, supplying not only the apparently insatiable demand for omega-3 health supplements across the western world, but potentially for use in the even vaster fish-farming industry. Zooplankton fishing is already happening in Norway, where a company called Zooca, which has been harvesting red plankton for some years, received a commercial quota in 2020. The Norwegian Institute of Marine Research says the harvest is well within sustainable limits. But many in the fishing industry are unhappy about the idea of sucking up zooplankton. Red plankton is the main food of many hugely valuable fish stocks – including mackerel and herring – and is vital for the juvenile growth of a species that is a mainstay of the Norwegian and Faroese industrial fleets: cod. Some scientists, meanwhile, warn that we have no idea what removing zooplankton from the oceanic food chain will do. “It’s a drop in the bucket right now,” says Peter Wiebe, scientist emeritus at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts, of the current zooplankton harvest. “But what they have in mind is not a drop in the bucket.” *** Zooplankton are tiny animals. They are copepods, or small crustaceans, each about the size of a rice grain. Zooplankton spend their summers in the sunny upper layers of the ocean, where they feed on phytoplankton, a plant that depends on photosynthesis. During the winter, however, the zooplankton go into hibernation. They slowly sink down into the deeper layers of the ocean and, lacking the capability to swim, they then float with the current. Around the Faroe Islands, that means travelling south-east before being pushed up through the narrow Faroe Bank channel and into deeper, colder oceans, where it is estimated that 90% of them die. This gave Eilif Gaard an idea. In his office, the head of the Faroese Marine Institute (Famri) holds up a box full of dark red capsules: omega-3 oil, made from red plankton. Zooca, the producer, says that its zooplankton oil is superior to conventional omega-3 oil, claiming in a 2019 paper that the zooplankton can counteract “insulin resistance and other obesity-induced metabolic disorders and exhibit a potent anti-inflammatory effect.” Zooca says the demand for omega-3 has caused many species to become overfished, and claims zooplankton is a sustainable alternative. Gaard wants a cut of this growing market for the Faroes. A marine biologist by training, as director of Famri he is more used to telling the fishing crews to catch less. But he proposed using the Faroe Bank channel to catch plankton that might otherwise die upon entering deeper open sea. “We have this channel where the current flows through, which gives us a special opportunity,” he says. “By doing our fishing in the channel and only during winter, we aren’t affecting ecosystems.” He admits not enough is known about the species after it leaves the continental shelf around the islands. Nevertheless, he recommended setting the zooplankton fishing quota at 125,000 tonnes, which he says is about 1.2% of the total mass of calanus that flows through the area. One of the fishers who received a licence is Jógvan í Skorini. The former mayor of Eiði, a village of about 700 people, Skorini now works as a schoolteacher but always dreamed of fishing. In 2017, he got a call from his friend Heini Niclasen, who had just learned about the fledgling zooplankton industry. Excited, the two friends flew to Norway, where they visited Calanus, the company that would later become Zooca, and left clutching a vital piece of paper. “We made a contract for exporting the potential harvest to them, and we get knowhow from them,” Skorini says. Back in the Faroes, Skorini partnered with his uncle, one of the biggest shipowners in the islands, who also applied for a quota and rented a boat to Skorini to haul in their collective 50,000-tonne catch. With a price per kilo of about $1.50 (£1.10), zooplankton could become a $100m business for the Faroe Islands and its 50,000 inhabitants. Harvesting plankton in the Faroes is easier said than done, however. The Faroe Bank channel is an undersea gorge about 50 miles (75km) south-west of the islands where cold water rushes through at an immense pressure of 2.2m cubic metres a second – twice the force of all the rivers in the world combined. Skorini’s first trawl net was torn to pieces in the current. They are working to develop a new, specially adapted system that covers the fine mesh net under a wider outer net designed to withstand the water’s destructive power. Skorini and his partners are learning from Zooca, which was started in 2002 by Kurt Tande, then a professor at the University of Tromsø in Norway. What began as a research company looking into the possible benefits of zooplankton omega-3 has since become a thriving business, employing about 100 people, selling its fish oil in Europe and North America, with a revenue of $9.2m last year. In August, the then Norwegian prime minister, Erna Solberg, visited Zooca’s newly built factory in Sortland. But other sectors of Norway’s fishing industry are concerned. Tom Vegar Kiil, head of Norges Kystfiskarlag, the association for Norwegian coastal fisheries, is one of the highest-profile opponents of zooplankton trawling. The Norwegian quota is 254,000 tonnes but, unlike in the Faroes, fishing for it is permitted all year – and in the warmer, upper layers of the sea, where Kiil is concerned that Zooca is catching larvae and juvenile fish in its nets. “We haven’t been good enough at taking care of our stocks,” Kiil says, referring to Norway’s loss last year of its Marine Stewardship Council’s sustainability label on cod fished near the coast. The idea of fishing one of juvenile cod’s most important foods strikes him as shortsighted. Kiil is also worried that the fish-farming industry will get involved. He fears that once they begin to use zooplankton for aquaculture they will start to demand even higher quotas – particularly for shrimp and salmon farming. Wiebe, an expert on the ecology of zooplankton, says there is a growing appetite for these kinds of fisheries in the so-called mesopelagic zone – the layer in the sea 200 to 1,000 metres below the surface. “There’s a lot of interest in fishing that part of the ocean, to capture stuff for aquaculture, to use it for feed for agriculture. That has a lot of ramifications,” he says. Others fishery associations have criticised the zooplankton trawlers for operating in spawning grounds during summer. And last year, Geir Jørgensen, a municipal politician in Nordland, led one of Norway’s regional councils to call on the national government to halt the trawling for plankton off the coast. The marine biologists at Norway’s Marine Research Institute disagree with those who want the plankton fisheries curbed. Cecilie Thorsen Broms, the institute’s head of research, says the current fisheries take only a fraction of the allocated quota of 254,000 tonnes. She says Zooca, which is still the only company fishing for red plankton, must test each haul for bycatch and that the numbers are far from frightening. “Our estimate has shown that the amount of bycatch is very small, so it will not affect the fish population,” she says. But Wiebe is not convinced. Part of a working group at the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea that looks at the ecology of zooplankton, he thinks that what starts small now will only grow. “They have in mind getting the technology to the place where they can actually go out and really exploit it,” he says of the budding zooplankton industry. “And I think, without the kind of studies that are needed to understand the dynamics of the populations there, we do that foolhardily.” Zooplankton is a key part of the food chain, he points out, for fish as well as seabirds. “A lot of the big predators in the ocean swim down into the mesopelagic daily to feed. And so if you start harvesting that mesopelagic regime, you may well be doing damage to a different kind of commercial fishery.” The chief executive of Zooca, Siv-Katrin Ramskjell, is not backing down. “We harvest way less than 0.01% of the quota that the Marine Research Institute thinks is sustainable,” she says. Ramskjell argues that although bycatch was an early challenge, they have developed new technologies to minimise it and, far from reducing their catch of zooplankton, they plan to rapidly expand. “Today we only fish around 1,000 tonnes yearly, but the goal is to fish 10 times more – or around 10,000 tonnes in five years,” she says. It is the prospect of that exponential growth that makes Javier Lopez, campaign director at the conservation group Oceana, fearful. “For us, this is an example of the greed of the human being to exploit and exploit,” he says. “It is true that maybe, to the extension that it is done right now, [zooplankton fishing] is not having an ecological effect – [but] we should not create any dependence on these kinds of resources.”Legal groups say the Victorian government should waive all fines issued under coronavirus public health orders following reports that some of those recruited to issue the fines were not properly authorised. The government separately promised 12 months ago to review fines issued under the Public Health and Wellbeing Act to ensure they passed the common sense test. That resulted in hundreds of fines being challenged in the magistrates court. Community legal services have been calling for fines to be waived since 2020, arguing they disproportionately affected marginalised communities and had in some cases been issued to people who were acting in accordance with the law. Police in New South Wales have also been accused of issuing fines under that state’s public health legislation unfairly and incorrectly, with an alliance of legal centres calling for the fines to be withdrawn. Inner Melbourne Community Legal’s chief executive, Damian Stock, said the reported failure to correctly authorise fining officers strengthened the argument. “The various different arguments for why they should all be scrapped are really stacking up,” he said. “It would be a particularly unfair and heartless government to continue to pursue fines considering this litany of errors.” The Victorian government recruited the authorised officers in 2020 to enforce its public health orders, including issuing fines for breaching lockdown orders under the Public Health and Wellbeing Act. But the Herald Sun has reported that as many as 40 authorised officers were not properly gazetted and therefore did not have the power to issue fines. The Department of Justice and Community Safety said it was “currently reviewing our administrative processes relating to the appointment of a small number of authorised officers and the issuing of some enforcement outcomes”. “If the review were to identify any issues, the department would then work to confirm whether any enforcement outcomes are affected,” it said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service chief executive, Nerita Waight, said Victoria had issued more fines for breaching pandemic health orders than “almost any other jurisdiction globally” and those resources should have been directed to bolstering the health system. “We had many clients who were unfairly issued Covid fines and we found the whole process to be opaque and frankly lacking,” Waight said. Waight said Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people were issued Covid fines at a higher rate than the rest of the community. “This unfairness was exacerbated by the lack of an independent review process for Covid fines. Waiving fines issued by officers without the correct authorisation is the right thing to do, as the community shouldn’t have to suffer because of the government’s stuff up.” Waight said that the vast majority of public health fines seen by VALS had been “unreasonably issued” and she called for an amnesty on “all but the most serious breaches”. Victoria police has refused to release detailed demographic data about who was issued fines and is fighting a freedom of information request made by community legal centres seeking that data. At a minimum, there should be a moratorium on pursuing people over unpaid Covid fines, Stock said. “We can’t have people having charges, being taken to court, having sanctions put on their vehicle, all the things that can happen if you have unpaid fines. “That needs to stop right away – we cannot have enforcement action out on fines that may have been issued by people who were not authorised to issue them.”My mother recently died of cancer, just three weeks after her diagnosis. While she was in hospital and the local hospice, visitors were restricted due to Covid. Many of her friends therefore paid for credit to top up her pay-as-you-go (PAYG) mobile phone so that they could keep in touch. But she deteriorated so quickly that she was unable to use all the credit, and had £93.86 left on the phone when she passed away. I asked the provider, Three, to refund the money so it could be donated to one of the four charities she had nominated in her final days. It was five weeks before the company told me that the money couldn’t be returned and that the number would have to be cancelled as it was in my mum’s name. Three has taken the money my mum’s friends so kindly gave her to ease her dying days and refused to allow me to pass it on to the hospice that looked after her so well. JC, London Most mobile phone providers, believe it or not, hang on to unused mobile phone credits. Not only that – customers forfeit any outstanding money on their sim card and their phone number if they don’t use their phone for six months – or in the case of some providers, for just 70 days. This policy, buried in the small print, penalises often elderly customers who buy a PAYG phone for emergencies, and may find it doesn’t work when they suddenly need it. “Use it or lose it,” says telecoms regulator Ofcom on its website, while acknowledging that PAYG phones are suited to occasional users. A clause tucked down a firm’s terms and conditions may make it legal, but it doesn’t follow it’s ethical. Three’s terms and conditions make no provision for exceptional circumstances. When I asked the company how it justified retaining the credit, it decided it couldn’t. It refunded the £93 plus £57 in goodwill for your mum’s chosen charities. It also told you that it would review its policy in such situations. It says: “Our current policy is that top-ups are non-refundable. This includes top-up vouchers where a user has voluntarily paid this into their account to use at a later date. However, we appreciate that this is a sensitive circumstance.” Ofcom says: “Providers may have different policies when it comes to refunding unused PAYG credit, but all must have policies in place to make sure vulnerable customers are treated fairly. Anyone can face circumstances that lead to them becoming vulnerable – temporarily or permanently – including bereavement.” Three has now confirmed it is looking to change its bereavement policy in the light of your experience. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsWe’ve all seen that sign in hotels where we are encouraged to reuse our towels for the sake of the planet. Often it’s just lip service. But what if that idea is taken a level upwards – to make your whole hotel sustainable? That’s the premise at room2 in Chiswick, west London, said to be the world’s first net zero “hometel”. It’s forecast to be 89% more energy efficient than a typical UK hotel and has a host of sustainable measures, from solar panels to recycled furniture, zero food waste and a wildflower roof. It’s the brainchild of owner Robert Godwin, who is passionate about driving a cultural shift in an industry where sustainability is often an afterthought. I didn’t think an overnight hotel stay could make me think about climate change, but here it does, and not in a preachy way. The staff are all on board and proud of their sustainable goals – and all the small details add up. As we arrive, someone is picking up an order from Too Good To Go, an app that connects people to restaurants and shops that have a food surplus, and the lobby is packed with plants and upcycled furniture. Another welcome innovation is flexibility: check-in is from 2pm, as is check-out, so you get a full 24 hours to make the most of your stay. Each room has a kitchenette – hence the hometel moniker – so it’s great for those who want to keep costs down by self-catering. Coffee and delicious food are available in the Boca restaurant on the ground floor – more on that later. Our studio is flooded with light from big Crittall windows and has everything you could expect from a boutique stay: big, comfy bed with crisp linen, Roberts radio, calming colour scheme and the kitchen is fully-equipped. I never thought I would get so excited about rubbish, but the three-in-one bin in the room – for food waste, mixed recycling and general waste – really makes us mindful of what we are using. Godwin tells us he looked at 200 bins from around the world, couldn’t find one that fitted his ethos, and came up with this design. “We needed the right ones to encourage our guests to recycle in the right way,” says Godwin. “All of the waste is compartmentalised and sent to different plants for mixed recycling or renewable energy. And all food waste goes to a new life.” There are natural textures everywhere: wood flooring, a blue-and-white striped fabric headboard, rattan chairs and a cork bench. A wooden Do Not Disturb sign, Post-it notes made of recycled paper, and pens and pencils which guests are asked to leave behind after use for future guests are nice touches. Features such as the bespoke marble-print wallpaper in the bathroom and the Dali-esque handcrafted mirrors were inspired by Chiswick’s Arts and Crafts heritage. And any carbon emissions from unavoidable items such as the biggish television are offset by a tree-planting scheme with its reforesting partner in Nicaragua. The energy-efficient shower – said to use 40% less water – is huge and powerful enough for any long-stayer. Bath towels are generously sized, and heavenly smelling body wash and shampoo come in dispensers from vegan brand Doers of London. Carpets on the corridors are made from recycled fishing nets, and in the basement there’s a 24-hour laundry and a gym with Peloton bikes, weights and yoga mats. The real behind-the-scenes savings are in energy use, according to Godwin. “We are forecast to be 89% more energy efficient than a typical UK hotel and that’s largely through minimising heat and energy loss. We are built to new regulations and, collectively, it’s a massive improvement.” Those improvements include a ground source heat pump, solar panels, motion sensors in the rooms, a green roof with 75,000 bees and wildflowers for biodiversity and insulation, and a blue roof to capture rainwater and minimise local flooding. Any additional power will be bought from solar, wind and hydro sources. Two lab rooms monitor the efficiency of the building and how guests use power and energy in their rooms. So why is the hotel industry lagging behind on sustainability? “I think it’s a lack of will, and that comes from a lack of knowledge,” says Godwin, whose epiphany came after a trip to South Africa in 2019 where he saw first-hand the effects of climate change in droughts and collapsing food chains. He is now seen as a trailblazer, with big hotel chains including Hilton coming to him for advice. In the Boca restaurant kitchen, there are no big fryers or extractor fans, and the menu, created by head chef Elisabetta Boi, has been adapted to be low energy. Boi tells us she is sourcing locally where she can, and bringing a taste of her Italian heritage. Zero waste is the aim here, too: potato peelings are made into vodka and any other waste is recycled or available on the Too Good To Go app. We try some sample dishes of what is to come when Boca fully opens on 1 February, and they all pack a punch in flavour. There is delicious homemade focaccia with wholemeal flour, risotto with black truffle and parmesan, and a white radicchio salad with figs and house-made fresh ricotta. Puddings are a tiramisu with mascarpone and a mouthwatering panettone filled with ice-cream. Starters are from £8 and mains from £10.50, pretty much the going rate in Chiswick. Next morning we grab a coffee and head off to Chiswick High Road, just paces away. There is no need for a car park at room2, as public transport is so good. Turnham Green station is three minutes’ walk away, from where it’s a 20-minute tube journey into central London. There are frequent buses to Kew Gardens or Richmond Park, or you can wander down to the Thames to admire the houses of leading Arts and Crafts figures Emery Walker and William Morris. Morris urged people to have nothing in their house that wasn’t beautiful or useful. Room2 has beauty and utility in abundance, and shows that being net zero doesn’t have to mean compromising on comfort or style. Doubles from £116 room only, room2.com/chiswick Four sustainable European hotels Iceland On a farm in southern Iceland, Hotel Fljótshlíð has been certified by Svanurinn, a Nordic eco labelling scheme, which means it is one of the most environment-friendly hotels in the area. Its 14 rooms have heated floors and private bathrooms, all powered by renewable energy. Nationwide, Iceland uses 70% hydropower and 30% geothermal. Guests can pay to plant trees to offset their carbon footprint, and the hotel is aiming for zero food waste. Local jams, meat, eggs and vegetables can be bought on site or in the restaurant. There are views of the Eyjafjallajökull volcano, and guests can go horse riding or tour the working farm. Doubles from £106 B&amp;B, smaratun.is Greece In Zagori, north-western Greece, Aristi Mountain Resort &amp; Villas was built with traditional methods and using only locally available materials. Water consumption is minimised with pressure regulators and wastewater is recycled through a hi-tech cleaning system. It’s a member of Stay Beyond Green, a hotel network that is vetted according to UN sustainable development goals. The hotel’s award-winning Salvia restaurant uses fruit and vegetables from its own gardens and greenhouse, rears its own chickens and has local trout on the menu. The 24 rooms, suites and villas are spread out so they blend into the mountains, and activities include hiking, rafting, horse riding and birdwatching. Doubles from €178 B&amp;B, aristi.eu Ireland Opened last September, the Wren in Dublin uses 100% renewable energy and recyclable and biodegradable materials. Aiming to be Ireland’s most sustainable hotel, it makes a conscious effort to limit single-use plastics in its 137 rooms and puts a big emphasis on local. Wonky veg is used in the kitchen and waste is reduced by using Too Good To Go. The ALT bar makes the most of local distilleries and breweries, with Irish whiskey, Dingle gin and micro ales on tap. It’s a four-minute walk to Trinity College and Grafton Street and a 19-minute walk to Connolly, the country’s busiest train station. Rooms from €129 room only, wrenhotel.ie Portugal In the Alqueva dark sky reserve, Montimerso Skyscape Country House has 15 rooms, all with contemporary Portuguese furnishings, and a terrace or balcony. Rainwater is used for irrigation and, because of its dark sky location, light pollution has been reduced. The staff are mostly from the local Alentejo region and local food suppliers are used wherever possible. The big draw here is the sky – the reserve was the world’s first Unesco-certified starlight tourism destination. Guests can use binoculars to look at distant stars and planets from the stargazing platform; other activities include cycling and wine tasting. Doubles from €200 B&amp;B, montimerso.ptName: Loud loos. Age: 19 years. Appearance: It’s more about sound than looks, occurrence than appearance. OK then, occurrence: Regularly, throughout the night. And what particular sound are we talking about here? The sweet sound of a toilet flushing. So annoying! In our house we don’t flush in the night, unless, you know … This isn’t your house, though, or even their house. Whose house is it then? Where are we? Italy. Near Spezia, in the Liguria region. A couple in a flat complained that they couldn’t get a good night’s sleep after their neighbours – four brothers – installed a new bathroom. Would that be the Crappellotti brothers? No. Anyway, after a local judge dismissed their complaints the couple took the case to the court of appeal in Genoa. There was an investigation … Which found …? That the new bathroom was directly adjacent and that the water closet was actually built into the party wall. Farty wall! That’s pathetic; stop it. Also, it’s the flush that’s the problem, remember? What was the outcome? That it amounted to a violation of the couple’s rights, protected not just by the Italian constitution but also by the European convention on human rights (ECHR). The judge ordered the brothers to move the water tank and to pay the couple €500 a year from when it was installed in 2003. €1.37 for every night of disturbed sleep – you can’t even get an espresso for that, can you? That’s not really the point, though, is it? What is the point? Well, it’s about noisy neighbours, and human rights, and the ECHR protecting the right to respect for a person’s private and family life, and their home and their correspondence. What about Brexit Britain, though: flush away all night long? Go on, give it another for good measure. The UK is still a participant in the ECHR. For now … Anyway, back in Italy, was that the end of the story? Not quite. According to La Repubblica, the brothers took the case to the supreme court in Rome. And it ruled … That the sound of flushing coming through the wall exceeded the legal limit by three decibels … Only three decibels! Do they not have earplugs in Italy? Or couldn’t the couple put a bit of white noise on? Actually, three decibels is a significant increase in sound. Anyway, whose side are we on here? Oh yeah, that side: the human rights side. Anyway, the supreme court ruled that infringing on the right to rest had consequences for the constitutionally protected right to health. So the removal order was upheld? Yes. And the compensation. Let’s hope the brothers are quite flush, so it won’t be a problem for them. Do say: [Banging on the wall] “Oi, Giovanni! We hear you! Not just the flushing: everything!” Don’t say: “No, I can’t sleep either, dear. Game of Guess Which Brother, then?”It wasn’t something you would think of as particularly grand – a white boat, the shape of an iron with a stripe down it, maybe a foot or two larger than an estate car. Named after my mother, it lived in a sort of car park for boats, where it rested high up on a trailer and a tractor would come to take it to the shore. A couple of checks were performed – the battery, maybe; something around the engine; a rubber bung that went in the drain in the back of the boat to stop water coming in. My parents didn’t often go out on the water together; perhaps the day I’m remembering was why. The boat was my father’s thing, really. He came from a family who built planes, raced motorcycles and sailed ships. At one point, before a fast house move consigned them to a yellow skip, our garage had the kinds of tools to maintain a yacht with: clonky wooden planes and sharp-angled items for working metal. Honestly, I don’t know what these things were for: they seemed ageless to me when I was a child, and full of purpose – the implements that carved Stonehenge. I remember being on the boat as one of the only times in my life when I spent significant amounts of time alone with my father – wet summers mostly, or grey, misty Easters when it was flat enough to go out, the sea somewhere between granite and slate. Now that he’s dead, it’s those afternoons I suppose I imagine replaying with my father until we arrived at a form of connection; sifting them for a closeness I know is wishful thinking. Usually, my father read the paper, or one of his car magazines, while I fished with a lead weight and a line with feathered hooks: there were electric moments where a shoal of mackerel passed and we would land them by the half-dozen – all wasted. My mother distrusted things that had come straight out of the sea in that bay; I suppose she was thinking of storm surges and sewage outlet pipes. The three of us would not have done anything out of the ordinary that day: a trip out to the two small islands, their lighthouse and seal colony. I remember it being overcast and the water fairly calm, no signs of anything sinister. But in the centre of the boat near the front there was an oblong, carpeted hatch covering a storage space maybe a foot deep. When we lifted it up, the space beneath was full of seawater. Floating boatless in water of that temperature is not deadly: all of us could have swum if we had needed to. There were lifejackets and ample time to radio for help. The only sharks of any size you find visiting that bay are basking sharks – vast placid cruisers occasionally sighted round the headland in summer. The worst risk might have been jellyfish stings, but – horrifying as they were to me as a child – these posed no real threat to our safety. In fact, as a therapist now, there is a sort of flexibility in this image that I might want to encourage in my patients: yes, floating; why not give in to it, be held up by something bigger than yourself. The horror for me at the time, though, was twofold. I don’t remember the specifics, but there must have been a point at which I witnessed my parents at a total loss. Then, too, the awful realisation that the outside was now on the inside – the water flowing slowly but surely into the boat; that there would come a point at which there was no firm surface any more; there would be new rules. After my father died, I think I started watching videos of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster for similar reasons: the boundaries of the world suddenly reordering themselves, the invisible chaos of things made dreadfully clear. The other frightening thing about this moment for me as a child was that I was used to my mother being the one who brought order to my world. My father was what at that time was called a manic depressive; though good at his job, he rarely spoke and did not excel at parenting. My mother was now out of her comfort zone: here we were in his territory, the restless sea. My father turned the key in the engine, which responded. He slammed on the accelerator, forcing the water out through the hole where the bung ought to have been, and we made it to shore. You still will not catch me swimming in deep water, and, for many years I stayed away from anything smaller than a ferry. So it took me by surprise, a few years ago, how much I enjoyed going out on a similar boat as part of a birthday present. Old enough now to be my younger self’s father, I want to go back to the sea. • The Reactor by Nick Blackburn is published by Faber (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyUh oh, it has happened. I have officially turned into that person. You know who I mean: the adult who seems oblivious to the fact that their screeching infant is not the most adorable thing to crawl the face of this Earth but an out-of-control noise machine. That person is the previously sensible and self-aware friend of yours who beams every time their perfect progeny farts or grunts, and acts like it is the cutest thing they have ever seen. “What happened to you?” I used to think, when I was childfree, and hung out with friends who had procreated. “How do you not realise that your child is sort of annoying? What did parenthood do to your brain?” I do not have the scientific answers to this but I can say that parenthood has undoubtedly done a number on my own brain. I have 100% been baby-pilled. My eight month old will be screeching like a banshee and, instead of finding it irritating, I will look at her perfect little face and my heart will melt. I find myself googling things such as: if my baby screams a lot at an unusually high decibel level, does it mean that they are gifted? (The jury is out on that but my kid is obviously brilliant). As well as being the smartest child ever, she is also exceptionally adorable. Everyone says so. The only time I have wondered if they might be politely lying is when I recently looked back at pictures of her as a newborn and realised that she was actually kind of funny-looking because, let’s be honest, all newborns are funny-looking. They are hairy, wrinkly, little gremlins. I can see that now. Eight months ago, though, I was convinced she was nothing like other newborns; I was sure she was unusually perfect. Which, to be fair, she is. Hormones, eh? They’re crafty so-and-sos. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistNobody was talking much about Oscars when Spider-Man: No Way Home was released in cinemas last month, but it was easy enough to see that they soon would be. The film swung onto screens as a pre-ordained saviour of cinema, the hopes of an industry pinned on its well-worn spandex bodysuit. As soon as the film delivered the gargantuan box-office receipts that were fully expected of it, its handlers could go about requesting a non-financial reward for their efforts. By the end of December, the film’s formal Oscar campaign for best picture had been launched, while a feature in trade outlet the Hollywood Reporter gave the producers a generous platform to insist on their worthiness. Marvel Studios’ president, Kevin Feige, made his case on populist grounds, stating his hope that the Academy “will think about the artistry that goes into storytelling that connects with a wide range of people on a very emotional level”, and adding that the public’s stand-and-cheer response to the film is “the sort of thing the Academy was founded, back in the day, to recognize”. Sony Pictures’ chair, Tom Rothman, meanwhile, argued for No Way Home as the model of “quality commerciality” that “the Academy needs to stay connected to”. His self-pitying clincher: “We have to overcome, weirdly, the prejudice against the fact that it’s a big hit.” Ah, the poor little rich film! No Way Home has, at this point, grossed over $1.6bn worldwide, but as this campaign would have it, what it’s missing is the love and respect of the industry that it’s saving. The shape of an Oscar behemoth has changed over the years: lately, voters have largely favoured independent and arthouse features that rake in modest sums relative to the average Marvel blockbuster’s total – as exemplified by last year’s win for Chloe Zhao’s quiet, meditative cross-country docufiction Nomadland, a film that shares a medium with Spider-Man in much the same sense that Danny DeVito and Arnold Schwarzenegger shared DNA in Twins. (Meanwhile, Zhao’s own Marvel film Eternals, hailed by Feige prior to its release as a game-changing stunner, isn’t getting a whisper of awards talk from its studio: it only made a quarter of what No Way Home’s current gross, after all.) Lately, tumbling year-on-year TV ratings for the Oscar telecast have bolstered the narrative that Feige and Rothman are now pushing to their advantage: that the Oscars have lost their popular touch, spurning the public to align with the sensibilities of “elitist” critics and tastemakers. (Note that e-word, trickling down from the public-versus-media discourse of current conservative politics.) It’s the same complaint that, a few years ago, caused a desperate Academy to moot a “best popular film” Oscar, only to swiftly can the idea when it became clear they had no idea what the criteria for such a prize would be. (Most money or most respectable money? Who’s to say?) Building a best picture campaign on that same basis is both canny and disingenuous. The Academy has never had a prejudice against commercial success in itself, or indeed against the blockbuster form: in the last 10 years, supposedly the Oscars’ era of arthouse surrender, best picture nominations (and multiple prizes) have gone to such big, brash popular entertainments as Joker, Gravity, Get Out, Ford v Ferrari and Bohemian Rhapsody. No Way Home wouldn’t be the first Marvel Cinematic Universe adventure to land in the premier race: Black Panther netted Feige an Oscar nomination only three years ago. It wouldn’t even be the first sequel in a long-running action franchise to succeed where its predecessors failed: Mad Max: Fury Road scooped half a dozen Oscars in 2016. As it stands, No Way Home currently looks like an outside bet for a best picture nomination: a potential lower-ranking beneficiary of the Academy’s decision to permanently expand the best picture category to a fixed 10 slots, but hardly a frontrunner. Its awards hopes recently hit a speed bump when Bafta disqualified it in all categories after it failed to surface on the British Academy’s digital viewing platform in time. (British blockbuster hopes instead rest on No Time to Die, which featured prominently in Bafta’s longlists unveiled last week, though its likeliest Oscar shot is for Billie Eilish’s brooding theme song.) A rung down from the brand recognition of Spider-Man and James Bond, blockbuster cinema is all but assured a place in the Oscar race in the form of Denis Villeneuve’s gorgeous sci-fi spectacular Dune, which has hit all the required precursors thus far on the awards trail, and has made nearly $400m worldwide. That’s small change compared to No Way Home, certainly, but handily more than any best picture winner since The King’s Speech. (Tom Hooper’s royalty-corn drama may only be 11 years old, but it’s a distant-seeming artefact of an era when a small-scale, adult-skewing drama could make even moderate superhero numbers in cinemas.) Is Dune not an example of “quality commerciality”, in Rothman’s words? Or is it a billion dollars shy of that status? Is the Academy only prejudiced against big hits of a certain bigness? The more nebulous truth that Spider-Man’s campaigners don’t want to articulate, perhaps, is that it doesn’t feel like an Oscar contender in the way that most blockbusters crossing the best picture threshold do. Dune, by virtue of its genre alone, would be relatively outré as a best picture winner, but it is solemn, literary and visually and sonically lustrous. Villeneuve has conceived it as art even as it has to function as product, in much the same way that Peter Jackson’s Lord of the Rings trilogy, Oscar-garlanded despite landing outside the Academy’s genre wheelhouse, did 20 years ago. Even Black Panther, the closest precedent for a No Way Home nomination, made its case to the Academy on the basis of political resonance and innovative design: it was rewarded as a cultural milestone, not merely a pop phenomenon. No Way Home, by contrast, has a harder time presenting itself to Academy voters as anything but a commercial flashlight in Covid-era industry darkness. Novelty was never likely to be a virtue of the ninth Spider-Man film in 20 years, but little about the storytelling or formal construction of No Way Home rises above business-as-usual proficiency: even the multiverse twist that serves as its most distinctive narrative feature was more freshly and inventively treated in 2018’s Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse. That film won a deserved Oscar in the animated category, but didn’t get a peep of best picture buzz. It’s noticeable that No Way Home’s Oscar campaign is laser-focused on best picture, with minimal effort made to big up its performances, direction, script or even the technical components that will inevitably lose to Dune across the board. As such, the campaign is promoting the film as bigger than the sum of its parts, with money making up the deficit. Perhaps, for some invested parties in an anxious industry, that’s enough. It wouldn’t be the first time. In the 1952 race, the Academy horrified some onlookers by handing best picture to Cecil B DeMille’s big, gaudy, extravagantly dumb and highly lucrative circus melodrama The Greatest Show on Earth, over future-classic western High Noon and John Ford’s The Quiet Man. That DeMille’s film won only one other prize (for “best original story”, a dubious claim) was telling. Nobody could say with a straight face that art had been served by the decision, but the year’s highest-grossing film by a wide margin had been acknowledged. It was, surely not coincidentally, the first Oscar broadcast ever to be televised: an ironic concession to a medium at that point seen as an ominous threat to cinema’s future. With the public watching, the Academy chose to celebrate the people’s choice – which just happened to be the kind of grand Technicolor spectacle that TV then couldn’t provide. It was neither the first nor the last time that the Academy bowed down to a popular phenomenon, though voters have tended to gravitate toward blockbusters that at least notionally match their ideas of prestige fare: sweeping historical romance in Gone With the Wind (or Titanic, decades later), anti-Nazi politicking in The Sound of Music, the morally burdened underworld saga of The Godfather films, the treacly American Dream ideology of Forrest Gump. Those blockbusters, however, don’t exist in a commercial landscape ruled by comic book fantasy, animation and all-important IP; gone, too, is the world where a modest, adult-targeted and borderline televisual character drama like 1988’s best picture winner Rain Man could also be the year’s highest-grossing film. Even as recent outlying winners like Moonlight and Parasite have pointed to a surge of younger, more adventurous voters in their ranks, the Academy’s taste hasn’t radically changed over the years: a film like 2018’s best picture winner Green Book could well have won the prize at any point in the last half-century, though in previous decades, it might have made blockbuster money. (As it is, Peter Farrelly’s aggressively middlebrow race-relations fable racked up over $300m worldwide – hardly evidence of voters’ turn for the esoteric.) All of which is to say the Academy hasn’t turned away from blockbusters so much as blockbusters have turned away from them, while the nice grown-up dramas that have always been their sweet spot have now been rebranded as art films. You couldn’t ask for a more on-the-nose example of this paradigm shift than the limp commercial fate of Steven Spielberg’s much-vaunted West Side Story remake last month. The 1961 original cleaned up at the box office and swept the Oscars too; its successor is now seen as a niche critics’ pet, though its Oscar hopes remain high. Is there anything to be gained from the Oscars re-embracing blockbuster cinema on its current terms, beyond a boost to Kevin Feige’s ego? The telecast ratings might get a bump from a No Way Home nomination, of course, but too many pundits overestimate Zoomers’ interest in watching a three-hour prize-giving ceremony – with ads – where their favourite film of the year may or may not get a gong. (If it does, they’ll surely watch it on YouTube the next day, along with Billie Eilish’s performance.) If that’s the uncertain clout the Academy wants to chase, then they may as well grit their teeth and make No Way Home this year’s The Greatest Show on Earth – in its time, a different kind of victory flag for a commercially imperilled form, further validated with gold. But it’ll age about as well.In the Wachowskis’ 1999 film The Matrix, the humdrum life of the central character Neo is revealed to be an illusion. His green-tinted reality is actually a digital simulation created by connecting human brains to a computer. When Neo swallows the red pill offered to him by Morpheus, his body is disconnected from the computer system and he is plunged into a new and frightening reality: for the first time he experiences the physical world. But as philosopher David Chalmers points out, how does Neo know that this new reality is not just another convincing simulation? Or, as the Professor Cornel West (who played Councillor West of Zion in The Matrix Reloaded) puts it: “It’s illusions all the way down.” This is the mind-boggling philosophical rabbit hole into which Chalmers invites his reader to dive headlong: is this – to paraphrase Bohemian Rhapsody – the real world, or is it just fantasy? Although Chalmers’s interest in virtual reality as a philosophical problem began when he was asked to write an essay for the official website of The Matrix at the time of its release, he now disagrees with the film’s premise – namely, that the digital simulation from which the film takes its name is an illusion. “Neo’s world is perfectly real,” he writes. Over 544 pages, Chalmers argues that virtual reality (VR) is in fact “genuine reality”. Chalmers taught himself to write computer programs at the age of 10 and discovered his first virtual world in 1976, the text-based Colossal Cave Adventure. Today he regularly uses different VR systems: “I put on a headset, open an application, and suddenly I’m in a virtual world,” he writes. In VR he has assumed a female body, visited Mars, grappled with assassins, and taken to the skies like a bird. During the pandemic he regularly used it to discuss philosophy, meeting up with his “merry band of fellow philosophers”. Although the technology may still be somewhat clunky, he notes, “we had the sense of inhabiting a common world”. Facebook’s recent rebranding as Meta – short for “metaverse”, a term borrowed from Neal Stephenson’s 1992 novel Snow Crash – signalled the growing importance of these new immersive cyber technologies. Facebook’s Oculus Quest headset is already available and Apple is due to release one soon. Augmented reality (AR) is also improving, offering a way of experiencing the world that is part virtual and part physical, with digital objects or text overlaid across the visual field. Chalmers thinks AR could initially be more influential than VR, replacing screen-based computing entirely. As the technology progresses, AR glasses or contact lenses may be superseded by retinal or brain implants. A brain-computer interface would allow our eyes and other sense organs to be bypassed, affording access to a complete range of simulated sensual experiences. Ultimately, this will transform how we live, work and think: “My guess is that within a century we will have virtual realities that are indistinguishable from the nonvirtual world,” Chalmers predicts. He believes that eventually many people will spend most of their lives in these environments, just as today people choose to emigrate to another country: “Given all the ways in which virtual worlds may surpass the nonvirtual world,” he writes, “life in virtual worlds will often be the right life to choose.” Chalmers rejects the idea that digital experiences are always mere escapist fantasies, as they might be in video games: “Simulations are not illusions. Virtual worlds are real. Virtual objects are real.” They are clearly not the same as non-virtual objects, but a virtual chair is created using digital processes, just as a physical chair is made of atoms and quarks. It follows that what happens in virtual worlds really does happen. You could lead your entire life in one and find it meaningful and fulfilling. Indeed, Chalmers argues that we could already be inhabitants of a virtual reality: “We can never prove we’re not in a computer simulation because any evidence of ordinary reality could be simulated.” This is known as the simulation hypothesis, the scenario that is explored in the recently released Matrix Resurrections. Chalmers points out that humans have already invented games that simulate real life, such as The Sims. These will become more sophisticated over time, with versions of them running on millions of devices. Furthermore, out there in the rest of the universe, “if any aliens have human-level intelligence, they should eventually develop computers and program them. If these alien civilisations survive long enough, they’ll likely create simulated universes.” Statistically speaking, that means simulated beings probably already vastly outnumber “real” ones. In other words, it’s more likely we’re living in a simulation than in the original version of our world. If we are indeed living in a simulation, then the creator of it is our god, be that a mad scientist, an alien or a teenage girl who has pressed a button in SimUniverse and set us going. As an atheist, says Chalmers, “the simulation hypothesis has made me take the existence of a god more seriously than I ever had before”. Ultimately, Reality+ is about extending our sense of the real. Chalmers’s central idea, that “there is more to reality than we thought”, is seductive, and I was surprised to find his arguments delightfully – or perhaps worryingly – convincing. He has taken a subject most people would dismiss as pure science fiction and produced a brilliant and very readable philosophical investigation. The whole thing is an exercise in what Chalmers calls “technophilosophy” – asking philosophical questions about technology and using new technology to answer philosophical problems. He tackles some frankly mindbending ideas, but does so in a lively and entertaining style, filled with references to pop culture. The only question is whether you really want to know how deep the rabbit hole goes. But then, what do you have to lose but your illusions? • Reality+: Virtual Worlds and the Problems of Philosophy is published by Allen Lane (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Expanding national parks and protected areas will not be enough to halt the destruction of nature, warn leading scientists, who say urgent action on overconsumption, harmful subsidies and the climate crisis is also required to halt biodiversity loss. Governments are expected to commit to a Paris-style agreement for nature at Cop15 in Kunming, China, later this year, with targets that include protecting at least 30% of the oceans and land by 2030. An analysis of the draft UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) agreement by more than 50 leading scientists has found that, while expanding protected areas will, if done well, help slow the destruction of the natural world, much more is needed to stop it. Prof Paul Leadley, an ecologist at Paris-Saclay University and co-author of the report, said: “The target of protecting 30% of all land and seas is important and attracting a lot of attention. And expanding protected areas is a good start if done well, but far short of what is needed to halt and reverse biodiversity loss – called ‘bending the curve’ for biodiversity. “There is very good evidence that we will fail again to meet ambitious international biodiversity objectives if there’s too much focus on protected areas at the expense of other urgent actions addressing the threats to biodiversity.” A “massive” reduction in harmful agricultural and fishing subsidies, holding global heating to 1.5C and tackling human overconsumption, including of meat, is necessary, the scientists said, as part of coordinated action across a diverse, interconnected set of “transformative” changes. The 21 draft targets to be negotiated at Kunming include proposals to eliminate plastic pollution, reduce pesticide use by two-thirds and half the rate of invasive species introduction. The agreement aims to stop what some scientists have called the sixth mass extinction of life on Earth, driven by human behaviour, which threatens ecosystems vital to human civilisation. The analysis of the proposed agreement, conducted by the scientific bodies BioDiscovery and the Group on Earth Observations Biodiversity Observation Network (Geo Bon), has been sent to governments, who will give their feedback later this month. The assessment looked at the impact of three scenarios on halting and reversing biodiversity loss: business as usual, improved quality and quantity of conservation, and transformative change of society. It found that only the last scenario will have the desired effect, assuming global heating is limited to 1.5C. “What we’re doing is trying to take the best science and explain why the global biodiversity framework looks like it does. A lot of countries are saying it’s so complicated. We’re trying to explain why you need all the pieces and how each piece fits together,” Leadley said. The analysis comes after confusion over the breath and complexity of the draft agreement, which ranges from pollution to the inclusion of indigenous communities. In March, governments are scheduled to hold in-person negotiations for the first time since February 2020, after several delays to the process. Governments have failed to meet a single target on halting the destruction of nature in the past decade. María Cecilia Londoño Murcia, a researcher at the Humboldt Institute in Colombia and co-author of the analysis, said: “The sooner we act, the better. Time lags between action and positive outcomes for biodiversity can take decades, so we must act immediately and sustain our efforts if we are to reach the global goals by 2050.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresScott Morrison has announced financial incentives to lure international workers to Australia as he continues to defend his government’s handling of the pandemic in the face of the Omicron surge. But while unveiling the $55m package that will refund the cost of visa application fees for up to 175,000 backpackers and international students, the prime minister was forced to fend off criticism of one of his backbench MPs, George Christensen, who has been calling for parents to opt out of the government’s child vaccination program. Morrison said he was in discussion with the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, about the potential for Christensen to lose his position on parliament’s joint committee for investment and trade, which is worth an extra $20,000 to his annual salary. Late on Wednesday afternoon, Christensen announced in a post on his Facebook page that he had decided to stand down from the committee. “In breaking news that’s of no interest to anyone but the Canberra Bubble: When I return to Parliament House on Monday 7 February, I will be advising the Speaker that I intend to stand down as the chairman of the Joint Standing Committee on Trade and Investment Growth, a decision of my own making and not a demand or request from any third party,” Christensen posted. “Until then, I will continue in the role, prosecuting the need for the recommendations of the committee’s report on the Prudential Regulation of Investment in Australia’s Export Industries to be adopted by the Australian Government, especially the recommendation that the government recognise that finance, banking and insurance services are essential services for businesses.” Earlier, Morrison said his advice regarding Christensen was to “simply ignore him”. “Australia is a free country, we can’t go around locking people up for what they say as Australians,” Morrison said. “He is allowed to speak his mind, but Australians shouldn’t be listening to it. “I think they’re unwise views, I think they are dangerous views, I don’t think parents should be listened to them, that is the medical advice I have from the chief medical officer and is consistent with the advice you get anywhere in the world,” he said. Morrison said parents should listen to the advice of the health experts and regulators, and said that already one in five students aged five to 11 had been vaccinated in the first 10 days of the program. The number of children vaccinated in this age bracket is expected to surpass 500,000 this week. The prime minister also faced questions about the shortage of rapid antigen tests across the country, saying Omicron had “changed everything”, and while discussions had been happening as early as June, at that stage the government’s focus was on vaccine procurement. He said the UK, which had a universal access program for rapid antigen tests, was unable to deliver on demand, and it was making no difference to the surge in case numbers in the country. “The test is not a cure, the vaccine is what protects, and that’s why we have channelled our effort into those vaccines, and that’s why one of the other areas we are working in with the workforce is targeting pop-up booster programs in a social work forces. “I understand that those rapid antigen test shortages have been a great frustration but a lot of these comments are made with hindsight, not foresight,” he said. In aged care, which is a responsibility of the federal government, Morrison said the commonwealth had begun supplying tests in August, but conceded there had not been enough. Under the details of the visa rebate program, the $630 fee for international students will be covered for the next eight weeks, and for backpackers for 12 weeks. Morrison said his message to 150,000 international students and 23,500 backpackers with visas was to “come on down”. “We want you to come to Australia and enjoy a holiday here … [and] move all the way around the country,” Morrison said. “At the same time, join our workforce and help us in our agricultural sector, in our hospitality sector, and so many of the other parts of the economy that rely on that labour.” He said international students could be willing to fill some of the critical workforce shortages being faced as a result of the Omicron surge, “particularly those who are working and being trained in healthcare, aged care, those types of sectors, that will be incredibly helpful.” The prime minister also said states that still had in place quarantine requirements for international arrivals should consider lifting them to take advantage of the additional staff arriving into the country. “I’d be encouraging them to look at those rules to make sure they can get those critical workers in,” Morrison said. He said the government was considering a further relaxation of isolation requirements down to just five days, but said it would be a “calibration” given about 30% of people remained infectious after such a short period. “At the moment that is not the advice,” he said.That’s it for today, folks. You can find all the daily Covid statistics in the summary post pinned at the top of the blog, and in our daily wrap of the Covid news from around the country. That includes all the details about the states that have brought forward the timing of booster shots from four to three months – so far, NSW, Victoria, South Australia and the ACT have all made announcements to that effect. Elsewhere today: • Dozens of intensive care nurses protested at Sydney’s Westmead hospital on Wednesday morning in the wake of staffing shortages across the healthcare sector. • 20 Australian defence force personnel have been supplied by the federal government to help with Victorian ambulance crews. • Prime minister Scott Morrison announced financial incentives to lure international workers to Australia, unveiling a $55m package that will refund the cost of visa application fees for up to 175,000 backpackers and international students. • Backbench MP George Christensen announced that he will step down from his position on parliament’s joint committee for investment and trade, a move that comes after the government was forced to fend off criticism of the backbencher, who has been calling for parents to opt out of the government’s child vaccination program. • The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, will hold talks with their British counterparts in Sydney on Friday, in the first 2+2 ministerial meeting hosted by Australia since the start of the pandemic. They are expected to discuss how to manage tensions with China. • Environment groups are calling on the Western Australian government to ban fracking in the state’s Kimberley region after an application by Perth-based oil and gas company Theia Energy to drill two exploratory wells. • Mining magnate Clive Palmer will attempt a return to federal politics, announcing he will lead his party’s Senate team in the upcoming election. Palmer’s United Australia Party plans to field Senate candidates in every state and territory. • Queensland will reopen to vaccinated international travellers from 1am on Saturday. They will be allowed to freely enter the state without needing to quarantine. Thanks for sticking with us today, and join us again tomorrow morning when we’ll do it all again. Have a lovely evening. The pressure on this has been building in the wake of the government’s decision to deport tennis player Novak Djokovic. Christensen and several other Coalition MPs have been vocal critics of the government’s vaccination program and openly campaigned against things like vaccine mandates. Yesterday, the health minister, Greg Hunt, was asked about Christensen’s anti-vaccination comments on social media (made in a promotion for his podcast). Hunt said: Wherever people have said things that are anti-vax, we disagree with them, whether that is people in our own movement, I disagree ... Frankly, the anti-vaxxers aren’t just losing the debate, they’ve lost the debate. Later, Scott Morrison issued a statement: I strongly disagree with the message sent out by Mr Christensen regarding children’s vaccinations. It is contrary to the official professional medical advice provided to the government and I urge parents to disregard his dangerous messages in relation to vaccines. As we reported earlier, the prime minister was today forced to fend off criticism of Christensen, who has been calling for parents to opt out of the government’s child vaccination program. Morrison said earlier he was in discussion with the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, about the potential for Christensen to lose his position on parliament’s joint committee for investment and trade, which is worth an extra $20,000 to his annual salary. Christensen’s statement, made on Facebook just now, says: In breaking news that’s of no interest to anyone but the Canberra Bubble: When I return to Parliament House on Monday 7 February, I will be advising the Speaker that I intend to stand down as the chairman of the Joint Standing Committee on Trade and Investment Growth, a decision of my own making and not a demand or request from any third party. Until then, I will continue in the role, prosecuting the need for the recommendations of the committee’s report on the Prudential Regulation of Investment in Australia’s Export Industries to be adopted by the Australian Government, especially the recommendation that the government recognise that finance, banking and insurance services are essential services for businesses. Just to give you some context on this: George Christensen has been coming under fire, including from Scott Morrison and Greg Hunt, in the last 24 hours for his comments urging people, against all sound medical advice, not to vaccinate their children. School reopening plans will be on the agenda when the prime minister, Scott Morrison, meets with state and territory leaders for national cabinet tomorrow. The meeting is due to begin at midday AEDT. It’s a week since the last national cabinet meeting, and comes amid growing case numbers and deaths in Australia. Morrison is in Canberra for the meeting, which is expected to receive an epidemiology update on the Omicron wave. The agenda also includes an update on the vaccine rollout and on health system capacity, along with the discussion about plans for schools as term one approaches. Yesterday the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said doctors and nurses would be diverted from private hospitals to the strained public network to help with the peak of Omicron cases, while the Victorian government issued a “code brown” for health services. Earlier today, Morrison defended his government’s handling of the pandemic, arguing the Omicron variant had “changed everything”. A little diversion to the cricket for a minute: this afternoon, New Zealand’s limited-overs tour of Australia was postponed indefinitely due to uncertainty over when the visitors would be able to return home according to Covid-19 protocols. The tour, scheduled for 24 January to 9 February, comprised three one-day internationals in Perth, Hobart and Sydney and a solitary Twenty20 match in Canberra. More here: I honestly can’t say that I’m a fan of cricket, but I am a fan of Geoff Lemon’s prose, and as a consequence even made my way through this sharply written Ashes commentary despite understanding very little of it, but that’s entirely on me. Our South Australian readers should also be aware of the fire danger warnings for the state, thanks to tomorrow’s forecast of hot and windy conditions. Continue to take care in the water on the east coast: the Bureau of Meteorology is warning that hazardous surf conditions persist along the NSW coastline. Police are working to retrieve a man’s body after he fell down a mineshaft and died in north-east Victoria, AAP reports. The man died after falling into a mineshaft near a walking track. Emergency services attended the Gibraltar Spur track in Hawkhurst shortly after 10am on Wednesday. Victoria police’s search and rescue squad are working to retrieve the body. Police will prepare a report for the coroner. Rural concession card holders may miss out on rapid antigen tests as small town pharmacists are caught between a government scheme that requires upfront investment in stock and wholesalers stipulating large minimum orders. Under the government’s scheme announced last week, pharmacies have to pay for the tests first before being reimbursed only for the tests they use. Small pharmacies are also increasingly forced to pay for large numbers of orders stipulated by wholesalers. More on the issue here: More on the situation in Tonga, from Kate Lyons: the Tongan government has raised concerns about the tiny islands of Mango and Fonoifua – north-east of the main island of Tongatapu – which both suffered catastrophic damage from the tsunami and volcano eruption on Saturday. The Tongan government reported on Tuesday night that all houses had been destroyed on Mango Island, and only two houses remained on Fonoifua. The news came in the first statement released by the government since the disaster on Saturday, which damaged the undersea cable, cutting off communications between Tonga and the rest of the world. You can read the full story here: The federal government says a meeting with senior visiting British ministers in Sydney on Friday “will be conducted in strict adherence to NSW government Covid-19 health guidelines and protocols”. The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, will hold talks with their British counterparts in the first 2+2 ministerial meeting hosted by Australia since the start of the pandemic. They will meet with the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who is tipped as one of the frontrunners to replace Boris Johnson as prime minister amid increasing pressure on his leadership, and the British defence secretary, Ben Wallace. A statement issued by Payne and Dutton this afternoon says discussions “will focus on strategic challenges and identify areas in which Australia and the United Kingdom can work to support an open, inclusive and resilient Indo-Pacific region where the sovereignty of all nations is respected” – a reference to how to manage tensions with a rising China. Payne said the international environment was becoming “more complex and challenging” and the meeting would “consider ways to strengthen our partnership in order to meet new and emerging threats and seize the many opportunities that this era presents”. Dutton said he looked forward to talking about “how we can work together in support of a safe and secure Indo-Pacific region”. The Australian government’s statement says the meeting “will consider ways to strengthen collaboration in defence capability, cybersecurity, critical technology, deterrence and sustainable investment in infrastructure” and “will also provide an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to protecting the core principles of the multilateral system, including the promotion and protection of human rights”. I missed this earlier with the Covid numbers rolling in from the south and west, but the ACT has also cut interval times for vaccine boosters and brought the start date for that forward. From the press release: People aged 18 and over will now be able to receive a booster dose of Covid-19 vaccine three months after receiving their second dose in the ACT. This change had initially been slated to come into effect from 31 January 2022, but has been brought forward as vaccine supply in the ACT is plentiful and capacity is available at the ACT government’s vaccination clinics. Chief minister Andrew Barr said booster uptake in the ACT had so far been strong and this change would help increase coverage rates among the Territory’s adult population. “Just like the initial vaccine rollout, the ACT is leading the way with booster doses with one in three Canberrans aged 18 and over now having received a third vaccination,” chief minister Barr said. “Receiving your booster is the best defence against Covid-19 infection and serious illness.” Kristin O’Connell from the Antipoverty Centre is in our opinion pages today making some powerful points about the way politicians treat poor people. She writes: All poverty is ultimately income poverty. And its number one cause in this country is abhorrently low welfare payments. We don’t need more food banks, more rebates, more niche supports that are impossible to find out about, let alone access. We need money. We reported earlier this week that people on jobseeker – which was raised by a mere $25 a week in April – were being told they would have their benefits cut if they didn’t attend face-to-face job agency appointments, despite the surge of Covid cases. You can read that story here. Scott Morrison, though, in the long preamble of his press conference today, alluded to giving Jobactive providers a greater role in “the urgent needs of the workforce in those particular critical sectors”. Advocates for people on welfare argue this is simply going to put more undue pressure on the poor. The interval for a booster shot will be reduced to three months in Victoria and New South Wales amid unprecedented strain on hospitals as Omicron cases surge. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, announced on Wednesday morning the move would take effect on Wednesday while NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said the change would be implemented from Friday in that state. Perrottet said he had “seen very clearly” through ICU numbers that vaccination was key to reducing symptoms and fatalities. Read more: When Melbourne woman Beth* called her fertility clinic on 10 January to arrange prepaid testing, she was told her procedure had been cancelled, and she would have to wait three months. Beth has been undergoing IVF for almost two years, and has had six unsuccessful transfers and two miscarriages in that time. It was hoped a biopsy, to be sent to Japan, would help to provide answers as to why she wasn’t getting pregnant. But on 6 January, Victorian health minister Martin Foley announced a ban on all non-urgent elective surgery – including IVF treatments – in metropolitan Melbourne and major regional cities, in an effort to free up health resources amid the Omicron wave. Read more about the issue here: Western Australia has recorded five new Covid-19 cases. They include two cases of local transmission and three from interstate travel. No cases are in hospital. Just a little detour to our Pacific neighbours for a moment. Australia and New Zealand have started to dispatch aid to Tonga in the wake of the volcano disaster on the weekend, amid fears relief workers could bring a “tsunami of Covid” cases to the Pacific Island nation that has so far recorded just one case of the virus. New Zealand has dispatched two naval vessels with relief supplies onboard. The country’s defence minister Peeni Henare said they were expected to arrive in four days, though could arrive as soon as Friday if the weather holds. Australia’s HMAS Adelaide left Sydney for Brisbane on Tuesday and was due to depart for Tonga on Wednesday. No further deaths have been reported since the Tongan government’s announcement of three confirmed deaths – one Tongan woman, one Tongan man, and one British woman – on Tuesday night. Royce Kurmelovs has our full report here: We’re still waiting to hear from Western Australian health authorities on the Covid situation over there today, but I understand that health minister Amber-Jade Sanderson will be stepping up to the mic at about 12.30pm local time, which is 3.30pm AEDT. Our US colleagues reported this week concerns from airline groups that the rollout of 5G in the country could interfere with plane radio equipment due to the equipment operating in the same radio frequency spectrum as 5G. In case you were wondering if that is an issue here, the Australian Communications and Media Authority (Acma) – which regulates spectrum licensing in Australia – says it will not be a cause for concern. Currently 4G and 5G mobile networks operate between the 3400MHz and 3700MHz spectrum band. Acma in 2020 started planning for what to do with the 3700-4200MHz band, and as part of that process has decided that wireless broadband will only go up to 4000MHz. Aircraft radio altimeters operate above 4200MHz, meaning there will be a buffer and it shouldn’t be an issue. Acma said there were no recorded incidents of wireless broadband interfering with radio altimeters in Australia. A spokesperson said: The ACMA works closely with the aviation and telecommunications sectors to ensure that wireless broadband services, including 5G, and aircraft radio altimeters can successfully co-exist in nearby frequency bands. We expect to publicly consult from March 2022 on how new wireless services in the 3400-4000 MHz range will be introduced, which will include approaches for managing this issue. We have also engaged with other regulators around the world on technical studies and approaches, including following developments in the US and Europe. Environment groups are calling on the Western Australian government to ban fracking in the state’s Kimberley region after an application by Perth-based oil and gas company Theia Energy to drill two exploratory wells. The proposal, published by the state’s environmental regulator on Tuesday, is the second application for fracking in the Kimberley, with a proposal from Texan-based Black Mountain Energy also under assessment. The Environmental Protection Authority has given the general public seven days to comment on Theia Energy’s proposal. WA lifted its ban on fracking in 2018. Theia Energy’s application is to drill one vertical and one horizontal well in the Canning Basin, 155km south-east of Broome. The amount of groundwater that would be extracted during the process would be up to 17.8m litres, according to the company’s application. The Lock the Gate Alliance, Environs Kimberley and the Conservation Council of WA (CCWA) have called on the McGowan government to reject the project. The conservation council’s executive director Maggie Wood said: As the state’s peak environmental body, CCWA has been consistent in our view that fracking is completely unacceptable in WA - but particularly so in the pristine landscape of the Kimberley. Lock the Gate warned that companies typically began with a handful of exploratory wells but if the development moved to production those wells multiplied across the landscape. The alliance’s WA spokesperson Claire McKinnon: The amount of water that would be required for a fully fledged fracking industry in the Kimberley is truly terrifying. Martin Pritchard of Environs Kimberley said opening the Canning Basin to the oil and gas industry represented a potential “carbon bomb”. We don’t think the premier and his cabinet have been briefed on the potential scenario of oil and gas fracking in the Kimberley and the billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide and methane that would be released if the region was opened up to gas fracking fields. Here is some further context on what’s happening in the Northern Territory. Indigenous organisations are calling for federal government and defence help to battle Covid outbreaks in remote communities, saying the Northern Territory’s pandemic response had failed, AAP reports. Aboriginal Peak Organisations NT warns there is a growing emergency in the territory with outbreaks in multiple remote and vulnerable communities where vaccination rates are low. Spokesperson John Paterson says there are not enough health workers on the ground, and local health centre staff are exhausted and at breaking point. Rapid antigen tests are also in short supply, and staff and community members are not being tested. Paterson said on Wednesday: The result is that infected individuals are not being identified and are spreading the virus undetected. NT virus response teams are also struggling to transport and isolate infected people and they are “being left to isolate in overcrowded and inadequate accommodation”. We need to see infected people rapidly moved into adequate, supported isolation accommodation. The groups called on the territory and federal governments to urgently provide more health workers and free RATs. Paterson said the labour shortage had slowed the remote vaccination rollout in communities with Aboriginal-controlled health organisations. “A surge workforce is urgently needed to deal with the current crisis,” he said. Paterson also raised concerns over “a looming food security crisis” due to supply chain issues. This is the time, when the essential elements of the Covid response are faltering, to enlist the direct support of the commonwealth and defence force to assist in critical areas of the response. It comes a day after the NT government reported new outbreaks in remote Indigenous communities from Arnhem Land to central Australia, including cases in Utopia, 240km north of Alice Springs, Areyonga and Papunya, Bulla, Galiwin’ku, Yuendumu, and Groote Eylandt, in the Gulf of Carpentaria. Dozens of new cases have also been detected in an Alice Springs renal hostel, an aged care facility, at the local prison and in town camps. Still in the Northern Territory, we’ve just heard that the Royal Darwin Hospital has activated the private hospitals agreement with Darwin Private Hospital to increase bed capacity. It follows the federal government’s announcement yesterday that it would enact that agreement, which allows for doctors and nurses to be diverted from the private system into the public in times of strain on the healthcare system. The Northern Territory has recorded 418 new Covid cases. There are 48 people in hospital but none of them are in intensive care, with seven cases classified as acute and on ventilators. There’s some nasty weather brewing inland in southern Queensland. Further to prime minister Scott Morrison’s comments earlier today, denying that he said there were no refugees in Melbourne’s Park hotel (there are indeed refugees in Melbourne’s Park hotel), here is a wrap from Daniel Hurst, Sarah Martin and Ben Doherty on who said what and when, and the facts of the matter. So just to recap the latest on booster shots, if you live in NSW, Victoria or South Australia and you had a second dose of a Covid vaccine three months ago, you are now or will very shortly be eligible to get your booster. Mining billionaire Clive Palmer will attempt a return to federal politics, announcing he will lead his party’s Senate team in the upcoming election, AAP reports. Palmer’s United Australia Party plans to field Senate candidates in every state and territory, with the one-time lower house MP last tasting victory in 2013 when he won the Sunshine Coast seat of Fairfax. In statements made in Brisbane on Wednesday, Palmer announced he would run for the Senate, pointing to the level of national debt: The reason I’ve come back into politics and taken a key role at this important time is because of the state of the nation. I’d like to be on my boat but I’m not, I’m in this situation. The anti vaccine-mandate advocate says his party has attracted more than 80,000 members, and will be backed by a campaign with significant resources. “I don’t budget, we just respond to the political circumstance,” he said. The UAP has just one seat in the federal parliament – the electorate of Hughes held by Craig Kelly, who was elected as a Liberal candidate until he resigned to sit as an independent before joining the UAP. But Palmer continues to spruik the party’s chances in the election to be held sometime before the end of May, and says candidates will also be fielded in every lower house seat. “We can win seats in Western Sydney, Western Melbourne. There are seats in Queensland that we can win,” he said. The party’s Senate team also includes former Deloitte Australia CEO Domenic Martino in NSW and property executive Ralph Babet in Victoria. The announcement follows controversy sparked by Kelly, who caught the attention of the Therapeutic Goods Administration after spamming people with unsolicited text messages last year. A lot hinges on how much all this Omicron disruption is affecting confidence in the economy (quite apart from those in hospital, or worse, of course). Today we got another snapshot, this time from the Westpac-Melbourne Institute’s consumer sentiment report, which, on the face of it, is a bit more upbeat than yesterday’s ANZ-Roy Morgan take that had sentiment lower than any January since 1992. Anyway, today’s reading showed the index of consumer sentiment fell by 2.0% to 102.2 in January from 104.3 in December. “This is a surprisingly solid result given the rapid spread of the Omicron Covid variant over the last month,” it said. “The 2% decline compares to the 5.2% drop seen in the first month of the delta outbreak in NSW, a 6.1% drop heading into Victoria’s ‘second wave’ outbreak in 2020 and the epic 17.7% collapse when the pandemic first hit in early 2020.” Still, “responses over the course of the survey week – from January 10 to January 14 – did show a deterioration suggesting some increased anxiety as the week progressed”, the report added. And that’s the rub. Most economists are still assuming the hit to the economy is going to be short-lived. Supporting consumer resilience, they argue, are ongoing record-low interest rates, a low jobless rate, the massive (25%) surge in house values over the past year and $250bn in savings squirrelled away. Watch this space, as they say in the cliched classics. The SA premier Steven Marshall has announced that the wait time for boosters in the state has been reduced to three months after second dose: Those people who had their second dose three months ago are now eligible for their booster. This will create increased demand of around 225,000 shots in South Australia. We have plenty of supply. You can get an appointment today, right across the state you can get an appointment for your booster. South Australia has recorded 3,482 new Covid-19 cases and six deaths. There are 294 people in hospital and 23 in ICU, with four people on ventilators. There are 60 people in hospital in the ACT, including five in intensive care and two on ventilators. It’s worth noting that the territory’s figures today also include rapid antigen tests. The ACT has recorded 1,467 new coronavirus cases. Thankfully, the territory has not recorded any Covid deaths today. A worker at a warehouse supplying Australian supermarkets says managers were not prepared for the Omicron onslaught, resulting in long shifts and stress among workers covering for absent colleagues due to the pandemic. The employee in the supply chain serving Coles, who asked not to be identified due to fear of reprisal, said about a quarter of staff were off work due to Omicron. He said most of those had Covid-19, rather than being forced to isolate due to being a close contact of a positive case. “A lot of pressure is put on us to try and pick up the slack,” he said, which involved “longer hours and weekends” as well as morning shifts that start earlier. “For instance, we usually start at 6am but a lot of the times … a lot of the staff start at 2am.” Read the full story: Hello everyone. I hope you have a delicious lunch in front of you to fuel you through this afternoon of news. Thank you Matilda Boseley as always for powering us through the morning. Okay, with that, I shall hand you over to the fantastic Stephanie Convery who will take you through the afternoon’s news. Victoria’s bid for the 2026 Commonwealth games appears to be bipartisan, with the Liberals hopeful it will get those darn kiddos off their darn phones. Australia has marked another deadly day of the pandemic, with 67 Covid-19 deaths recorded on Wednesday. Here is a summary of the daily numbers: NSW Deaths – 32 Cases – 32,297 Hospitalisations – 2,863 (217 in ICU, 66 ventilated) Victoria Deaths – 18 Cases – 20,769 Hospitalisations – 1,173 (125 in ICU, 42 ventilated) Queensland Deaths – 11 Cases – 19,932 Hospitalisations – 835 (52 in ICU, 18 ventilated) South Australia Deaths – six Cases – 3,482 Hospitalisations – 294 (23 in ICU, four ventilated) Tasmania Deaths – 0 Cases – 1,185 Hospitalisations – 29 (two in ICU) ACT Deaths – 0 Cases – 1,467 Hospitalisations – 60 (five in ICU, two ventilated) Northern Territory Deaths – 0 Cases –418 Hospitalisations – 48 (none in ICU, seven ventilated) Western Australia Deaths – 0 Cases – five Hospitalisations – 0 Readers from the Dandenongs and surrounding regions in Victoria, please be careful. There are powerful and potentially damaging winds headed your way. These will be coming from the east, which is unusual and therefore make trees more vulnerable to falling. Stay safe. But Palaszczuk says she is still worried about how the Gold Cost will handle the influx of international travellers, given the area’s (comparatively) low vaccination rate. Can I just say something with this? Of course people will come into all different parts of Queensland but I want to make this observation. Over the past week I’ve had a look at our regions and our vaccination rates. People are going to be coming into Brisbane, the Gold Coast and Cairns. Brisbane is around 93% to 95% vaccinated. That’s fantastic. Cairns is at 94.1% first dose - I should add some parts of Brisbane are over 95%, such as Brisbane East. The Gold Coast, however, and I know I keep talking about the Gold Coast but I am concerned. The Gold Coast is still sitting at 90.5%. Now, to put that in perspective, we were very concerned at the start of this vaccination campaign about Mackay and Central Queensland. Mackay is now more than 95% first dose. Central Queensland – well done Central Queensland – 91.1%. Wide Bay regions, more than 95%. Townsville is 91.7%. Southwest Queensland is 93% first dose and Darling Downs region is 95%. If you look at the scheme of things. In terms of where people will be travelling, can I please give an added push for Gold Coast. Come and get vaccinated. Annastacia Palaszczuk says that from 1am on Saturday vaccinated international travellers will be allowed to freely enter Queensland without needing to quarantine. We made a decision yesterday as part of our Covid task force meeting and we have decided to set a firm date for vaccinated people, international travellers coming into Queensland and we have set that date at 1am this Saturday. If you have family or loved ones - I know a lot of people have sons and daughters overseas or parents or brothers and sisters overseas. This gives to the airlines and incoming travellers that from 1am on Saturday, you can come into Queensland and you will no longer have to do, if you are vaccinated, quarantine. You are free to come in. We’re asking you to do a RAT test within 24 hours. This is consistent with other states. If national cabinet decides to change that down the track, so be it, but we do believe that now is the right time with our vaccination rates so high, 88.82%. The Queensland premier has confirmed that she will be pushing for local manufacturing of rapid antigen tests at national cabinet tomorrow: If you think about it, we have capacity in this country to manufacture these RAT tests. So I think, you know, we need to ask these companies to put forward approvals and get them done quickly. Rather than searching the world to get them, we could be producing them here locally. It’s something I’d like to raise at national cabinet tomorrow. In an open letter, 138 academic experts have expressed concerns about a decision made by the acting minister for education, Stuart Robert, to reject six research grants that were recommended for funding by the Australian Research Council. Robert’s veto of the proposed grants, announced on Christmas Eve, has been widely condemned by the research community. The letter, addressed to Robert and the ARC’s outgoing chief executive, Sue Thomas, said: Such interventions compromise the integrity of the research funding system, weaken public trust in the ARC, and threaten to damage Australia’s international reputation. The letter’s signatories are all members of the ARC’s 2021 college of experts, appointed specifically to assess research grants and select which ones should be funded. They include experts of international standing drawn from the Australian research community, many with extensive industry experience. The letter continued: Each grant eventually recommended to the Minister for funding is first assessed by multiple international experts and multiple College members, and then individually discussed and voted on by College members … The Ministerial decision to override the ARC’s recommendations for funding undermines this process. We ask that this and future Australian Governments legislate amendments to the Australian Research Council Act 2001 that will ensure the independence of the ARC and prevent political interference in research grants. We are jumping right over to Queensland where the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, is speaking now. She has confirmed the state has sadly recorded another 11 deaths of people diagnosed with Covid-19 and 19,932 new cases. It is my very sad duty today as premier of Queensland to report that tragically there have been 11 people that have lost their life. Any death is, of course, a tragedy. And every day I’m reminded that this is someone’s grandmother or grandfather or brother or sister or aunt or uncle and I think we all need to keep that in mind that. Any loss is a tragedy and I express my condolences on behalf of the state to the families of the loved ones who have lost their lives under such tragic circumstances. The Victorian premier has confirmed that 20 Australian defence force personnel have been supplied by the federal government to help with Victorian ambulance crews and hopes that this number will grow in the coming weeks. Daniel Andrews: I’ve been on the phone with the prime minister in the last few days and I’m grateful for the fact that there will be a number of commonwealth public servants continuing to support us at triple zero, helping with call-taking. We know that system is under significant pressure. They’re not ADF as such but it’s not a matter of the uniform you wear. It’s the role you play. They’re doing a great job. We’ve got some in there now, and that will be basically doubled and it won’t end any time soon. It was scheduled to end at the end of this month. I think that will be ongoing. We’re very grateful for that. In terms of ADF strictly, there will be in the order of 20 I think. And hopefully we can build to that over time. Just like we successfully did in ‘20 and ‘21 - certainly in 2020 - where we had an ambulance paramedic and trained ADF member working together as a blended crew so the paramedic can provide the care and the ADF person, who is trained to assist where appropriate but principally to do the driving, meaning there are many shifts that will get filled that wouldn’t otherwise get filled and it means many, many patients will get the care they need as fast as possible. So I’ve been speaking with the prime minister quite a bit in recent times, grateful ... for the answer, which I think came through yesterday or late the day before, and thank you very much to him and to his team. And we certainly don’t rule out asking for more help when we need it. Andrews has suggested that the number of industries that will have third dose vaccine mandates imposed will likely grow, stating that he does not want Victorians to view the booster shot as optional. He also alluded that the new definition of “fully vaccinated” may be changed to three doses by national cabinet in the weeks to come. The health minister last Monday made a number of announcements for a number of different classes of worker. There’s every chance that we add to that list, for the best of reasons. We mandated a number of people, many people across many different sectors, a first and second dose and I think you’ll see very soon, out of national processes, you’ll see the terminology and the recognition of the third dose be crystal clear. This is not an option, not an add-on, not ‘a good thing to have’. I think we’re close to a change in policy that will simply reflect the fact that in order to be fully protected, you need three doses. Victorian officials have urged double vaccinated people recently infected with Covid-19 to get their booster vaccine as soon as they are eligible and feeling well enough. (Which includes me actually, I should make my booking). If you’ve had Covid your immunity will wane quite quickly. We know the immunity post-vaccination is much longer and higher than the disease itself. So yes, my advice would be that as soon as you’re well enough after your Covid illness, go and get a booster vaccine. Victoria has announced a four-day “booster blitz” to help many newly eligible residents get their third dose. A woman, whose name I did not catch but seems important, has given the details of that blitz. Over the four days of the blitz, there are literally tens of thousands of appointments that are currently available waiting for you to book in. For those who want to walk up, here’s where you can go: The Royal Exhibition Buildings ... between 8am-8pm, for the duration of the blitz. La Trobe University Bundoora, 8am-8pm, over the four days of the blitz. Sandown racecourse, 9am-6.30pm, Saturday and Sunday. Dandenong Plaza, 9am-5pm, Saturday and Sunday. Frankston Bayside centre, 9.30am-5pm, Saturday and Sunday. Sunshine hospital, 8am-8pm, over the four days of the blitz. Bendigo Vax hub, 9am-8pm, over the course of the blitz. And the Ballarat Mercure [hotel], 8.30am to 3pm on Sunday. About 42,000 rapid, at-home Covid-19 tests worth more than $500,000 have been stolen from a depot in Sydney amid a nationwide shortage, reports AAP’s Tiffanie Turnbull. NSW police were called after man walked into the freight depot in Mascot on Tuesday afternoon and “took possession” of the tests. “The incident was reported to police and inquiries are continuing,” a police spokesperson said. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet warned the culprit to expect a visit from police soon. At a time when everyone across our state has made incredible efforts in keeping people safe, in making sacrifices, what a disgraceful act... The police will catch you. Australia continues to grapple with a shortage of rapid antigen tests and price gouging which the consumer watchdog has called “beyond outrageous”. Australian Competition and Consumer Commission boss Rod Sims says the agency has received reports of RATs costing up to $500 for two tests through online marketplaces, and more than $70 per test through convenience stores, service stations and independent supermarkets. Despite wholesale RAT costs being up to $11.45 a test, the agency said prices for the kits are often retailing between $20-$30 and are priced much higher through smaller outlets. Premier Daniel Andrews has announced that, from this moment onwards, Victorians will be eligible for a booster three months after their second dose. I’m pleased to announce that, effectively immediately, the dose interval will be reduced to three months across our state for your third dose. So if you’ve had your second dose within the last three months, then you will now be eligible. That’s is if three months have passed since your second dose of the Covid-19 vaccine, you will be eligible for a third dose. That interval has been reduced down to three months effective immediately. That’s on the advice of our public health team, consistent with ATAGI’s broader statement. It’s safe. It’s effective. The total number of people eligible increases substantially, by two million Victorians, and it will help us get more people third-dose boosted quicker than would otherwise be the case. OK, we are jumping straight away over to Victoria, where the premier, Daniel Andrews, is speaking now as the state’s hospital system prepares to enter a statewide “code brown”. It seems Andrews will be announcing an increase to vaccination capacity later in the presser but for not he is running through the daily Covid numbers. He has confirmed that 14 out of the 18 deaths recorded in the state today were from the last two days. There are 1,173 people that are in hospital. That’s an increase from 1,152 yesterday – 125 people are in intensive care and that was 127 yesterday so it’s down by two. Forty two are on a ventilator, again that’s down by one. And sadly, I have to report that 18 Victorians have died with Covid-19 – 14 of those people in the last two days and, of course, we send our thoughts, prayers and sincere condolences to all of their families. This will be an incredibly difficult time for them. In terms of case numbers, 10,043 people reported a positive rapid antigen test. A further 10,726 positive PCR results from 489,838 tests processed. Reporter: One last one on George Christensen. He holds a relatively lucrative position as a backbencher on the joint committee for investment and trade. Does he still deserve to hold such a position, given that he’s spouting dangerous views that are contrary to government advice? Should he step aside for another more deserving member of your team? Morrison: That’s a matter I’m discussing with the deputy prime minister. Morrison has claimed that he never said that all those people detained in the makeshift immigration facility at the Park Hotel in Melbourne were not refugees. The suggestion that I said they were all found not to be refugees, that’s not true. That is not what I said. It was a question in a radio interview, I answered to the best of my knowledge at that time. In a quite number of cases that was indeed the case. There were people in detention who are not owed protection under the refugee convention and our rules. Others, I can tell you, the ones who are there are those who are there arrived in Australia illegally on the boat. Let’s zoom back in time and see exactly what he said: When speaking to 2GB radio earlier in the week, the prime minister was asked by presenter Ben Fordham how it was “acceptable” that refugees in the same hotel as Djokovic had been detained for almost nine years with taxpayers spending millions of dollars “to keep them in limbo.” In response, Morrison suggested the detainees were not refugees. Well, the specific cases, Ben, I mean, it’s not clear that to my information that someone in that case is actually a refugee. They may have sought asylum and been found not to be a refugee and have chosen not to return, and … that happens in this country, people aren’t found to be refugees and they won’t return. Reporter: Just to confirm, have you received a formal request ... from the Tongan government for assistance, for humanitarian assistance? And considering the serious nature and just the devastation that this volcano has occurred, will Australia consider increasing its long-term aid to the nation? Morrison: Well, we have always been prepared to provide support to our Pacific family whenever they have needed it, and that’s exactly what we’re doing in Tonga. It’s exactly what we’re doing in Papua New Guinea, it’s exactly what we’re doing right now in the Solomon Islands. It’s exactly what we did in Samoa when they had their outbreaks there previously. I mean, any time a Pacific nation has called on us for support, we have always said “yes”, and so, you know, I’ll be talking to the prime minister, I hope, later today, communications allowing, and we run through whatever else they might need. Our defence forces have stood up their operation and are deploying as necessary and as directed. So we feel deeply for our family in Tonga. Morrison has been asked about the current situation in Tonga after the devastating undersea volcano eruption and subsequent tsunami. I met by phone with the prime minister of New Zealand the other day, and we’re working together with flights that are going there and we’re providing aide support. It is a very difficult environment to be operating in, the ash clouds and things of that nature. Minister [Zed] Seselja has been directly engaging on that issue with their counterparts. I’ll probably speak to the [Tongan] prime minister later today because communications have been a challenge over the last little while. It’s a very small island community in Tonga and there are a lot of Australians of Tongan descent and who have family and friends and many Australians have visited there. So they would be expecting us to do everything we can to stand with our Pacific family in Tonga and they’re a faithful community and they’re a beautiful community and I’m sure they’ll be supporting each other but they need us now and they’re getting our help. Reporter: That is within your power to kick [Christensen] out of the party room, why don’t you do that given that he holds “dangerous views”, in your words? Morrison: The more important thing to do is to say his views are not the government’s views. They have in no way, whatsoever, influenced government policy at all, and the greater attention given to his views – which is not the government* – then, I can only encourage those to simply ignore him. *For those that missed it, the prime minister is once again suggesting that it is the media’s fault that one of his government’s MP’s anti-vaccination views have been getting attention. Oh, we are back to talking about George Christensen. Reporter: You know that George Christensen isn’t like any other person talking about anti-vaccination sentiment. He is a government member. Is George Christensen taking you for a ride? Morrison: He is not a candidate for the government at the next election. And George has been putting out these views for some time. I’m not seeking to amplify them, in fact, [I don’t think people should] be paying attention to him on this issue at all. And anyone who is also pushing those views. I don’t think, those who said people shouldn’t take the AstraZeneca vaccine, I don’t think people should listen to those views either*. People on the same side of politics as well. As a free country, people are allowed to say what they think, but we don’t have to listen to them. We don’t have to amplify their views**. And are certainly not seeking to do that. I think they’re unwise views. I think they’re dangerous views. I don’t think people should be listening to them. You want the best information, my advice to them is to get the best information from the official sources. Don’t go after things that are people rabbiting on Facebook and social media and all the rest of it, you’re not going tofind it there, you aren’t going to find things can help you there. Go to the credible source of information on vaccines and George Christensen is not one of them. *This is a dig at the Queensland government by the way. **Oh sorry! I forgot that it’s the media fault for reporting on what an MP says publicly! Morrison on RATs: The UK [is the only country] with a universal policy [and] they aren’t able to deliver ... People who want them, can’t get them there either. The test is not a cure, the vaccine is what protects and that’s why we have channelled our effort into those vaccines and that’s why one of the other areas we working in the workforce is targeting pop-up boosted programs in a social work forces. I understand that those rapid antigen test shortages have been a great frustration but a lot of these comments are made with hindsight, not foresight. In Australia, we can still say that we have the lowest death rate, strongest economy and highest vaccination rate in the world. Morrison has been asked about George Christensen’s comments yesterday encouraging parents not to vaccinate their children. On George Christensen, I don’t think you could have been any clearer yesterday, don’t listen to him. He is not a doctor, he can’t tell you what to do with vaccines. I listen to Prof Paul Kelly. Their advice is that children should be vaccinated. And so, we strongly encourage people not to follow [Christensen’s] advice. Australia is a free country, you can’t go around locking people up for what they say as Australians. I’m sure the media would be suggesting we are doing that. He is allowed to speak his mind but Australians should be listening to it. Morrison! No one is saying that he should be locked up! You are acting like the only two options are “be a federal MP of Australia and receive mild at best criticism from the government” and “prison”. There has to be a middle ground, surely. Scott Morrison has been asked if the government is considering following the US’s lead and reducing the isolation period for fully vaccinated Covid cases from seven to five days. All of these things are always under active consideration and that has been for some time. The most recent information that we have is that post-five days you still got 30% that are remaining infectious. And so that is a calibrated decision you got to make. What I’m pleased about the measures that we have – we have announced and are already taking are having impact. I mean, the difference between standing before you today and a week ago has been quite significant. I mean, a lot of that is yet to be seen, I understand, on the shelves, but where the challenges were, I mentioned particularly the poultry sector and others, the trucking industry and others, some of those peak pressures we’re seeing, we’re seeing some relief, it’s not where we want it to be, but the trajectory is right. We’re going to take medical advice on that and I know the chief medical officer has many sleepless nights over this one because we ask him about it regularly, and he is constantly talking to his colleagues overseas, places like Israel, UK and many other places, to understand what the experience there is and so if he’s in a position to tell me that we can make a change like that, then, of course, that would be something that we would proceed with, but at the moment, that is not the advice and until we have such advice. The treasurer now making the point that the US and UK’s fatality rate is significantly higher than ours. Frydenberg: Australia’s performance through this pandemic, as the prime minister has said, has not been perfect, but nobody’s response has been perfect. But we are in a very, very strong position relative to the rest of the world given that we have faced a once-in-a-century pandemic and the biggest economic shock since the Great Depression. The fatality rate in the United States per head of population has been 24 times that of Australia. The fatality rate in the United Kingdom from Covid has been 21 times that of Australia, and Australia’s outpour in both of GDP and employment outcomes has been better than any other advanced economy across the rest of the world. Frydenberg: Today we’re opening up an opportunity for 175,000 more students and working holiday-makers to come to Australia. We’re putting out the welcome mat to 175,000 students and working holiday-makers to come to Australia and to take up this opportunity by ensuring that they get rebated that visa application charge. The prime minister is working through the national cabinet on a schools plan to ensure that our schools open at the start of term 1 and stay open and that’s going to be critical for the workforce as well. Frydenberg: Now, the prime minister referenced the challenges that we face with respect to supply chains. In recent days, I was with Coles workers at a distribution centre in Laverton – 600 workers, many who have been absent. But they were working hard to ensure that the food made its way to the supermarkets and then to people’s kitchens. And they said the changes that the prime minister led through national cabinet have made a real difference to their ability for their operations to keep going. Yesterday the assistant treasurer and I were at Cameron Trucking business, a family owned business that is nearly 50-year strong which has nearly 1,000 workers. Again, they said those changes we made through the isolation requirements through national cabinet had made a real difference on the ground to allow that trucking business to keep going. So it’s changes around isolation that have made a real difference. It’s changes to the visa requirements and the working requirements of people on visas that is going to make a real difference. OK, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, is up and we are being treated to some more preamble. It was 678 days ago that the prime minister and I stood in this courtyard and announced a $17.6bn stimulus package for Australian households and businesses at the start of the pandemic. Little did we know then what we know now. Two years of hardship. Australians subject to curfews and lockdowns. And family and friends separated for extended periods of time. But what we do know is that over the last two years, Australians have pulled together. And that the Morrison government has pulled out all stops to help Australians get through this pandemic. There are enormous challenges right now. Our hospital system is under great pressure and our thoughts are with those selfless and professional healthcare workers who do amazing job on the front-line and those Australians who are in hospital right now with Covid. And, dare I say it, those who are in ICU or on ventilators as well. OK, the big announcement from the press conference is a tweak to the visa application system that removes a number of application fees, along with $3m in funding for an ad campaign to encourage backpackers to come work in Australia. Morrison: When it comes to working holiday-makers, we haven’t changed any of the rules around the regional requirements, that’s very important because we still need people working in those regional areas. We don’t want them coming off the farm and coming in to the city. We need them out there and we need them in the city as well. That’s why today we’re making a further announcement on visas to support the workforce challenge. What we’ll be doing is we will be rebating the visa application fees from all those who arrive today and going forward for students over the next eight weeks and that is a fee of some $630. And there are around 150,000 students who have visas who we are encouraging to come back to be there for the start of their university or college year and that is a thank you to them for coming back and continuing to choose Australia. But we also want them to come here and be able to be filling some of these critical workforce shortages, particularly those who are working and being trained in healthcare, aged care, those types of sectors, that will be incredibly helpful. That will be for the next eight weeks. So visa application fees rebated when you arrive in Australia and that will be done through the Department of Home Affairs and that will be eight weeks from today. The second one is for backpackers and we’ll be rebating their visa application fee and there are some 23,500 backpackers who have visas to come to Australia right now. My message to them is – come on down. Come on down now because you wanted to come to Australia, you got your visa, we want you to come to Australia and enjoy a holiday here in Australia, move all the way around the country, and the same time join our workforce and help us in our agricultural sector, in our hospitality sector, and so many of the other parts of the economy that rely on that labour – that workforce right now. And we’ll be supporting that with a $3m that will be giving to Tourism Australia to support a marketing program to target backpackers and students to get them out. OK, we have something of substance finally. Morrison is keen for states to remove any requirements for workers to test negative on a RAT each day before working on site. One of the big ones is the occupational health and safety. Now the clear medical advice to me from the chief medical officer that except in quite specific circumstances, like aged care or health workforces and things of that nature, there is no requirement for workers to be tested on a daily basis with rapid antigen tests. That is not the medical advice. Those resources should be targeted towards the priority sectors like health and aged care and other critical sectors that are identified, things like meat processing, for example, where there is much higher rate of infection that occurs in those workplaces, and that is where those resources should be directed. It is not the medical advice for rapid antigen testing to be a requirement for a safe workplace broadly across the Australian economy. And seeking to impose that would not only frustrate the supplies, but it would impose further burdens on our employers at a time when we’re seeking to ensure that our economy can push through. We have relaxed the 20-hour rule and I should say all of that can be clarified by states and territories now. They can change that right now by regulation and make it very clear that daily testing of workers in workplaces is not a requirement of meeting the OH&amp;S regulations. That would provide immediate relief, I think, in those workplaces in enabling getting more people back at work. But that’s a matter for the states and territories. We have been trying to land that now for a couple of weeks, and are not making the progress I would like to see happen. So those states who want to get their workers back, that is one thing they can do today to ensure they can alleviate those workforce shortages. OK, we are still going through what I would like to describe as “a rough draft of an election stump speech”. Still unclear why we are here at this press conference. Morrison: Unemployment – where it is today at 4.6% – obviously means we got a tight labour market but we are working and yesterday there was an important meeting between Anne Ruston and employers about how we can even better connect Jobactive with the urgent needs of the workforce in those particular critical sectors and tying the Jobactive providers even more into the priorities that are coming back through the response from those industries. We have been working to reduce the regulatory requirements in the trucking sector and others, you know, the changes we made to the testing arrangements for truck drivers. There are other changes that need to be made and they’re at state level and I’m continuing to pursue those with the states. There are changes we need to make around the age of forklift drivers to get quite specific. There are changes we need to make that – Kiwis who are living in Australia, resident in Australia, who have truck licences can drive trucks. I highlight these to you to demonstrate the level of detail that the government is working through to ensure that we can try and alleviate all of the challenges that we’re facing right across the workforce. OK, there is a lot of “which I will get back to in a moment” and not a lot of ... actually saying anything. Morrison: Workforce has been a particular challenge and the treasurer will speak more to this, but workforce was a challenge before the pandemic and the government was already taking actions in that area as we had been over some years, particularly in the area of skills and training which I’ll reflect on in just a moment. But particularly to deal with the challenges of disruption in the workplace, same challenge we have seen with the health workforce, aged workforce in countries all around the world, they have these problems in Ottawa like they had them in New South Wales. They have these problems over in the UK just like we have them here or in France or in Spain or in Germany or in any of these places. They have the same problems that we’re dealing with here with disruption to workforces. Close contact rules were changed for essential workforces and that definition of “essential workforce” was expanded. Morrison is now telling us everything the federal government has done for us. Again, ominous. With Omicron, it isn’t a policy of just letting it go. That is a complete falsehood. In Australia, we have isolation and we have testing where necessary. We have masks and distancing rules, we have density arrangements tailored to the circumstances in each state and territory. We have strong border controls which we stand up for and we protect and we have vaccination programs which particularly for five to 11 years’ olds is one of the fastest five to 11 years’ olds vaccination take-up rates we have seen anywhere in the world. Over the course of this summer, this frustrating summer for Australians, we have got $9.8bn that we announced in MYEFO to support the health effort which brings our total investment in the health response in the pandemic to $34.8bn. $308.6m on primary health, telehealth, mental health supports. $180m alone just in supporting our GPs to deal and support patients who have Covid. Our 50/50 national partnership agreement with the states and territories which is funding hospitals, which is funding testing, remember, there are free tests available to everyone who needs one because they have symptomatic and close contact. There are free tests available to those who are working in healthcare and in aged care and other important settings such as that. There are free tests available to over 6.5m concession card holders which starts on Monday and these tests are being also provided to vulnerable communities, in Indigenous communities, where needed. I have a bad feeling that all this preamble about how tough everyone else is doing is building to something. Morrison: Yes, other countries have problems with the impacts on aged care systems and healthcare systems, but in Australia, there are 40,000 more lives that have been saved. There are 40,000 and more people alive today than had we had the same experience of the average of other developed nations around the world. And that is a great credit to Australians and it’s a great credit to the way that we have been able to push through from the start. It hasn’t been without challenge, it hasn’t been without loss, it hasn’t been without frustration and difficulty and the natural anger that I know flows from that. But that’s where we are – doing better than almost every other country in the world when it comes to even the large number of more than 350 deaths in the course of the past week. Our death rate that relates to Omicron is one of the lowest in the world. Morrison: We understand the frustration and we share them and live them. We understand the great concerns particularly in the early stage of Omicron several weeks ago when we knew it was contagious, but we didn’t quite know then just how severe it could be. Good news – yes, it is much more contagious, we do know that, but the good news is that it’s far less severe, some 75% less severe, which has given us more options once we could have greater certainty about its severity impact. Prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking now and has started the press conference by reminding us that Australia isn’t the only country struggling with Omicron at the moment. It’s true all around the world, go to Canada, go to the United States, go to Europe, go to the UK – you’re seeing the same things. It’s been incredibly frustrating. You have seen queues, you have seen rising cases, you have seen pressures on hospital systems, you have seen disruption of supply chains, you have seen shortages of tests, you have seen all of these in all of these countries all around the world. That is what Omicron has brought. But that is of no comfort to Australians who had a frustrating and difficult and highly concerning summer and that is something that we must continue to work together to push through. This has been one of the biggest challenges through this pandemic, certainly not the first. We have been through many challenges over the course of this pandemic and I have stood here on countless occasions as we have outlined measure after measure after measure. Output from BHP’s coalmines in Queensland and NSW has been hit by Covid-19, the mining company says. There’s also uncertainty over the impact of Covid on its copper mines, BHP said in a quarterly update out this morning. It comes after BHP’s biggest rival, Rio Tinto, also warned of risks from Covid yesterday. BHP said output from Queensland operations that mine coking coal, which is used to make steel, fell 8% in the three months to the end of the year due to torrential rain and “Covid-19 related labour constraints”. Over the same period output from its energy coal division, which mines thermal coal used to run power stations and includes the Mount Arthur operation in NSW, rose 5% “despite Covid-19 related impacts”. BHP has been trying to flog off its energy coalmines. It has already successfully unloaded its third of the Cerrejon mine in Colombia but has so far yet to find a buyer for the ageing Mount Arthur operation, which the company has on its books at a negative value. More than 19,000 cannabis plants – worth almost $67m – have been seized from a rural property in western NSW, in what police believe is Australia’s biggest weed bust, reports AAP. Drug and firearms squad detectives, beat officers and police dogs descended on a property at the Newell Highway in Dandry, near Coonabarabran, on Tuesday morning. What they found was one of the biggest illegal cannabis farms they had ever seen. Drug and firearms squad commander John Watson said: In terms of scale, this is one of the largest and most commercial cannabis enterprises we’ve seen – with significant infrastructure, including two large dams, commercial generators, earth moving equipment, across multiple sites, all of which require attention from workers seven days a week. About 90,000 square metres of land has been illegally cleared at this property to make way for more than 20 greenhouses containing cannabis plants. The operation is continuing, but police have so far seized 19,082 cannabis plants, with an estimated potential street value of nearly $66.8m. Detective Superintendent Watson says police believe the seizure to be a national record. Six people, five men and one woman, were arrested and charged with cultivating a large commercial quantity of cannabis and participating in a criminal group. All six, aged between 23 and 42, were refused bail to appear at Coonamble local court on Wednesday. Investigators are working with the Department of Home Affairs regarding the visa status of the group. Looks like we will be hearing from the prime minister at 9.45am this morning as well. Stay tuned for that, I’ll bring you all the updates here on the blog. Victoria’s numbers have now also come through. Sadly the state has recorded 18 deaths in the latest reporting period, along with 20,769 new cases. British foreign secretary Liz Truss – one of the leading contenders to replace Boris Johnson as prime minister amid a row over Downing Street parties during the pandemic – is heading to Australia. Truss and the British defence secretary, Ben Wallace, are flying to Australia for a meeting with the Australian foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, to be held on Friday. Truss and Wallace are also due to meet the prime minister, Scott Morrison, at Kirribilli House in Sydney on Thursday, the Australian newspaper reports. The meeting comes four months after the announcement of the Aukus pact between Australia, the UK and the US, so the plans for Australia to acquire eight nuclear-propelled submarines are expected to be a key item on the agenda. (The submarine plans are currently subject to an 18-month study period.) Payne has issued the following statement confirming the talks, known as the Australia-United Kingdom Ministerial Consultations (Aukmin): This meeting is the first 2+2 Ministerial Meeting hosted in Australia since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic. Aukmin is a demonstration of the strong partnership between Australia and the United Kingdom, underpinned by a shared commitment to deliver on practical actions that reinforce the sovereignty, resilience and prosperity of the Indo-Pacific. The international environment is becoming more complex and challenging, and Aukmin 2022 will consider ways in which we can work together even more closely. Oh, and also apparently Melbourne wants to host the 2026 Commonwealth games. This has mostly been backed up by anonymous sources so far but a government spokesperson released a short statement this morning alluding to the possibility. Victoria is Australia’s premier events state and we’re always working hard to attract new major events. Just on NSW, the state now has 2,863 people hospitalised with Covid-19, and 217 in ICU. The NSW numbers are out and sadly the state has recorded 32 Covid-19 related deaths, a slight decrease from yesterday’s grim record of 36. The state has once again recorded more than 30,000 new cases with 32,297 infections reported. Just a reminder, we should be getting the Victoria and NSW Covid-19 numbers in about 10 minutes. Yesterday was Australia’s deadliest ever day in the pandemic, with NSW recording 36 deaths and Victoria 22. Stand by. The vice-president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Chris Moy, has told ABC News Breakfast that MPs with anti-vax views such as George Christensen “really do need to shut up”. It is frustrating that this sort of nutty stuff which is essentially converted into some sort of cause to raise popularity really has a foothold, and it’s driven by a particular type of advocate, which unfortunately we are seeing some ... of them within the government. They really do need to shut up because they are not helping what we need to do and it is causing increasing anxiety. What they are saying is rubbish. The evidence in terms of childhood vaccination, so much good data from the US. Millions and millions of kids have been vaccinated and we’ve shown how effective it is. Paul Kelly is making the rounds this morning and he is now chatting with ABC News Breakfast about Victoria’s move to declare a statewide “code brown” across its major hospitals. There is no secret there that there is pressure on our hospital system. It is what we planned for, our surge capacity and so forth, that we did towards the end of last year, and much earlier than that. The private hospital guarantee has been in place exactly for this sort of event since 2020. So that provides another 57,000 nurses, many bed places to support our aged care facilities as well as public hospitals, so that’s something that the commonwealth has put in place. In terms of the code brown in Victoria. Code brown – it sounds scary, but actually something that is in place for all hospitals. All hospitals around the world have something similar, but here in Australia a code brown just means there is an external threat that may lead to a surge in hospital admissions, and we know what that external threat is. It’s something that we have been talking about for a long time. By the way, it looks like we are going to be hearing from the NSW premier at 10am today, Sydney time. Tonga is facing an “unprecedented disaster” from a massive volcanic eruption that covered the nation in ash and 15-metre tsunami waves that destroyed almost all the homes on two small islands, the government has said. Hampered by a communications breakdown caused by the severing of a major undersea cable, authorities had not released an official update since the blast on Saturday, when the Pacific island nation was shaken by what may have been the largest volcanic event in three decades. Since then, information on the scale of the devastation had mostly come from reconnaissance aircraft. On Tuesday, the office of Tonga’s prime minister released a statement saying it had confirmed the deaths of three people, although the toll could rise. The government has still not managed to make contact with several inhabited islands. You can read the full report below: An FYI for any ACT readers of the blog this morning. As Victoria braces for Covid hospital admissions to skyrocket, a “code brown” emergency has been declared in all metropolitan hospitals and six in the regions, reports AAP. The unprecedented move will take effect from midday on Wednesday. The order means each hospital will be able to postpone or defer less urgent care, while some staff may be reassigned or recalled from leave. Staff will only have leave cancelled if “absolutely necessary”. The federal government has also activated its private hospitals agreement, allowing staff to be redirected to the public system. The acting health minister, James Merlino, announced on Tuesday that the measure would last for four to six weeks, with hospitalisations from the Omicron wave expected to peak in February. He said the state’s hospital system was under “extreme pressure” from staff shortages, with more than 4,000 healthcare workers isolating after either testing positive for Covid-19 or as close contacts. The code brown applies to all metropolitan Melbourne public hospitals, as well as major hospitals in Geelong, Ballarat, Bendigo, Shepparton, Albury Wodonga and Traralgon. A code brown of this scale has never previously been declared across the Victorian health system. They are usually reserved for short-term emergencies, such as the Black Saturday bushfires and deadly 2016 thunderstorm asthma event. Australasian College for Emergency Medicine spokeswoman Dr Mya Cubitt said she understood that Victorians may fear they will not be able to access emergency medical care. But she stressed that people experiencing medical emergencies will be prioritised, and will receive acute care, but that care may be in a different location to what was expected. The situation in hospitals is increasingly dire but it is not that common to see people at the health frontline speaking out because of gag orders on doctors, nurses and so on. Unions, though, offer some cover for people speaking out, as we will see at a protest planned later today at one of the biggest hospitals in Sydney – and a key Covid treatment centre that is struggling to cope with the wave of patients. Today’s action involves ICU nurses who are desperate for more staff “to immediately address the dangerous staffing levels faced on every shift”. Nurse to patient ratios are blowing out to as many as 1 to 8, one nurse said on ABC Radio this morning, (compared with less than 1 to 3 in more normal conditions). The union said this morning in a statement: Well before the current Omicron outbreak began, the NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association (NSWNMA) Westmead Hospital Branch repeatedly raised their concerns with management citing the serious staffing issues that have plagued the hospital for years without adequate resolution. “Nurses and midwives are tired, angry and frustrated and feel that the NSW government isn’t supporting them at all,” said the NSWNMA acting general secretary, Shaye Candish. Our members are working in unsustainable conditions due to the excessive overtime, unreasonable workloads and are regularly working understaffed. The 10am protest apparently involves nurses on their own time, and they invite the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, to come visit their hospital for one of his daily media conferences. Similar invitations have been lately been made by others, including Greens MP Cate Faehrmann: Kelly has been asked what his message to Nationals MP George Christensen is after the controversial MP took to social media yesterday, discouraging parents from vaccinating their children. Kelly: I don’t have a message for MPs. I have a message for the people of Australia and the parents of Australia. You should have the highest [confidence] in our system to provide safe, effective and high-quality vaccines for your children. That is what you’ve come to expect for all of the vaccine programs over many, many years, and the Covid vaccines are in that same league. They’ve gone through all of the checks and balances that have been used in literally millions and millions of children of that same age group in the US and in Europe and many other parts of the world, with no ill effects. We know that they’re very effective. We know they are high quality. And please make sure you go ahead and get that vaccine booking as soon as you can. Given many aged care residents are still waiting to receive their booster shot as case numbers peak across a number of Australian states, chief medical officer Prof Paul Kelly has been asked on the radio if Australia has “dropped the ball” with this third wave of vaccinations. We have rolled out to a large proportion of the aged care facilities, and the vaccine program that’s led by General Frewin is committed and the government is committed to making sure that every aged care facility in the country is visited for boosters by the end of this month. Kelly: Many of the people who are reported as having passed away yesterday had been vaccinated but very few had a booster shot. So I think the messages there about what to do are very clear. If you’re due for a booster shot, go out and get that as quickly as possible. There are plenty of doses available right around Australia so for those that are not vaccinated and I would absolutely definitely include children aged five to 11 years of age just have started to have that opportunity. Kelly says Omicron deaths are affecting the same demographics as we have seen with previous variants. It’s very similar to what we’ve seen throughout the pandemic, both here and internationally. Older people, people with chronic disease and particularly people who are older, with chronic disease and unvaccinated or have not received their booster doses, are the ones that are at the highest risk. Australia’s chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, says he expects Covid deaths to continue to rise over the “next couple of weeks”. He is speaking with ABC radio now: Well, firstly, my condolences to all of the families that lost loved ones yesterday and throughout this pandemic. It is reality though, we’ve known from the beginning of the pandemic, from experience here in Australia and internationally that there is a death toll from the Covid-19; all of the variants. And one of the things we know about Omicron it is less deadly, but, when you have a lot of cases, you will get that small number that are affected in that way. We do expect that the deaths, as well as intensive care and hospitalisations, will continue to rise over the next couple of weeks even as we have peaked or are about to peak in terms of caseload particularly in the eastern states of Australia. But we know from international experience, particularly with Omicron, that it rises quickly, plateaus and then falls quickly and I fully expected that whole big experience here in Australia as well. Christine Walker has seen the politicians on her television continually repeating the same message. “They’re … saying, ‘Go and get vaccinated. Get your children vaccinated’,” says Walker. “They’re telling us all to go and do it … What are they doing to make it easier for the most vulnerable?” Walker, 56, is at a loss. Her 21-year-old son, who Guardian Australia has chosen not to name for privacy reasons, has a rare genetic mutation that causes epilepsy, an intellectual disability, autism and a global developmental delay. You can read the full report below: Good morning everyone, its hump day and the news just keeps coming. But never fear, it’s Matilda Boseley here on the blog with you, and we will be breaking down all the events of the day together. First up, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, has been forced to publicly reprimand Nationals MP George Christensen after he took to social media and urged parents not to vaccinate their children. The government has previously been reticent to criticise the Dawson MP, who is retiring at the next election, fearing that he could leave early, triggering a contentious byelection. But, ever since the extremely public deportation of Novak Djokovic due to the tennis star’s unvaccinated status, the Coalition has been under renewed pressure to crack down on anti-vaccination voices within their own ranks. Christensen was promoting his new podcast episode across social media when he made the comments about childhood vaccination, triggering the prime minister to release the following statement. I strongly disagree with the message sent out by Mr Christensen regarding children’s vaccinations. It is contrary to the official professional medical advice provided to the government, and I urge parents to disregard his dangerous messages in relation to vaccines. Moving to the Pacific and we are slowly learning more about the devastating effects of an undersea volcano eruption on the island nation of Tonga, where the local government confirmed three deaths. In his first international statement since the “unprecedented disaster”, prime minister Siaosi Sovaleni’s office confirmed that every home on Mango Island had been destroyed, with only two left standing on nearby Fonoifua Island. Around 100 people live across both islands. There has also been “extensive damage” done on Nomuka where about 200 people live. A 65-year-old woman from Mango Island and a 49-year-old man from Nomuka island have now been confirmed dead, along with British national Anglea Glover. With that, why don’t we jump into rest of the day’s news.The interval for a booster shot will be reduced to three months in Victoria, New South Wales, South Australia and the ACT amid unprecedented strain on hospitals as Omicron cases surge. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, announced on Wednesday morning the move would take effect on Wednesday while NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said the change would be implemented from Friday in that state. The interval reduction in South Australia and the ACT came into effect immediately. Perrottet said he had “seen very clearly” through ICU numbers that vaccination was key to reducing symptoms and fatalities. “I encourage everybody across our state today, who’s eligible now … to make that booking at one of our centres across the state,” he said. “It is very key to ensuring you stay safe during this pandemic.” The booster shots will be available from New South Wales’s 40 vaccine centres in a bid to speed up the rollout and fill vacant appointment slots. The change was slated for the end of the month by the commonwealth government but brought forward given the vaccine supplies available. Earlier this week, the NSW Health deputy secretary, Susan Pearce, said tens of thousands of vaccine booster appointments were going unfilled at state clinics each week. Speaking on Wednesday, she said she was relieved more people would be able to get those appointments. “Last year during the Delta outbreak, we watched them like hawks every day and we got used to seeing a very high number of vaccines being given in this state every day,” she said. “I’d really love to see that happen again now as we work our way through this latest challenge.” Andrews said the move would expand eligibility for the booster to two million more Victorians. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It’s safe. It’s effective … and it will help us get more people third-dose boosted quicker than would otherwise be the case.” Andrews said the number of industries with third dose vaccine mandates in place was likely to grow as eligibility expanded, while the definition of “fully vaccinated” would be changed to three vaccination doses in the weeks to come. NSW recorded 32 deaths and 32,297 Covid cases on Wednesday while Victoria had 18 Covid deaths and 20,769 cases. There are 2,863 positive cases in hospital, including 217 people in intensive care and 66 on ventilators in NSW. The rise in cases has led to staffing shortages across the healthcare sector, with dozens of intensive care nurses protesting at Westmead hospital on Wednesday morning. The hospital is one of the state’s biggest, and has been one of the priority destinations for Covid patients throughout the pandemic. “Nurses and midwives gathered today and they were really angry, with a real shared frustration because they are seeing something completely different than what the government is saying,” said NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association (NSWNWA) acting general secretary, Shaye Candish, said. “Our members are working in unsustainable conditions due to the excessive overtime, unreasonable workloads and are regularly working understaffed. “It’s causing people to cry at work. People are just at their wit’s end.” That sentiment is echoed by a senior doctor at another Sydney hospital who told Guardian Australia that one nurse broke down in tears during a video conference saying they were being told to take on more and more patients with “just no end in sight”. “Staff are literally falling apart,” this doctor said. “They are becoming walking zombies.” The hospital has given up trying to isolate Covid patients in specialised wards because they have insufficient staff and facilities. “Every day it gets worse,” the doctor said, with staff being asked to provide care beyond their skill sets. Non-ICU trained nurses, for instance, are working ICU wards, with workers relying on qualified staff to supervise those who aren’t. “Patients are not being fed, patients are not being showered, and people who are falling are not being attended to,” the doctor said. “It’s very dire.” The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, said he had been talking with NSWNWA representatives and would work to bring more staff onboard to ease the pressure. “I have been listening to their concerns and we are certainly considering some of the operational challenges they have inside, and certainly they have been compounded by the pandemic,” he said on Wednesday. “We’re doing everything we can.”With mounting speculation that Boris Johnson’s days in Downing Street could be numbered, the minds of Conservative MPs – and those inside No 10 – will be turning to how it might all end. Here are the various ways in which Johnson could be out of a job. Vote of no confidence Under party rules, a vote of no confidence is triggered if 15% of Conservative MPs write to Sir Graham Brady, the chair of the 1922 Committee of Tory backbenchers, to formally seek one. The crucial number is now 54, after the removal of the Tory whip from Anne Marie Morris for voting against the government, which reduced the total number of the party’s MPs to 360. If a vote is triggered, a secret ballot of MPs is organised by the 1922 Committee. Should the prime minister gain the support of at least half the parliamentary party, which for Johnson would be 180 MPs, then he would remain in office, and no new no confidence vote can be triggered for at least 12 months. A visit from the men in grey suits This was the traditional way in which Tory leaders were quietly informed it was time to go, and the way a successor was chosen – via a closed-doors gathering of party grandees. While this is no longer the case, a Conservative prime minister can still be removed through informal pressure. Theresa May survived a no-confidence vote in December 2018, and was officially safe from challenge for 12 months. But by the next spring, with rebels attempting to change the rules to allow a new challenge, and after repeated humiliations over Brexit votes, May announced on 24 May 2019 that she would step down two weeks later. This decision was triggered by a meeting with Brady, who warned May she would face a new no-confidence vote if she did not depart soon. Resignation While May was famously dutiful, to use the slightly patronising description of some Tory opponents, and could be something of a parliamentary scrapper when needed, there is speculation that Johnson might not have the stomach for battling a no-confidence vote. If it became obvious that he had lost the support of many Tory MPs – especially if this message is conveyed plainly by Brady – then the PM might decide to simply step down, and return to an easier life in which he is free to earn considerable sums on extracurricular work, whether as a backbencher or outside parliament altogether. A resignation triggers a leadership contest. While this took place, Johnson would be expected to stay in his post, although he could theoretically step down in place of an interim leader. He sticks it out This is, of course, the other option, and Johnson is nothing if not a politician who regularly defies the normal political rules. It remains unclear how Johnson could turn things around. He will face a difficult prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, and will attempt to change the national conversation by announcing the end of Plan B Covid measures, with a plea for any final judgment to await the report into various alleged government parties amid lockdown being led by senior official Sue Gray. If that holds, Johnson could busy himself with efforts over Covid and the cost of living and turn to the final hope of any beleaguered politician – a vague hope that something will come up to salvage things. Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereTwo years ago, hardly anyone outside the world of competitive cheerleading would have been familiar with Navarro College, based in the small Texan town of Corsicana, its junior college cheer squad, or its head coach, Monica Aldama. But the global success of Cheer, Netflix’s Emmy-winning docuseries following Aldama and her team’s journey to the national championships in Daytona, changed all of that. Audiences were immediately captivated by the technical skill, athleticism and personal dramas of competitive cheerleading. Cast members became stars, garnering huge social media followings and appearing on the likes of The Ellen DeGeneres Show and Oprah’s live tour. Aldama’s signature blond highlights and no-nonsense “mat talk” were satirised on SNL. Reese Witherspoon even said she inspired her to the point of tears. “None of us expected it to be as big as it was,” says Aldama, following the release of season two, which shot straight to the top of Netflix charts last week. “We thought maybe the cheer community would watch it. We went from zero to 100 really fast.” But the attention hasn’t all been positive. Aldama has been portrayed as a complicated figure: someone to whom the kids can turn for support – which many of them haven’t received elsewhere due to the circumstances of their upbringing – but also someone who rules the squad with an iron fist, encouraging cheerleaders to push through pain, at times to the point of collapse. Concerns were raised about the number of cheerleading-related injuries, including concussions and bruised ribs. Aldama was too tough, critics said, too heartless. “I don’t like to disappoint, I’m a pleaser. So to see people’s perception of me was shocking,” she says. “I’ve worked so hard to do everything right, and I have a huge heart for these kids.” She stresses that Cheer is an edited show, focusing overwhelmingly on every fall and tumble. “We are very well trained. We do a lot of progressions to build up to anything difficult. As with any sport, you obviously have risks and injuries but, for the most part, it’s normal wear and tear.” Though her skin has got thicker, she says, the daily comments “definitely hurt”. “I don’t know if it’s because I’m a female, but I definitely don’t think anyone would criticise a football coach for being tough and having high expectations.” The other safety concern regards actions off the mat. Cheer made headlines last year after one of its biggest stars and fan favourite Jerry Harris was arrested and charged with production of child pornography. Harris denies seven charges regarding five minor boys, including four counts of sexual exploitation of children, one count of receiving and attempting to receive child pornography, one count of travelling with the attempt to engage in sexual conduct with a minor and one count of enticement. Part of this season is devoted to Harris’s alleged victims’ stories and the broader issue of child safety in cheerleading. When the news broke, we are told, Aldama was taking part in Dancing With the Stars, and found out just before her first onscreen dance. “It was shocking and devastating for all of us,” she says now. “Anybody with a heart can imagine the pain we would be going through, for the victims and for someone we loved. It still affects us daily.” That openness, regarding her conflicted feelings towards Harris, led to accusations on social media that she was refusing to disown a child predator, with the appearance of mocked-up images of her and others behind bars. Others said she was absent when her team needed her most. “When you’re in a really low place already, it’s difficult when you keep getting hit. People will see one small piece of an interview I did a long time ago, at the lowest point of my career, and judge me. They assume I didn’t speak up on anything else and that’s just not true. I have to keep in my head that people don’t know me. I know where my heart is.” She can still barely talk about it without coming to tears. The episode, including claims, by the mother of two of the alleged victims, that the cheerleading industry turned a blind eye to wrongdoing, makes for difficult viewing. But for Aldama, shining a light on what happened is key to progress. “I know that episode was hard to watch, but it was important for people to feel like they can come forward. The more education we can have, the better the whole system will be.” This includes classes, “not only for the coaches, but also for the children on what’s appropriate”. In conversation, Aldama has a warmth that belies the caricatures. Nowhere is this more evident than in her relationship with La’Darius Marshall, one of the lead cast members, who, in a plot twist this season, leaves the squad, claiming he didn’t receive the support he needed. Aldama, who has said previously that she went “above and beyond” for him, speaks of the pain the rupture brought her. The pair’s tearful reconciliation in the final episode is one of the most emotional moments of the series. “I wear so many different hats, from adviser to counsellor to mother,” she says. “I’m there for them to come and cry to if they have relationship problems, or their parents are going through a divorce. It’s a huge responsibility, because sometimes you’re the only person that they have.” So what of Aldama’s “cheerleading dynasty” – the “machine” that her rivals so often refer to? She has led her squad to 14 NCA All-Star National Championships, and five grand national titles. Much of it, she says, stems from her background in business. After cheering at Tyler Junior College, Aldama transferred to the University of Texas, where she received a finance degree and, later, an MBA (master of business administration). She joined Navarro after a friend – then assistant baseball coach at the college – told her to apply. “I had no intention of ever being a cheerleading coach. I was just out of college and not quite sure what I wanted to do, so I took the job temporarily. Here I am, 27 years later.” The so-called Navarro machine, she explains, was something she built from the ground up. “I looked at it like a business plan. What’s my end goal? To win a national championship. How do I get there? I get the highest score. How do I do that? I analyse the score sheet.” After Cheer came out, she says she had many people asking her for advice in all areas of life, from parenting to relationships to work. Her new book, Full Out, which was published this month, addresses all of this. “When you’re coaching, you have so many stories and challenges every single year. The book talks about some of the core principles that I try to instil in my own athletes to set them up for success.” To be a champion in life, she says, one needs to be resilient, able to communicate, lead by example and hold yourself accountable for your own actions. “You keep putting one foot in front of the other no matter what you’re going through.” Thanks to her, Corsicana, which is about 50 miles south of Dallas and boasts a population of about 25,000 people, is now a point of reference worldwide. Navarro Cheer have become hometown heroes. “I think we add a fun element to the community. We definitely bring some diversity and the community welcomes that with open arms.” Although she is often asked if she will move on to coaching other teams, Aldama is adamant that her coaching career begins and ends at Navarro, “whenever that time comes”. She is not ready to say goodbye to the kids just yet, but when she does she plans to explore opportunities in the world of business and finance. Her life, she says, has “definitely changed” since she agreed to let Netflix into it in 2017 – but she remains the same person, trying to do and be her best. “I’m still living in a small town, I do my day-to-day job. It feels very normal to me.” • Cheer season two is on Netflix now. Full Out is available now.A high-profile advocate of the woman who accused Christian Porter of raping her 30 years ago has been awarded more than $400,000 in costs after the federal court forced the former attorney general’s barrister to stand down during an ABC defamation case. Jo Dyer, a former chief executive of the Sydney writers’ festival, became one of the most prominent advocates of Porter’s deceased accuser after the former attorney general outed himself as the unnamed minister in an ABC story revealing a dossier detailing the rape claim had been circulated to politicians. The dossier contained allegations by the woman that Porter had raped her in January 1988 when she was 16 and he was 17. Porter has strenuously and repeatedly denied the allegations. When Porter sued the ABC for defamation over the story, Dyer began her own legal action, seeking to block barrister Sue Chrysanthou SC from acting for him. Dyer argued successfully that Chrysanthou had a potential conflict arising out of a meeting about a separate matter between the two women in November 2020. A federal court judge ruled in May 2021 the lawyer had received confidential information which was relevant to the case and could present a “danger of misuse”. Four days later Porter dropped his case against the ABC, despite failing to secure an apology or retraction from the public broadcaster. Instead, the ABC agreed to pay mediation costs and publish an editor’s note stating it “regretted” that some readers had “misinterpreted” the article “as an accusation of guilt against” Porter. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The separate case between Dyer and Chrysanthou has continued to make its way through the courts. Following the decision that Chrysanthou should stand aside, lawyers for her and Porter sought to have the costs claim reduced, as well as access to timesheets and invoices to challenge the claim. But in a brief hearing on Wednesday, national judicial registrar Tim Luxton found Dyer was entitled to costs of $430,200 as part of a lump-sum payment. The costs order applies to both Chrysanthou and Porter. The ruling is complicated by the fact that lawyers for Porter last year announced the former attorney general would appeal the decision to bar Chrysanthou – despite his having ended the defamation case against the ABC. In a case management hearing in October, justice John Middleton asked Porter’s barrister, Callan O’Neill, if the appeal was related to costs, to which the lawyer replied: “On one view, costs, but also a matter of principle.” In November, a judge dismissed an attempt by Porter to access notes he claimed would assist the appeal, and made another costs order related to the exercise. The appeal is likely to be heard in February. Dyer has since launched a political career of her own. In December, she announced her intention to run for the marginal South Australian seat of Boothby as an independent, held by the retiring Liberal MP Nicolle Flint on a margin of 1.4%. In a video announcing her campaign, Dyer said she had “been involved in a campaign for women’s justice” and that she had “experienced first hand the way this government has treated that broad sweeping campaign as just another political problem preferably to be ignored, and if not ignored, managed”.Like many young Zimbabweans before and since, Tinashe Nyamudoka left the economic chaos of his country to find work and a better life for himself in neighbouring South Africa. When he left in 2008, Nyamudoka had never tasted wine. Now, he ranks among southern Africa’s top sommeliers and has his own wine label with international sales. “We have a lot going against us as Zimbabweans, and you might think there is nothing good coming out of the country,” says the 36-year-old. “So, for me to be recognised as the [top] sommeliers in the world, being African and Zimbabwean, instils a sense of hope and pride.” Nyamudoka began his career as a waiter in a Cape Town restaurant, where he learned about the different varieties and tastes of the wines his customers drank. He moved on to become a hotel wine waiter, working alongside some of the city’s leading sommeliers. After studying his trade, he won the best wine steward award in a competition for luxury hotels in the Western Cape in 2013. His talents received international attention when, in 2017, he and three other Zimbabwean sommeliers were selected to take part in the World Blind Tasting Championship in France. The team was the first from Zimbabwe to take part in the contest, in which competitors have to use just their palate to identify the variety of grape, country of origin, appellation, vintage and producer of the wines. The Zimbabweans did not win – coming 23rd out of 24 teams – but their story became the subject of a documentary released last year, Blind Ambition, which Nyamudoka says brought him “a sense of pride”. The team returned to the competition the next year and this time came 14th – beating the UK and the US teams. His wine label, Kumusha – “home” or “roots” in Zimbabwe’s Shona language – has benefited from his celebrity, producing 200,000 bottles a year, up from 1,200 when it was launched four years ago. “People started embracing it,” he says. “I conceptualised it [the label] around 2014,” he adds. “Xenophobia was hitting home [in South Africa] and we were all missing kumusha.” The eight Kumusha wines – three reds, four whites and a rosé – are all produced in South Africa. They are sold in the US, the Netherlands, Kenya and Zimbabwe – “my exciting market”, he says. This month, he is starting to export his wines to the UK. “I started this brand from scratch with no aid or financial handouts. It has been pure grit, passion and dedication,” he says. “I want people to understand that you can make it without prejudice.” But Nyamudoka says he has encountered racism on his way to the top of a white-dominated industry. “There are instances where you get to a tasting, and it is all white [people], you kind of feel out of place. At work, you cannot get the position you want because you are black. It comes in different forms. It is not obvious, it is much more subtle,” he says. “When I was in my last days on the floor [in a restaurant], people would recognise your talent, but they would not give you your flowers [recognition] because you are not like them. It is like you must work twice as hard to prove yourself. It is always going to be there, I suppose.” Nyamudoka, who sits on the board of the recently established Sommeliers Association of Zimbabwe, hopes that his achievements will encourage other Zimbabweans to enter the wine industry. “There’s been an emergence of black sommeliers in the world as the industry becomes more diverse. We see the hospitality offering in Zimbabwe improving and there will be a need for sommeliers.” A fellow sommelier, Takura Makadzange, agrees. Also from Harare, Makdazange, 38, trained in Australia, working his way up from hotel porter to restaurant owner. Now, he is back in Zimbabwe. “I came back home because there are plenty of opportunities. There is plenty of space in hospitality. Recently there has been more of an explosion in the food and drink sector in Zimbabwe, especially speciality wines that are being made now. “The industry has grown, the fish industry has grown and we can have access to wildlife and game meat. Promoting the local food and beverage industry is a no-brainer. We have something that no one else does. National pride is important but also we have beautiful products,” he says. Makadzange qualified for last month’s Ubuntu Sommelier Trophy in South Africa, but had to withdraw when he caught Covid-19. “There are instances where a less-qualified white person is trusted with looking after the wine list over any person of colour, but you have to keep moving,” he says. “It is very unusual for a Zimbabwean to do well in this field. We want to continue that trajectory. “I think it’s time we have more women sommeliers from Zimbabwe so, hopefully, I will train someone to get to the standard of competing.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:‘We use hot-water bottles in the evening’ Most of primary school teacher Kate Locke’s salary goes on her rent – and in the last month, that’s gone up by 10%. Combined with the rising costs of food and energy, Locke, 39, is increasingly worried about money. “By end of month I’m in my overdraft, I haven’t been able to save anything – there’s no stability,” Locke, who lives in Reading, says. “Food costs have gone up over the last six months – but it’s in the last two months that I’ve been really worried about if I can afford things. Before this I never had much money but now I’m not getting through the month.” Locke, who is a single parent with a teenage son, says her energy bills have risen steeply. “Since Christmas, my bills have gone up by £47 to around £110,” she says. “We use hot-water bottles in the evening to avoid putting on the heating. My son was off school with Covid recently and there was a real rise in bills – we shouldn’t have to worry about getting our children warm.” She used to shop at Sainsbury’s, but lives by a Waitrose and would “nip across the road” for the odd item. “That’s not an option any more,” Locke says. She’s switched to Lidl. “Now I’m really thoughtful about what I spend my money on. I’m really feeling the pinch more than ever before.” ‘This year I don’t intend to buy anything I strictly don’t need’ Julie, a retired teacher and novelist in Arbroath, is “scrutinising” her bills as she’s noticed a steep rise in costs. Her food shop has risen by a third compared with six months ago, and her energy bills have doubled in the same period. “I fully expect that any pension increase won’t cover price rises – and it’s time to start cutting back,” she says. Julie, who gets a fortnightly shop delivered from Asda, has noticed price increases in items like cheese and coffee: “Good quality instant coffee has doubled, and is no longer on special offer.” She’s also noticed a large increase in the price of dried goods, such as crackers: they used to be 50p and are now 90p. “Items that were price-matching with Lidl have gone way up at Asda,” she says. The 63-year-old doesn’t buy meat or fish from the supermarket – “you’re not going to get better local produce than here” – and notes that local businesses have not raised their prices. While ordinarily Julie would have bought new clothes in the January sales, this year is different. “This year I don’t intend to buy anything I strictly don’t need,” she says. “I’m not going clothes shopping, and I’m buying books on Kindle rather than physical books.” She adds: “There are some things I’m saying: ‘you don’t need that, don’t even think about it.’ I’m scrutinising the twice-a-month supermarket shopping to look for savings where possible.” ‘Rising petrol prices are very noticeable in the Highlands’ To Gavin Waugh, a 46-year-old store manager in Fort William, rising petrol prices have been particularly alarming. “It’s very noticeable in the Highlands: our pricing in Fort William is more than other places,” he says. “What’s frustrating is you can go to Inverness, 66 miles away, and the prices are much cheaper, up to 8p cheaper per litre. It just feels like because we are a very touristy destination area, the locals are penalised by that.” Waugh lives close to his workplace so isn’t spending too much on commuting, but says some of his employees who live 20 miles away have been seriously affected. “Right now, it’s £1.49 [a litre] in Morrisons, which is the cheapest. I’ve been away a week and it’s just gone up a penny. A year ago [it was] at £1.30, if not £1.20 – quite a significant jump.” ‘Changing prices mean I can’t plan and save’ Gareth Evans, 54, in Cornwall, has seen the cost of his weekly shop jump in the last year. “I’m not buying anything outrageous, just cheap stuff like pizza and chips,” he says, yet his weekly spend has gone from about £15-£20 to up to £25. “I struggle to digest bread so I have to get the good stuff – that’s gone up from £0.99 to £1.35 since Christmas 2020. I presume the rise is due to import duty after Brexit.” Evans, who shops in a number of supermarkets including Asda and Co-op, says he’s also noticed that supermarkets’ ranges have shrunk. “The variety has disappeared – you walk down Asda and think they’ve just got rows and rows of green beans and no peas. When they’re short of something the price tends to go up even higher – so I’m learning to like green beans.” Evans, who receives employment support allowance, says the changing prices make it difficult to plan or save. “The smaller your income, the greater those percentage changes are,” he says, giving the example of tinned tomatoes rising from 22p to 30p. “You can go in next week and it’ll be a different price. It’s the yo-yoing of it all – it used to be that you could plan the week; I used to be able to go into the shop and know how much it would cost. I can’t plan anything, which means I can’t save up.” ‘Prices for materials are through the roof’ Ian Huckle, a 56-year-old cabinetmaker and carpenter in London, has noticed a significant increase in the price of materials. He recently found invoices for sheets of MDF from early 2019, which had been £28 a sheet at the time. They’re now £55. “The main reason is the shipping crisis – for things that shipped from China and Taiwan, the prices are through the roof,” he says. “All costs of building materials are up faster than inflation, and then there’s the slower incremental rise of things like insurance costs.” He worries that rising costs are putting off clients. “It’s getting to the point where I’m losing jobs because clients don’t want to spend that much,” he says, giving the example of some cabinets and bookcases that worked out at £2,300 when two years ago, they would have cost about £1,800. “I’ve priced my labour at the same rate as then, which means I’m effectively earning less after inflation. I’m generally busy with a good client base but I can feel I’m getting towards the limit of what people are willing to pay.”While they may not be everyone’s cup of tea, Newcastle’s owners are certainly grist to the Rumour Mill’s … er, mill with the endless churn of content they continue to generate giving us no end of material with which to fill each day’s allocation of tittle-tattle for your reading pleasure. Yesterday we brought you news that Atalanta had rejected their £25m offer for Duván Zapata and 24 hours later it is reported they’ve agreed personal terms with the Colombian striker’s team-mate Robin Gosens. The German left wing-back is believed to be open to a move to Tyneside, which is no great surprise given Newcastle are prepared to triple his wages. It remains to be seen if Atalanta will be prepared to sell him. In other left-back news, the Geordies are also sniffing around Bayer Leverkusen’s 21-year-old Dutch defender Mitchel Bakker, while the name of Fenerbahçe centre-half Attila Szalai also features on their extremely long January shopping list. Spanish newspaper Nacional claim Real Madrid have accepted a £33m (rising to £41m) bid from Newcastle for Eden Hazard, but say the former Chelsea winger has turned his nose up at the prospect of a move to the struggling Premier League club. Currently plying his trade at Adana Demirspor, Mario Balotelli might not consider such a move beneath him. “Newcastle United were considering signing Balotelli, but so far they have not made us an offer,” said the Turkish outfit’s chairman Murat Sancak. “There is an exit clause in his contract. I will not tell you the number.” Arsenal’s hopes of signing Fiorentina striker Dusan Vlahovic in the current window look to have been dealt a significant blow, with reports from Italy suggesting the 21-year-old is hell-bent on going to Juventus and has already agreed personal terms with the Serie A club. Anthony Martial’s mooted loan move to Juve also seems to have hit the skids, after transfer rune-reader Fabrizio Romano revealed they are unwilling to meet the financial terms – a sizeable fee and all the player’s wages – laid out by Manchester United. Along with United, Juve are giving Borussia Mönchengladbach’s Swiss defensive midfielder Denis Zakaria the glad eye in a situation that could make or break Arsenal’s chances of bringing Arthur Melo to north London from Turin. Leeds United have had an initial bid of £15m for American international Brenden Aaronson rejected by RB Salzburg but remain hopeful of luring the midfielder to Elland Road before the end of the month. Meanwhile at Villa Park, Steven Gerrard could use his increasingly apparent pulling power to stage a reunion with another former Liverpool team-mate, Luis Suárez, when his contract with Atlético Madrid expires in June. The Uruguayan striker is believed to be enthused by the prospect of a summer move to the West Midlands and has already rejected overtures from a trio of Brazilian clubs in Palmeiras, Corinthians and Atlético Mineiro. Brentford’s audacious bid to land free agent Christian Eriksen could be scuppered by Tottenham Hotspur or Newcastle, who are also interested in offering the Danish midfielder a return to the Premier League. Meanwhile at Turf Moor, Burnley continue to be linked with extremely tall replacements for the recently departed Chris Wood, but are predicted to be unsuccessful in any attempt to land Christian Benteke from Crystal Palace or Richard Osman from House of Games. And finally, the Athletic’s man on the Watford beat reports the club are on the verge of making their fourth signing of the current window after agreeing a £3.5m fee with Bordeaux to secure the scrawl of Samuel Kalu. Absent from his country’s Africa Cup of Nations squad, the Nigerian winger is expected to cough for the Hornets’ medical team later today.The pub chain JD Wetherspoon has criticised the government’s “hypocrisy” for holding parties at 10 Downing Street while restrictions forced pub sales to crash. Wetherspoon also said the latest plan B restrictions brought in at the start of the Omicron wave of infections in December had depressed sales over the crucial festive period in the hospitality sector for a second year running. The pub chain, run by chairman and founder Tim Martin, directed its ire at the government over “partygate”. Wetherspoon said “there would have been a number of advantages for the nation” if pubs had been open on 20 May 2020, the date on which the embattled prime minister attended a “bring your own booze” party in the garden of No 10. The trading update alleged that Covid-19 controls in pubs at the time “were superior to private parties”. It argued that this was true because no outbreaks of the virus among customers were reported in public health data, although it did not cite any specific evidence for the claim. Scientific modelling has repeatedly suggested that limiting crowded gatherings helps to reduce coronavirus infections. The update on Wednesday also claimed that staff in Wetherspoon’s pubs “would have easily dealt with the ‘high jinks’ alleged to have occurred at No 10” and that CCTV in central London pubs would have helped “subsequent inquiries” into the parties. Although the update to the City on Wednesday was not signed, Martin has a long history of using them to hit back at critics or to highlight his personal political agendas, including prominent support for the Brexit vote that ushered Boris Johnson into power. In a statement attributed directly to Martin, he said: “The uncertainty created by the introduction of plan B Covid-19 measures makes predictions for sales and profits hazardous. “The company will be loss-making in the first half of the financial year, but hopes that, with the ending of restrictions, improved customer confidence and better weather, it will have a much stronger performance in the second half.” Like-for-like sales for the 12 weeks to 16 January 2022 were 15.6% down on the same period a year ago, as the rise of Omicron infections ruined the second Christmas period in a row for British hospitality businesses. Like-for-like sales dropped by 11.7% and total sales by 13.3% year-on-year in the 25 weeks to 16 January, .Amina* used to work for an NGO in Kabul while studying at university. She was forced to flee to Pakistan with her family once the Taliban took over. She remains trapped and fearful for her and her sisters’ future. I currently live in Pakistan with my family. Before I left Afghanistan, I was working as a programme administrator for an NGO and I also studied business at university. When the Taliban took over, I had no certain future. My education was not clear; my school was closed. I was happy before the Taliban took over. This semester we were supposed to have in-person classes. We had online classes because of the coronavirus, but it was so difficult because we didn’t have a good internet connection. So I was like a child preparing for the first day of school when we got told we could come back to the class. I was so happy and ready to go and sit in my class and learn. What followed was worse than I could ever imagine. I never thought that everything could vanish like that. My sister is in grade 12 and supposed to graduate high school. But after the collapse of Kabul, we had no choice but to leave. I don’t see any future for her. When I see her, my tears come. I can’t control them. She does not have any future and as a sister I can’t do anything for her. In Kabul, I was always wandering around my room. Sometimes at midnight, I’d wake up and think of what comes next. I was always praying for God to save my siblings, to save my parents. We decided to leave a month ago when we saw the situation getting worse; people are dying in the streets and their homes, and there’s no justice. There is no certainty and no security. We didn’t know when or for what reason we would be killed. We left the country and we came here [to Pakistan], but the struggle is the same. I don’t see any future for myself or for my siblings. But I am at least happy; I saved my life and my family’s. I applied for the UK evacuation scheme because of my work and my [other] sister is an artist and journalist. But still we have not heard anything specific from them. Sometimes I receive emails but as much as I reply, they do not respond telling me exactly what I should do. We are just waiting here. I wish I could explain the difficulties we go through. We don’t have a place to live, everything is more expensive and people live on the street, and you don’t know the language. My siblings don’t have any access to school. It is like being imprisoned in a house, in a room. I wish I could tell the UK government there’s so many other people who are waiting for a better future or so many other people who are displaced. I wish I could show them the pain and the uncertainty. We don’t have any other options. We can’t go back to our country but we can’t continue to live here. *The name has been changed for this article.Boris Johnson has had some low moments as Britain’s prime minister, but last week, surely, will take some beating. As “partygate” revelations threatened to overwhelm his administration, he tried first to convince parliament that he had wandered unwittingly into a “bring your own booze” party in the Downing Street garden. By Friday he was apologising to the Queen after it emerged No 10 staff had held a drunken leaving do on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral. Toby Helm reflects on a crisis from which few believe the prime minister can escape. There’s a look at the Tory runners and riders manoeuvring to replace Johnson – and John Harris explains why whoever may follow could prove much worse for the UK. Then, on the Opinion pages, the actor Rory Kinnear recalls the heart-wrenching experience of his sister’s lockdown funeral, held on the day of one of the most notorious parties – a vivid reminder of why the scandal has caused such anger. Across the Atlantic, Joe Biden last week marked an eventful first year in the White House. How has he got on? Lauren Gambino and David Smith mark the US president’s report card in key areas such as climate, economy and social justice. In Kyiv, Luke Harding finds a mood of resignation among Ukrainians about the threat of conflict with Russia, with the city’s professional classes, from actors to lawyers, preparing to take up arms against Vladimir Putin’s massing troops. Following a week of seemingly fruitless diplomatic manoeuvring, Julian Borger weighs up the diminishing prospects of averting war. In the features section, the French-Israeli film-maker Roy Cohen writes movingly about his childhood friendship with a Palestinian activist who was subsequently killed. Then, Oliver Milman takes an alarming look at the damage the climate crisis is inflicting on the world’s insect population. Get the Guardian Weekly magazine delivered to your door.The socialist, historian and civil rights activist WEB Du Bois wrote in a 1903 essay titled The Talented Tenth: “The Negro race, like all races, is going to be saved by its exceptional men.” Though he isn’t a character in this ambitious debut novel by award-winning US poet Honorée Fanonne Jeffers, his spirited thinking about the important role of classical education in the fight for Black liberation pervades the book. It’s an expansive tale cataloguing the journey of one African American family across centuries, from slavery to the antebellum south and from civil war to present times. The novel starts with a family tree. We’re first introduced to Micco Cornell, the son of a Scottish man and a woman from a Native American tribe known as the Creek people, who also has African ancestry. In the late 18th century, when Cornell inherits a village from his father, he signs it over to a white man called Samuel Pinchard in case his African heritage is one day exposed. The deal is done with the promise that Pinchard will peacefully run the farm and eventually marry Cornell’s daughter, but it isn’t long before he turns brutal, buying slaves and committing endless atrocities. That’s when we learn about Aggie, who is brought from Africa and sold to Pinchard. “Tears and sleep were not luxuries cast to slaves. There was only work,” writes Jeffers. But soon, Aggie becomes an energising force intent on destabilising Pinchard’s sadistic reign. Pulling us into modern times is Ailey, a clever, sensitive academic who is equal parts petulant and spectacular. She provides the main first-person narrative and connects with the family tree through her visits to the fictional town of Chicasetta, Georgia, where her ancestors were once enslaved and where her maternal family still live. We witness her coming of age in the 1970s and 80s, while keenly observing her family: her pale-skinned Nana, with colourist attitudes, who sometimes passes for white; her sister’s spiral into crack addiction. There’s a lot of trauma and tragedy to wade through, but there are also respites – sex scenes with forgettable men, entertaining back-and-forths with racist white graduate students. Still, Ailey’s most significant relationship is with her Uncle Root, a retired professor and formidable mentor, and the one who first introduced her to Du Bois. Alongside details of the forced arrival of African people to America and the violence experienced by Native Americans, Jeffers also explores Ailey’s mother Belle’s younger years and her experience of racial segregation, the riots during the civil rights movement, and the changing of cultural attitudes. By continually looking back, Jeffers is doing delicate needlework, stitching together the interior lives of African Americans to illustrate how they survived historical moments. Sexual abuse is a central theme, though never treated sensationally. It helps to form a larger landscape of misogynoir that stretches from Pinchard’s fetish for prepubescent Black girls, who he believes “seduce” him with their beauty, to the policing of promiscuity that Ailey observes in her college years via a list of the most sexually active girls on campus. Ailey herself is haunted by the sexual abuse she suffered at the hands of her grandfather Gandee. It also shapes her oldest sister, Lydia, who one day turns up high at her Nana’s house, shouting: “Leaving me with him, and I was nothing but a child!” Her other sister Coco, a successful doctor, responds: “You don’t see me using Gandee as an excuse to sleep late, and be lazy and eat up somebody else’s groceries.” Each sister’s trajectory shows that there is no universal way to suffer. Some of Jeffers’s strongest writing comes when Ailey abandons her family’s dream that she will become a doctor like her father, and decides to pursue a PhD researching Chicasetta. Here we see the pain that comes with being a Black historian personally connected to archival information that can make you weep and rage. This book is mammoth in size and scope and, though at times it overspills with a surplus of details, is exceptional in the way it engages so deeply and emphatically with history. • The Love Songs of WEB Du Bois is published by 4th Estate (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Only one year has passed since Cincinnati Bengals owner Mike Brown felt the need to issue a statement explaining why he was keeping head coach Zac Taylor, whose Bengals had won just six of 32 games in his first two seasons. Brown, the 86-year-old son of the late legendary Hall of Fame coach and Bengals founder Paul Brown, ended his statement with this kind-of-silly line (which should have been accompanied by the sound of a snarling tiger): “Next year, we will earn our stripes.” It came as a surprise to the rest of the world, but these Bengals indeed have done some stripe-earning, winning 10 of 17 regular-season games, the AFC North for the first time in six years and their first playoff game in 31 years, outlasting the Las Vegas Raiders on Saturday. No doubt the Bengals, who are to play at Tennessee in the divisional round Saturday, would not have achieved what they have without unflappable second-year quarterback Joe Burrow, whose rookie season was cut short because of a torn left ACL and MCL. But the Bengals’ rapid rise from the depths would not have been possible without Taylor, the 38-year-old coach in whom Mike Brown still saw potential even when the Bengals pretty much stank it up his first two years. Brown saw, first-hand, that Taylor was building something. “Personally, if I coached in any other organization in football, I probably wouldn’t be here right now in my third year,” Taylor said in a news conference after the Las Vegas game. Taylor was explaining why he’d decided to give Brown a game ball. Taylor said he would be giving another game ball to long-suffering Bengals’ fans, and he did that a day later by dropping off a ball at the tavern he drives past (and sometimes stops in) on his way home from the office. “Zac Taylor’s unrelenting optimism and faith in his players has helped create the team culture he spoke of so often in his first two awful seasons,” Paul Daugherty, the veteran sports columnist for the Cincinnati Enquirer, tells the Guardian. “The players trust him. They play hard for him and for each other, and that togetherness has been a reason for their success.” Only one year has passed since Daugherty read Brown’s statement about Taylor and his team “fighting through adversity” and concluded in one of his columns: “I’d throw my hands up in the air, but it’s hard to type with my hands up in the air.” Daugherty continued: “Show of hands: At your work, does your boss frequently praise you for ‘fighting through adversity’? Funny, I thought that was part of the job. Any job.” After Burrow was carted off the field midway through a loss to Washington last season, the Bengals lost to the Giants, Dolphins and Cowboys to fall to 2-10-1. They were routed by Baltimore in an especially unsightly season finale, but they’d battled past the Steelers and Titans before that. Those two victories without Burrow, the No 1 overall draft choice in 2020, might have bought Taylor one more year. It is possible that Burrow’s injury might have saved Taylor’s job, too, just because the quarterback was such an enormous part of the gigantic rebuild in Cincinnati. Burrow, who led LSU to the national championship after playing high school football 150 miles east of Cincinnati, was superb during the 2021 regular season, throwing for 4,611 yards and 34 touchdowns. Only Aaron Rodgers had a better passing rating among NFL starters. “We expect to beat everybody that we play – not just hang with them,” Burrow, the son of a football coach, said after the Raiders’ game. It helped that the Bengals won three of their first four games, and five of their first seven. But then came two ugly losses to the dismal Jets and to the division rival Browns, the team named after Paul Brown, and their hot start looked rather misleading. But Cincinnati have won seven of nine games since. The city, one of the smallest TV markets in the league, is delighted. The Bengals made the playoffs five straight years in the 2010s under longtime coach Marvin Lewis, but they lost all five of their playoff games, and Brown probably allowed Lewis to stick around a little too long. Taylor was just 35 when he was hired by the Bengals, with six years as an NFL assistant coach, none as a coordinator. An ESPN panel debated whether the Bengals had made a mistake before Taylor had even coached a single game. One of the talking heads, the former NFL coach John Fox, sounded less than convincing when he said of Taylor: “The Brown family has been around this league for a long time. They hired him because they’re thorough, and they believe he’s going to be the best guy for the future of their organization.” Then the Bengals started 0-11 (earning their first victory against, guess who else, the Jets) and sagged to 2-14 in Taylor’s first season. At least they earned the No 1 overall draft pick for the first time since 2003, when they chose Carson Palmer, who did not play at all as a rookie. Taylor started Burrow from Week 1. He won two of 10 starts before he got hurt, and Cincinnati won as many games without Burrow as with him. Then Burrow started slowly at training camp last summer. But Taylor said there was no reason to panic. His steady hand surely benefitted his players, who, as Taylor said in another news conference Sunday, “haven’t had an easy game in a long time.” His demeanor is pleasant if a little bland, and he often resorts to coachspeak, dodging chances to crow about himself. When Taylor was asked if he felt vindicated after two rough seasons, he replied, “I’m just happy for our team and our organization, to be honest with you.” He told the story of driving up to the tavern with the game ball. He was with two old friends and his young sons, and when he was asked if someone should tag along to take photos or shoot video, he said, no, he planned to just run in and duck out. He wanted a low-key deal. “Sure enough, there were 1,000 cell phones in there,” he said, smiling. “I don’t know what I was thinking was going to happen, but it was a good moment.” The Bengals are 3.5-point underdogs against the Titans, so the ride might end this weekend. But the owner has not seen the need to issue statements about the coach’s future, because Zac Taylor will be around to bag himself a few more stripes.After authors including Kate Mosse and Philip Pullman warned that proposals to change the UK’s copyright laws could be “devastating” for writers, the government has paused its plans. The Intellectual Property Office launched a consultation last summer into UK copyright after Brexit. Writers and publishers had feared that if the “copyright exhaustion” rule were changed, governing when the control of a rights holder over the distribution of their property expires, it could lead to a flood of cheap international editions of books. “Authors could lose this precious ability to sell their work abroad and be fairly paid for it,” said Pullman at the time, while Mosse added that “if we don’t ensure writers remain respected for their work, then many will be forced to leave the industry and Britain’s cultural landscape will suffer hugely.” The government has now announced that due to a lack of available data, it has not been able to calculate the economic impact of any alternatives to the current regime, and will therefore maintain the UK’s current laws on exhaustion of intellectual property rights. The news was welcomed by the Save Our Books campaign, organised by the Publishers Association. “We are delighted that the government has chosen to maintain the UK’s gold standard copyright regime, which our world-leading creative industries are built on, and that ministers have listened to authors, readers and the wider industry on the risks of any change,” said PA chief executive Stephen Lotinga. “I am extremely grateful to our Save Our Books campaign partners, MPs and members of the public who have worked together to make our case to government. I know everyone will be relieved that for the moment they can get back to doing what they do best – putting incredible books into the hands of readers.” But the government also said that it “remains committed to exploring the opportunities which might come from a change to the regime”, something which the PA described as a concern. “The evidence is clear, any weakening of our intellectual property laws would be devastating to UK creators, and we will continue to make this case to government in any future discussions of the matter,” said Lotinga.It was not always clear that Rafael Nadal would make it back to the Australian Open this year, but 20 seasons into his illustrious career, he has developed a knack for blowing past even the most generous expectations. Nadal is indeed in Melbourne, he has already won five matches in the new year and for the first time in his career he is at a grand slam tournament without either of his greatest rivals, Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic. On Wednesday, Nadal returned to Rod Laver Arena and saw off a strong performance by Yannick Hanfmann to win 6-2, 6-3, 6-4 and reach the third round of the Australian Open. Nadal’s troubles last season had been a long time coming. As he emerged from the early lockdowns of 2020, he suffered a flare-up of a chronic left foot injury, Müller-Weiss Syndrome, which has affected him since he was young. By the time his classic French Open semi-final match against Djokovic was done, he had reached his limit. Nadal played only one other tournament in 2021 before ending his season. As he prepared his return in December, Nadal contracted Covid on his way back from Abu Dhabi like the majority of players at the event, which he said left him “very sick with fever” and in bed for a couple of days. It was not a positive moment: “A month and a half ago I didn’t know if I would play tennis again at a professional level due to various factors, including the problems I’ve had with my foot and with Covid,” he told Eurosport Spain. Instead, shortly after he returned a negative test and was cleared to enter Australia, he quietly boarded a flight to Melbourne. Expectations are tempered, but the first steps have been smooth and Nadal won the ATP 250 event in Melbourne. After his Australian Open first-round win over Marcos Giron, Nadal stared down Hanfmann, a 30-year-old qualifier ranked 126 who could not have enjoyed a more different path to one of the biggest stadiums in the world. Rather than bursting on to the tour at a young age, Hanfmann spent his formative years playing college tennis for the University of Southern California. His progress has been incremental, a career high ranking of 92 achieved last year. In perhaps the biggest match of his life, he rose to the occasion and played extremely well from the beginning. His serve was firing, he stepped inside the baseline and rejected Nadal’s high-bouncing topspin with vicious crosscourt backhands and he frequently showed delicate touches at the net. But the challenge of facing Nadal, whether he has four recent matches behind him or 42, remains the same. Competing with him means consistently taking those risks, making sound decisions and executing forcefully point after point for up to five long sets. Nadal comfortably navigated those challenging rallies, he moved well and struck his forehand freely. After being dragged into two complicated final service games, he held off any further complications by improving his serve under pressure at the close. After a six-month layoff, five matches against players ranked outside of the top 50 offer no indication of how Nadal’s game and body will hold up against more challenging, higher-ranked players to come. Nadal says that the most pleasing outcome of the past few weeks is that these wins have offered him a chance to further improve his level. He will next face Karen Khachanov, the 28th seed. “I’m excited about it,” he said. “I’m excited about the fact that I’m going to be playing in a third round for one more time here after all the things I am going through. I don’t have big pressure on my shoulders, honestly. I don’t feel it. The pressure is only to stay healthy and to enjoy the fact that I am competing again, then give my best as I did during all my tennis career.” Ever since Nadal was a teenage prodigy managing chronic knee and foot injuries many doubted his physicality would be conducive to longevity in his sport. Yet at 35 years old, 20 seasons on, he is still here and his age is a frequent punchline of his own jokes. He was asked if there are any positive side to being 35, a question that most players would respond to by underlining the wealth of knowledge gained after so many years on the tour. He was having none of it. “Well, the positive thing is I achieved much more that I never dreamed. I was able to spend almost 20 fantastic years on the tour. The rest of the things? Nothing positive because [I] arrive to the end. When you get older, the watch never stops, no? That’s the circus of life. You need to accept that. But it’s all good with me,” he said, smiling widely.Small gardens are as important as big gardens for conserving bees and other pollinators in UK cities, a study has found. Worldwide, bee populations are declining. Habitat destruction, pesticide use, and climate change have led to the disappearance of some pollinators, but researchers found that small urban gardens are some of the most pollinator-friendly places. The study, published in the Journal of Applied Ecology, found that the size of gardens in Bristol had little relationship to the amount of nectar produced. “Most of the nectar produced in gardens is by a shrub in the corner or a border around the edge of the garden,” said Nicholas Tew, a PhD student at the University of Bristol. “There are some very flower-rich small gardens and some very flower-poor big gardens.” Previous studies have shown that gardens and allotments are important sources of nectar, the sugar-rich energy source pollinators need, but allotments cover only 1% of cities, and on average 85% of nectar in cities is produced in gardens. Researchers at the University of Bristol measured the nectar supply of 59 gardens each month from March to October to track the differences between how much food gardens produce for pollinators, and when nectar production peaks. The flowers identified as producing the most nectar were shrubs. These plants are dense with flowers, making them great nectar resources that can fit into smaller spaces, Tew said. He added that the common daisy was another pollinator-friendly plant; because of their open shape, they are more accessible to pollinators with short tongues. The variety of plants between gardens also provided pollinators in urban areas with a stable supply of food throughout the year, researchers found. “The diversity you get in urban areas is remarkably high, much higher than most natural habitats, even nature reserves,” Tew explained. “It’s unlikely for two gardens to have exactly the same species of plants, so together gardens create much richer nectar resources than they do individually.”Inflation was supposed to be yesterday’s problem. This time last year, the government’s preferred measure of the annual increase in the cost of living was running at less than 1%. Now it stands at 5.4% – the highest in almost 30 years – and it has not peaked yet. With the lagged impact of the supply-chain bottlenecks of last autumn feeding through into prices in the shops and a likely 50% jump in domestic energy bills to come, inflation will certainly exceed 6% in April and may be closer to 7%. Clearly, the data released by the Office for National Statistics will concern the Bank of England, which is mandated to hit the government’s 2% inflation target and has continually underestimated price pressure over the past year. The Bank’s monetary policy committee will next meet in early February – and with the cost of food, household goods, eating out, staying in hotels and clothing and footwear all pushing inflation higher last month – the chances of an increase in borrowing costs from 0.25% to 0.5% have increased. Threadneedle Street’s view is that inflation will peak in the spring and then start to head back down towards target. A return to a more normal economy as the impact of the Omicron variant wanes could help if consumers start spending less on goods (where inflationary pressure is most apparent) and more on services. But the ONS figures for producer prices – the cost paid by firms for fuel and raw materials and the cost of goods leaving factory gates – suggest there is plenty of inflationary pressure in the pipeline. Industry’s input prices were 13.5% higher in December than a year earlier while output prices were up 9.3%. In both cases there was only a small fall from November’s even higher levels, and the Bank’s fear is that, with firms struggling to find workers, higher prices will lead to higher wage settlements and an inflationary spiral will set in. Rishi Sunak is also feeling the heat. As Labour’s Jonathan Reynolds noted, households face a “triple whammy” over the coming months: higher taxes, higher energy bills, and wages failing to keep pace with prices. In his response to the highest inflation rate since John Major and Neil Kinnock were facing off during the 1992 election campaign, the chancellor said he understood the pressures people were facing with the cost of living. Sunak is working on a package of help for low-income households before the regulator Ofgem announces the new energy price cap early next month. Steadily rising inflation means the government needs to make it a generous one – or face a political price.Any athlete behaviour that is against the Olympic spirit or Chinese rules or laws will be subject to “certain punishment”, a Beijing 2022 official has said in response to a question about the possibility of athlete protests at next month’s Winter Games. It comes shortly after human rights advocates told athletes they were better off staying silent for the duration of the Games and amid concerns over the online security of attendees’ data contained in a mandatory phone app. At a press conference on Tuesday, Yang Shu, the deputy director of international relations for the Beijing organising committee, said athletes could face cancellation of accreditation or other “certain punishments”. “Any expression that is in line with the Olympic spirit I’m sure will be protected,” said Yang. “Any behaviour or speech that is against the Olympic spirit, especially against the Chinese laws and regulations, are also subject to certain punishment.” Acts of protest at the Games are generally against the rules set by the International Olympic Committee, which also warned athletes not to protest at the Tokyo summer Games, or face potential punishment. However, there are mounting concerns over the increasing intolerance of protest, dissent or criticism in or against China. Numerous human rights activists and lawyers have been arrested and jailed, and last year the Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai, disappeared from public view for several weeks after she publicly accused a former senior official of sexual assault, sparking an international campaign over her wellbeing. On Tuesday night, a forum hosted by Human Rights Watch warned athletes about conducting any activism, including making statements, while in Beijing for the Games, and to be wary of the extraordinary reach of Chinese surveillance. Yaqiu Wang, a researcher on China for the organisation, said the disappearance of Peng was “a good indicator of what could possibly happen” if athletes spoke out. “Chinese laws are very vague on the crimes that can be used to prosecute people’s free speech,” she said. “There are all kinds of crimes that can be levelled at peaceful, critical comments. And in China the conviction rate is 99%.” “Athletes have an amazing platform and ability to speak out, to be leaders in society and yet the team is not letting them field questions on certain issues ahead of these Games,” said the US Nordic skier and former Olympian Noah Hoffman. “But my advice to athletes is to stay silent because it would threaten their own safety and that’s not a reasonable ask of athletes. They can speak out when they get back.” In the lead-up to the Games there have been concerns over how to protect attendees’ data and privacy while in Beijing. Last week, Team GB athletes were urged not to take their personal phones with them and were instead offered temporary replacements by the British Olympic Association, over government spying concerns. But a report published on Wednesday by the tech security watchdog Citizen Lab warned an app that all attendees were mandated to download had a “devastating flaw” that left personal and medical information, voice audio and file transfers vulnerable. The app, MY2022, collects sensitive personal information including a user’s name, phone number, ID number and email address, and health information including daily self-reported health status, vaccination status and Covid test results. The flaw allowed encryption protecting users’ voice audio and file transfers to be “trivially sidestepped”, Citizen Lab said. “Health customs forms which transmit passport details, demographic information, and medical and travel history are also vulnerable. Server responses can also be spoofed, allowing an attacker to display fake instructions to users.” Citizen Lab said the official Olympic Games Playbook outlines a number of entities that are allowed to process that personal data, including the organising committee and various Chinese authorities, but it did not specify “with whom or with which organisation(s) it would share users’ medical and health-related information”. The app also contains a feature allowing users to report “politically sensitive” content, and a currently inactive censorship keyword list, relating to topics including Xinjiang, Tibet, the Tiananmen Square massacre, insults against China and its leaders, and neutral references to Chinese government agencies and figures. In response, the International Olympic Committee said users could disable the app’s access to parts of their phones and that assessments from two unnamed cybersecurity organisations “confirmed that there are no critical vulnerabilities”. It also said installing the app was not required “as accredited personnel can log on to the health monitoring system on the web page instead”, but it had asked Citizen Lab for its report “to understand their concerns better”. Citizen Lab said it had told the Chinese Olympic organising committee about the issues in early December and had given it a 15-day deadline to respond and 45 days to fix the problem, but received no reply. Agence France-Presse contributed to this report.Can a one-person event make a sport more diverse? Consider monobob, the accurately named bobsleigh event that will make its Olympic debut this year, six years after its first Youth Olympic Games competition. The name says it all – the driver does everything by herself. And it is “herself” rather than “himself.” Women will be the only monobobists in Beijing. A step forward for gender equity? Not quite. Yes, women now have two bobsleigh events – the monobob and two-woman bob – matching the men, who have the two-man and four-man disciplines. But when it comes to the number of athletes at the Games, a women’s race for one-person sleds doesn’t balance out a men’s four-man race. The total number of places available in the bobsleigh events in Beijing is 124 for men and 46 for women. Indeed, the competition for places in the women’s events is so intense that Lolo Jones, the former world champion hurdler, didn’t make the US team one year after winning the world championship. While the monobob can’t deliver on gender diversity, it has the potential to add geographic diversity through a couple of unique rules. The first is to do with the equipment. Monobobs aren’t owned by national federations, which cuts out the possibility of rich countries splashing money to gain a technological edge. Instead, athletes race in standardized sleds provided by the organizers. The sled assigned to top-ranked US driver Elana Meyers Taylor is initially identical to the one assigned to every other competitor. That rule only goes so far, though, as countries can fine-tune their sleds, and some countries will always have more resources than others. The second rule could expand the sport’s geographic footprint. Sixteen countries will compete in the monobob, while only 12 could qualify in the two-woman event, opening up space for four countries that didn’t make the two-woman. But the IOC squashed an effort to reintroduce continental quotas this year, and the non-European contingent in women’s bobsled is stagnant. Instead, the two countries that earned spots by throwing all their eggs in the monobob basket are both European. The Netherlands’ Karlien Sleper qualified comfortably. Viktoria Cernanska, the 2020 Youth Olympic Games silver medalist in monobob, will be the first Slovakian woman in Olympic bobsleigh history. Non-traditional bobsleigh countries certainly gave it a try. Nigeria, which had a two-woman team in 2018 but focused exclusively this time around on monobob, wasn’t able to qualify despite Simidele Adeagbo’s win in the last Europe Cup event. Marina Silva Tuono couldn’t lock down a spot to give Brazil its second-ever women’s bobsleigh entry. Keomororkot Kong and Tran Thi Doan Trang fell short in their quest to be the first Winter Olympians from Cambodia and Vietnam. Like Adeagbo, Tuono and Kong pinned all of their hopes on monobob. To be sure, these entries typically clustered at the bottom of the standings in each race. But Adeagbo, a 2018 Olympian in skeleton, usually finished ahead of Lidiia Hunko, who earned Ukraine’s first-ever women’s bobsleigh spot. The difference came down to how events are weighted. All relevant monobob races were listed as “World Series” events, but those that coincided with World Cup weekends had far more points on offer than those that took place at Europe Cup or North American Cup stops. Hunko’s biggest point total of the season came at a 1 January event in Sigulda, where she finished last by a wide margin. Had Adeagbo competed in Sigulda, she likely would have taken Hunko’s spot in Beijing. Another factor limiting geographic diversity: Two-woman results are heavily weighted in the monobob selection process. Britain’s Mica McNeill barely competed in monobob this year but qualified for the Olympics based on her strong performance in two-woman races, including a World Cup runner-up finish in early January. (McNeill may choose to concentrate on the two-woman event in Beijing, which would open a space for Italy.) Still, monobob’s inclusion ensured repeat appearances for Jamaica and South Korea, each of whom barely missed out in the two-woman event. Even with standardized equipment, the women’s podiums are likely to have considerable overlap. Germany and Canada will have three spots in two-woman and two spots in monobob, and all of their representatives will be medal contenders. For the US, Taylor and newly naturalized Kaillie Humphries are 1-2 in the monobob rankings and tied for fourth in two-woman. So if you’re looking for another quirky event to add to your Winter Olympic viewing list, monobob is a good bet. If you’re looking for another Miracle on Ice, don’t count on seeing it here. A brief guide to monobob Monobob has a slightly different feel than other bobsleigh events. The sleds themselves are roughly as heavy as those used in two-person races. Add the athletes and some ballast, and a two-woman sled can weigh up to 330kg, considerably heavier than the 248kg monobob max. With less weight and only one person doing the pushing, monobobs aren’t quite as fast as two-woman sleds and considerably slower than four-man sleds, which can weigh as much as 630kg fully loaded. On the Olympic track at Yanqing in October, a four-man sled hit 133.22 kph, the two-woman sleds topped out at 127.12 kph, and the monobobs’ max speed was 119.60 kph. That’s still faster than Clark Griswold in Christmas Vacation, but if you watch a multiple-rider event and a monobob race back to back, the speed difference is notable.When Chelsea met Chesterfield in the FA Cup third round, the preferred hashtag was #CHECHF rather than the more accurate and frankly soul-stirring #CHECHE. But this act of cultural vandalism did at least facilitate a decent question, and give our readers the opportunity to burst with trivia. “When Colchester United knocked Crystal Palace out of the League Cup two years ago I thought it was just your everyday shock,” writes Neil O’Sullivan. “However, the full significance is apparent as the abbreviations for the two teams differ by just one place alphabetically: CPL v COL.” John McDougall has an example from international football. “If Australia played Austria it would be AUS v AUT,” offers John. “Not sure we have played them.” Not in the men’s game, as far as we can tell, but it has happened in the women’s game. In April 2015, AUT beat AUS 2-1 in a friendly. Here are a few more, via SCL MDA DSG Twitter. Finally, a couple of kooky examples that have little to do with the original question but are nonetheless worthy of note. “When Sweden play at home to Denmark,” writes the mysterious XX, “the abbreviations spell SweDen and the omitted letters spell DenMark.” And finally, who could forget the great WALRUS of 2003? No countries for local heroes “This season will be the 30th season in a row where the English top flight is won by a non-English manager,” mails Jerry Higgins, arrogantly writing off Brighton’s title hopes. “Has any other league had such a long run of being won by non-domestic managers?” Tim Dockery has gone above and beyond on this one. “As I see it, a non-Saudi has won the Saudi Pro League every season since 1987,” he writes. “In that year, Khalil Al-Zayani, who had previously coached the Saudi national team to win the AFC Asian Cup in 1984, won the league with Al Ettifaq. In the 34 years since, the league has been won by coaches from 11 different countries.” Tim did list the winning coaches in all 34 seasons. For reasons of space, and perhaps sanity, we won’t print that here, but it includes Henri Michel, Omar Borrás, Artur Jorge, Joel Santana and our old friend Christian Gross. Rough and ref justice “Has any player had to leave a game after colliding with a referee?” wonders Gerard Parker. Let’s start with world football’s hottest property. In May 2020, when football was feeling its way back after Covid, Bayern Munich won 1-0 at Borussia Dortmund to effectively end the Bundesliga title race. Dortmund’s chances weren’t helped when Erling Haaland went off injured in the second half after twisting his knee when he collided with referee Tobias Stieler. Depending on which country you’re in, and whether you’re Arsène Wenger, you might be able to see the incident here. That’s the only example we’ve found of a player coming off injured after a collision with the referee. But officials can sometimes bear the brunt too, as was the case with Keith Stroud in 2015, when he had to be replaced at Hillsborough during Sheffield Wednesday’s game with Hull City. Chuba Akpom accidentally went through the back of him, resulting in the required change. Rutger IJzermans also has a bizarre tale that is well worth telling. “On 14 January 2018, during a Ligue 1 match between FC Nantes and Paris Saint-Germain, Nantes’ Diego Carlos accidentally collided with referee Tony Chapron,” writes Rutger. “If anything, it was the ref’s fault as he changed the course of his run and crossed Carlos’s path. This didn’t stop Chapron from kicking out at the player when he was on the floor. He gave Carlos a yellow card too, which happened to be his second of the game. So, technically, Diego Carlos had to leave the game after colliding with the referee. Here is footage of the incident.” Yes, there is a postscript. “Chapron was suspended after the match,” adds Rutger, “and ended his career as a ref.” Knowledge archive “After playing almost one half as a centre-forward in last week’s Cup game against Vard, IK Start’s Kristoffer Paulsen has played in all the 10 different outfield positions of the side’s 4-3-3 formation this year,” wrote Eivind Lindeberg in 2007. “Even though he has yet to touch the keeper gloves, this sounds quite impressive. Anyone ever heard of something similar?” Step forward Steve Palmer, surely the only footballer to have attended Cambridge University, played a first-class cricket match for them and appeared during one season in 11 positions for a club. The campaign was 1997-98, Palmer was at Watford, and going into the final home game of the season it was noted that Mr Versatile had yet to don the goalkeeper’s jersey. Chris Wardle took up the tale: “Of course, when this was pointed out to Graham Taylor, Palmer had to start the match in goal. His teammates kicked off and immediately booted the ball into touch, allowing him to swap shirts with a defender who, coincidentally, happened to be Watford’s regular keeper.” Palmer finished the campaign having worn a full set of shirts from 1-14. More recently, in 2005-06, Sheffield Wednesday’s Lee Bullen achieved the feat. There was, as Richard Sargeant and Adrian Burkinshaw pointed out, a terrific twist when Bullen stood in as an emergency keeper at Millwall after an injury to David Lucas. “With no goalkeeper on the bench,” recalled Richard, “Lee, who had already played in all 10 outfield positions, was asked to put on the gloves. The Lions soon put the ball in the back of the net only for the referee to disallow the goal. Bullen went on to keep a clean sheet and the mighty Owls won 1-0.” Also worthy of a mention are David Webb and Mick Tait. Webb, noted Mark Turnbull, “played in all 11 positions for Chelsea – even starting in the goalkeeper’s jersey against Ipswich in December 1971, when he kept a clean sheet”. Webb got the nod because the regular goalkeeper Peter Bonetti and his deputy John Phillips were injured and the ‘A’ team keeper Steve Sherwood arrived too late despite a motorway dash. “I believe,” Mark added, “that Webb wore shirt numbers 1-11 at a time when numbers actually meant something.” Craig Wilson went similarly misty-eyed thinking about Tait’s contribution to Portsmouth. “He played in all 10 outfield positions, although admittedly over a slightly longer period than a year,” wrote Craig. “He was incredibly consistent, scoring goals and being just as brutal and clumsy in all of the positions he played. But that’s why we loved him.” Can you help? “Fulham are top of the Championship with a goal difference of +47. I am acutely conscious of their capacity to screw things up, however, so what is the best goal difference a team has had and not been promoted,” asks Richard Hirst. “According to Wikipedia, Jesper Blomqvist only managed to score one goal for six of the clubs he played for: Milan, Parma, Manchester United, Everton, Djurgarden and Enkoping. Can any other outfield player boast a longer list of teams they have only scored a single goal for,” wonders Kieran Whooley. • Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.Is it a bird? Is it a plane? No – it’s a Venezuelan propaganda campaign designed to burnish Nicolás Maduro’s strongman credentials with the help of a caped crusader called SuperBigote – or SuperMoustache. The musclebound cartoon superhero – who bears an unmistakable resemblance to Venezuela’s authoritarian president – has been met with acclaim or derision, depending on which side of the country’s bitter political schism viewers stand. Pro-Maduro politicians have eulogized the “indestructible” beefcake, who appears on state television using his superpower – an iron left fist – to protect their socialist homeland from a Donald Trump-like villain. “It’s fantastic! Don’t miss it!” the deputy commerce minister Luis Villegas Ramírez tweeted after the latest instalment, in which SuperMoustache tried to send Cuban, Russian and Chinese Covid vaccines to Venezuelan citizens – only for the US to block delivery with the help of Maduro’s domestic enemies. “We’ll destroy them at last! They’ll suffer! They’ll weep! They’ll be the global epicentre of the pandemic!” the dastardly imperialist brags in heavily accented Spanish before SuperMoustache saves the day. “Nobody messes with SuperBigote,” state television channel VTV boasted on Twitter. Maduro’s foes have savaged the series, with pundits decrying what some called an attempt to build a cult of personality – or even a Goebbels-style attempt at mind control. Others wondered why the supposedly omnipotent SuperMoustache had failed to shield his country from humanitarian catastrophe. Julio Borges, a prominent opposition leader, suggested “Super Destroyer of Venezuela” would be a more appropriate name. “Maduro means misery and corruption,” Borges tweeted alongside photographs of Venezuelans scavenging for food. Guillermo Zubillaga, a Venezuela specialist at the Americas Society/Council of the Americas, said there was logic to the seemingly frivolous cartoon. He believed spin doctors hoped SuperMoustache would emphasize the invincibility of a politician who, against all odds, overcame a relentless US-backed campaign to topple him. “His superpower is staying in power,” said Zubillaga, pointing to critical support from China and Russia, whose deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, last week refused to rule out sending troops to Venezuela if tensions with the US continued to rise. “The message they are trying to convey is that they are in total control.” Maduro is not the first authoritarian to be cast as a comic book hero. In 2016 Chinese propagandists produced a cartoon version of their leader, Xi Jinping, in which the Communist party boss played Whac-a-Mole with corrupt officials. A year later, Moscow hosted an art exhibition called Super Putin, featuring sculptures and paintings celebrating Vladimir Putin’s superhero side. One showed Putin in a skin-tight Superman costume with the initials SP written on his chest. Maduro’s predecessor, Hugo Chávez, received a posthumous cartoon tribute in which Latin America revolutionaries such as Che Guevara and José Felix Ribas welcomed him to heaven. Zubillaga suspected propaganda officials saw SuperMoustache as a distraction from the far less amusing topic of Venezuela’s collapse. “It’s so ludicrous it gets people talking. It distracts you from the real reality of the 6 million people abroad, the malnutrition numbers, the fact that there are 250 political prisoners. “I think it’s effective. I wouldn’t dismiss it,” he added. “You repeat it so much … that people start to believe it.” Frank Dikötter, the author of a book about 20th-century cults of personality, was less sure. “The dictator’s dilemma is that he must show himself to be close to the people but, on the other hand, far above the fray – and particularly above his entourage, since anyone could stab him in the back at any one point in time. A cartoon seems to slightly undermine that sense of distance,” said the University of Hong Kong professor. Dikötter said art had long been used to signal the extraordinary and even supernatural qualities of such leaders: “But nothing as flippant as this. It’s not quite dignified is it?”Almost two years after working in a temporary Covid intensive care unit at the hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Kim Bishop, a critical care nurse, can still remember which patients were in which rooms. “When you walk back on these units, you know which patient survived in which room and which ones didn’t,” said Bishop, who still works at the Philadelphia hospital and moves among different units. “I thought we closed that chapter once we closed that unit, but now walking back into it, it’s almost like a slap in the face.” Bishop’s feelings are not unique among providers who treat Covid patients in the US. Many are leaving the field. Recent research indicates that healthcare workers and first responders are displaying post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms like veterans who served in combat. Healthcare providers and researchers now say that if hospitals continue to be overwhelmed with patients who have not been vaccinated against the virus and administrators don’t find a way to provide relief to medical staff, many will leave areas where they care for Covid patients – or exit healthcare altogether. That would worsen staffing shortages and further strain hospitals’ capacity to provide necessary care. “It’s important to take care of and think of healthcare workers because they matter as people, and also it has really significant implications for our healthcare system,” said Dr Rebecca Hendrickson, a VA Puget Sound Health Care System clinical psychiatrist and lead researcher of a new study on healthcare workers. “You actually can’t protect your healthcare system without protecting the workers.” The Journal of General Internal Medicine study published in December surveyed more than 500 doctors, nurses and first responders and found that 15% said it was “not at all likely” they would still work in the field in five to 10 years. Among nurses, the figure was 20%. That’s largely because of the deterioration of healthcare providers’ mental health. Seventy-four per cent of respondents reported symptoms of depression; 37% reported symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder; and 15% reported thoughts of suicide or self-harm. A significant contributor to their recent distress, Hendrickson said, was the duration of the pandemic. Earlier in the pandemic, workers knew they were facing a real risk of becoming ill but understood there was no other option to provide care to patients. Vaccines were not yet available, and there was a limited quantity of personal protective equipment. Now, more than two-thirds of hospital workers are vaccinated, according to a September report in the American Journal of Infection Control, but they treat Covid patients who in most cases are severely ill because they have not been vaccinated. Hospitals also still sometimes ask nurses to use less personal protective equipment than they feel they need because of the cost or patients’ complaints, respondents said. “Even when objectively the risk level may be lower” because they are vaccinated and the Omicron variant is less severe than earlier variants, “when they were asked to take risk that no longer felt necessary, that was actually harder to handle and caused more distress”, Hendrickson said. Every day that Kadee Klafka works as a cardiac intensive care nurse at Ball Memorial hospital in Muncie, Indiana, she speaks with the families of Covid patients on ventilators, almost all of whom have not been vaccinated, she said. She often must inform them that their loved ones’ lungs won’t recover. “We have done every single thing we can,” she tells them. “Right now, they are just suffering, and the best thing we can do for them is make them comfortable.” Klafka wishes she could wear a GoPro camera to illuminate nurses and patients’ experience. “I have had to learn to cope with the anger that continues to rise and fall based on people who will not get vaccinated,” she said. Patients are often angry too because of how long they wait in the emergency room before they can get a bed, Bishop, the Philadelphia nurse, said. In 2021, 71% of medical practices saw an increase in the number of incidents with disruptive patients, according to a January poll from the Medical Group Management Association, which represents large physician groups. Bishop is also drained by two years of worrying about infecting her family, she said. She said the Omicron surge is even harder to manage than previous waves. “I felt like there was a light at the end of the tunnel, especially with the vaccine. I felt like we were getting back to normal, being able to go out and celebrate holidays and other life events with family,” said Bishop, who became a nurse because of her interest in the human body. “The staff is already mentally and physically exhausted, and this is pushing all of us to our breaking point.” Since February 2020, 30% of US healthcare workers have lost their job or quit, and the most common reason was the pandemic, according to an October survey by Morning Consult. Carol Wilcox worked as a discharge planner on a Covid floor at Saint Anne’s hospital in Fall River, Massachusetts, but retired 17 December, after four decades as a nurse. At the start of the pandemic, Wilcox, 65, woke up each day sick to her stomach and petrified. She and other staff weren’t allowed to wear masks because, like at other hospitals, supplies were limited and administrators “were afraid we would make people nervous”, she said. Before she retired, she felt worn out “just going in to see a patient and putting on the protective gear”, she said. In one case a couple months ago, Wilcox saw a woman who weeks earlier lost her husband to Covid and now had to decide whether she wanted to be on a ventilator. She said no and died. Neither were vaccinated. “We are giving people the best we can,” said Wilcox, who hopes to work part-time from home in case management. “I don’t know how long people can sustain. There is an underlying frustration with people who aren’t getting vaccinated because it’s just so sad.” But there are, perhaps, encouraging developments. Nurses can now make significantly more money than before the pandemic, particularly if they sign up to become travel nurses, due to increased demand. Enrollment in undergraduate nursing programs increased by 5.6% and by 4.1% in master’s programs in 2020, according to an American Association of Colleges of Nursing survey. At Sister Claire Tynan school of nursing at Holy Name in Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 171 people applied to attend the school in 2019; in 2020, there were 325 applicants, and in 2021, there were 292, according to the school. “I think people are realizing that they can contribute to the positive effects in a hospital, that they have something to offer and that they will always have a career,” said Michele Acito, Holy Name chief nursing officer. Chloe Sneyer, 26, started her career in Holy Name surgery and cardiac units and then became an intensive care unit nurse during the pandemic. She now has more confidence in her skills, she said. “It made me realize I can learn something new every day that I go to work, and I can figure it out,” Sneyer added. Early in the pandemic, the hospital also tried to help nurses like Sneyer by having a psychologist host “resiliency rounds” over Zoom where staff could talk about a work experience; becoming sick with Covid; or the loss of a family member, among other topics, said Acito. In one recent case, an unvaccinated young man with Covid died after being on a ventilator. He had been in the hospital for weeks and become close with some staff, Acito said. “Two of our newer staff were very upset, so we made sure they had time to sit, to talk to other staff members,” recalled Acito. “They went outside; they took a little break … and then other staff members called them that night, so it’s that kind of support that has really strengthened that bond.” In addition to providing counseling, Hendrickson also said it’s important that hospitals seek input from healthcare workers on how to manage the risks they are facing, such as what personal protective equipment staff should wear or how food should be handled in inpatient units. “The more that can be actively listened to and reflected in policy decisions in a transparent way, those details make a huge difference for how it feels on the frontlines,” said Hendrickson. But much of healthcare workers’ wellbeing depends on the virus, which remains unpredictable. Wilcox said she fears for the healthcare system if the pandemic stretches on many more months or years. She told her former colleagues that she would return to visit. “But I don’t want to go back,” she said. “I really don’t. It is a war zone.”Director Denzel Washington and his stars do their best with this bland, shallow and awkwardly structured film. It’s a romantic drama based on the bestselling 2008 memoir from publisher and former New York Times reporter Dana Canedy, about the journal that her soldier husband Charles Monroe King wrote for their infant son Jordan just before King’s death in Iraq – telling Jordan how to respect women, himself and his country. Chanté Adams plays Canedy, a young New York journalist in the 90s who falls hard for Charles (Michael B Jordan): a sweet, idealistic guy in the US army who has no desire for her to abandon her career for him. So they are apart a lot when he is training, and then, tragically, seeing action in the Middle East. The narrative jolts episodically back and forth between the early days of their relationship, their happiness living together and her grim and lonely widowhood and single-motherhood in which she has some supportive female friends and the regulation Gay Male Friend (very similar to the one in The Devil Wears Prada). There is a particularly jarring moment when Dana reacts to the breaking story of 9/11 in the New York Times newsroom and then, before she or we have absorbed the horror of that, the story unsatisfyingly shifts to her life much later, an entirely different situation. The awful truth about how Charles actually met his end is of course saved for the end, but he actually had a first wife and daughter (that is, Jordan’s half-sister) whom we never see on screen. Apart from one or two mentions they are bafflingly – and heartlessly – excluded from the story. Dana’s own professional situation isn’t great: we see two smug male journalists undermining her at work, taking her story away from her, using her single-motherhood against her. How did that situation pan out? We aren’t told. And the all-important journal itself is not very interesting or powerful. There doesn’t have to be a Nicholas Sparks-type twist, but the document itself needed to have some impact. A disappointment. • A Journal for Jordan is released on 21 January in cinemas.In 2020 the European Club Association conducted research into what it called the “Future Fan”. A survey across seven countries asked 14,000 people about their interest in football and how they interacted with the game. The survey recorded that among all fans only 40% regularly watched professional football in a stadium. Meanwhile 51% said they played Fifa at least once a month. This research caused a degree of consternation in the ECA, especially with its then president, Andrea Agnelli, who believed that “many traditional assumptions about fans need to change” and that the game may need to adapt to meet them. Within months, however, Agnelli’s thoughts had been rendered moot because he had been forced out of the ECA for embracing that most radical of changes: the European Super League. For many, concern over the “future fan” was simply a cover for some of the biggest clubs wanting to abandon traditional structures in search of more money. But the ECA’s research was not inaccurate and the questions raised were legitimate. As football has grown into a global form of entertainment so those who call themselves fans have changed too. The majority no longer watch football live in person but digitally through a screen. Has the sport come to terms with that shift? Certainly clubs know more about their digital fanbase than they ever did about those clicking through the turnstiles. “The most sophisticated clubs have data coming from a lot of sources; I’d say more than a dozen,” says Roger A Breum, the head of marketing for Hookit, which specialises in tracking the digital footprint of sports teams and their sponsors. “Each of the social platforms they’re on gives them individualised data, then you probably have a social listening tool that’s bringing you broad data on hashtags that your club cares about. You have a sponsorship tool like ours and you might have tracking tools too. There’s a whole suite of sports tech software a club could use.” These tools mean that clubs know what messages and initiatives their fans are receptive to, what they are not and, in some cases, how strongly those opinions are held. “Sentiment analysis”, says Breum, is gleaned most cleanly from the comments under Instagram posts and from tweets. That’s where “the diehard fans are telling you how they feel,” he says. This information is well understood by the clubs, whether it be through their own insight teams or reports commissioned from consultants. They use it to tailor the kind of content they put on Instagram, or how they might help their sponsors run more effective ad campaigns. But that’s where it largely stops: the information is there to help the club run as a business, and it stays on the business side. “Historically there has been a gap between the commercial operations of the club and the sporting operations,” says Ben Marlow, of the consultancy 21st Group, which has worked with the Premier League and Tottenham among others. “I would still believe that to be the case. There’s an element of church and state.” Marlow’s opinion is shared by others who work with and inside Premier League clubs. He also observes that building a club’s strategy around fan sentiment would not be a great idea, but says that a “marriage between sporting performance and commercial performance” is important and that “the two drive each other”. Although sporting performance can be determined by league position, traditionally it involved making the fans happy too. Fans inside the ground, or “legacy fans” as they became known in ESL jargon, are less often the subject of customer research, their views on their club infrequently sought. But they do have the ability to make their opinions known directly to the footballing department, with the strength of their sentiment measured in decibels. There the link between results and enthusiasm is not always straightforward. At Selhurst Park Crystal Palace fans grew frustrated with Roy Hodgson despite mid-table security, while at Old Trafford Manchester United fans stuck with Ole Gunnar Solskjær to the end despite apparent underachievement. Digital fans do not have the same mechanism for making their feelings known. Yet no one would argue that they are short on opinions. This is particularly true on Twitter, perhaps the place where fandom is most alive outside matches and a place in a constant state of fulmination. As one Premier League executive puts it: “You can feel sometimes that the mood online is very different to the mood in the stadium.” Last year the journalist Dean Van Nguyen wrote a taxonomy of one “extremely online” section of Liverpool’s fanbase, a type he called the “Twitter fan”. They were largely young, he wrote, obsessed with transfers, highly combative and persistently pessimistic. “Not getting what you want from football all of the time seems completely intolerable to them,” Van Nguyen wrote. He argued that similar groups existed in most clubs’ fanbases, something borne out by even the most cursory glance at a Premier League club’s hashtag. The Twitter fan does not represent every “future fan”, but it would seem hard to argue they are not precisely the demographic that clubs want to reach and with the levels of “engagement” that would put them in the highest category of digital supporter. Their support is vocal and dedicated but much of it is critical, with that criticism left unacknowledged by clubs. Some of the criticism undoubtedly filters through, to players with an active social media presence and to other parts of the football department, including one former Premier League manager who in the latter days of his last job would obsessively check online comments the moment he stepped into the dressing room after a match. Other managers might choose to ignore the noise but have comments shared with them by friends and family, or their agent, anyway. More likely, however, the frustrations expressed on social media end up in the ear not of the club but other supporters. Van Nguyen writes that Liverpool’s “Twitter fans” often end up turning on match-going fans and have developed a name for them: “Top Reds”. That term is used in similar online disputes between Manchester United supporters. “You will be seen as elitist if you go to the games,” says one fan of a top-six club who travels home and away and also has a substantial social media following. “They do see us as the elite. If I speak out on issues that matter to match-going fans, be that ticket allocations, prices, games being picked for TV, the new fans do not give a shit. They do not care about these kind of issues. A lot of match-going fans don’t consider what they call ‘e-fans’ proper fans either. They think that if you don’t go, you don’t know.” It seems inevitable that the importance of the digital fan to football, especially at the top level, will only continue to grow. But while the commercial opportunities offered by a new audience have clearly been identified, it appears the other direction in the relationship, the one that involves listening, has not. Match-going fans might argue it has been ever thus. Perhaps in that respect supporters old and new may share some common ground.The tracksuit era began – as every history student will learn from now on – on 11 March 2020, the day that the WHO declared Covid-19 a pandemic, and the age of lockdowns commenced. The details of its demise are, as yet, not officially verified – but they say that journalism is the first draft of history, so I’m calling it for 31 October 2021, when the dystopian seaweed-green tracksuits of Squid Game became the go-to Halloween costume. So now it is time to get back into your jeans. I don’t just mean getting them done up, although there is no doubt that may be a little tricky after two turgid years spent feeling dissatisfied with life while in eyeballing distance of the fridge. No, the real challenge is getting your head back into jeans, not your waistline. The most telling marker of the casualisation of our wardrobes is that jeans, which used to be what we wore to dress down, can now feel like too much effort. It’s not that I’m saying our standards have slipped, but – well, actually, that is exactly what I’m saying. There is nothing more satisfying to reach for in the morning than your favourite denims. Jeans are timeless and democratic, because while silhouettes, colours and washes come and go, everyone who owns a pair of jeans makes them their own. To look at someone who is wearing a pair that they love and that suit them is like looking at the perfect black and white portrait: candid, but flattering. This year’s Golden Globes ceremony had no red carpet, but it was a fashion moment that has turbocharged the denim revival. Jane Campion’s The Power of the Dog, one of the night’s big winners, is set in rural Montana in the 1920s, hinged between the dust-and-horses iconography of the cinematic western tradition and the modernity and raw energy of the 20th century as it begins to roar to top speed. Benedict Cumberbatch as Phil acts out masculine swagger in broken-in jeans with chaps, but it is Kodi Smit-McPhee as Peter who steals the fashion show. Slight and gawky in the stiff new jeans that his mother has bought him so that he will fit in on the ranch, he looks like a boy soldier in new uniform. In westerns, jeans stand for real-world toughness – resilience, to use the buzzword of the hour – but also for the American dream. The brass rivets that are a feature of every traditional pair glint like the nuggets for which goldrushers once panned the rivers of the western states. Also, jeans represent sex – as they always have and always will. (Think of the album cover of Bruce Springsteen’s Born in the USA, with the Boss’s jeans-clad back view standing in front of the stripes of the flag.) Resilience, fantasy, adventure and sex appeal: it is little wonder, really, that jeans are a style icon. The Power of the Dog is the latest and most lauded in a new wave of westerns – from News of the World to the very stylish The Harder They Fall – that are seducing us back to denim as a nostalgic, easy way to dress. If we had fallen out of love with jeans, it was at least partly because they got way too complicated. In the decade since the skinny jean began to fall from grace, the question of what jeans are “in” has become vexed. I have lost count of the number of clever women who have taken me aside to earnestly, quietly enquire whether it was still OK to wear skinnies, or what on earth a barrel leg or a peg leg was, or whether mum jeans are actually chic or a joke in which being a mum is the punchline. Designers and denim brands became embroiled in never-ending face-offs over high rise v ultra high rise, over wide leg or bootcut, patchworked or embroidered, indigo or bleached. Writing about what jeans to wear began to feel like reporting on an increasingly labyrinthine and remote civil war, in which no clear victor ever seemed to emerge and right and wrong had become impossible to judge. And jeans should not be that hard. They should be wardrobe route one: an easy option that you don’t have to waste time thinking about. Now they are coming back into focus, and without the hipster squabbling over what actually is the difference between a mum jean and a dad jean. Instead, the new denim style icons are stone-cold classics. Celine’s most recent Paris fashion week featured jeans that looked easy and timeless. Think Robert Redford in Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid. Marilyn Monroe between takes on the set of The Misfits, photographed by Eve Arnold in rolled-hem jeans. The late, great Nick Kamen in that laundrette advert. Janet Jackson in the 1990s, in ripped jeans and a crop top. Elle Macpherson doing the noughties Holland Park school run in jeans and a blazer. This is a rich bloodline that traces back to the rugged utilitarianism of the western. But denim is a “thirsty” fabric to work with, requiring large quantities of water and energy during production. A pair of jeans is likely to have four or five times the carbon footprint of a T-shirt, because of the fabric’s heavier weight. The environmental impact is multilayered, and brands are addressing it via different strategies. Reformation uses non-hazardous low-impact chemical dyes to ensure worker safety and to reduce water usage. Its best-selling Cynthia high-rise straight leg jeans require 685 gallons (2.5 cubic metres) less water to make than conventional jeans. Frame has developed jeans made from biodegradable denim and thread, with rivets replaced by buttons and fastenings that can be removed, so the garment will fully disintegrate if buried at the end of its life. White Stuff uses 98% recycled water and 85% air drying in its manufacturing process, to cut energy usage. (Its very wearable Robyn barrel jeans, at £55, are well worth a look.) Nudie has pioneered Repair Shops, to normalise and ease the process of repairing and reworking jeans instead of replacing them. Scattergun approaches to the sustainability problem may perplex consumers, but there are ethical shopping strategies that everyone can agree on: buy fewer clothes, buy vintage where possible, minimise washing, and wear garments for longer. And on all of these metrics, jeans can score surprisingly highly. You only need one pair that you love and they will work with everything. Vintage is a brilliant way to shop for denim, not least because jeans change shape in their first few washes, so it is only when you try on a preworn pair that you can get a true sense of how they will fit. We have all known the disappointment of jeans that look good in the fitting room but slump into a saggy mess within weeks. Refreshing with an eco-friendly laundry spray and spot-cleaning is a quicker and less environmentally damaging way to care for them than overwashing. And best of all: jeans improve with age. My desert-island jeans, a pair of straight leg Levi’s 501s, were already vintage when I found them last year, and look even better now than they did then. If we fall back in love with our jeans, let’s hope it is for ever.On 24 October 1962, an American nuclear chemist, Harrison Brown, started to pen a guest editorial for the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists just as the Cuban missile crisis reached its climax. “I am writing on a plane en route from Los Angeles to Washington and for all I know this editorial … may never be published,” Brown said. “Never in history have people and nations been so close to death and destruction on such a vast scale. Midnight is upon us.” With this dire warning, he was referring to the Doomsday Clock, which has been the Bulletin’s iconic motif since it started as a magazine 75 years ago by Albert Einstein and some of the University of Chicago scientists from the Manhattan Project. Their work had contributed to making the atomic bomb, but many of them had been outraged when the US used it against Japanese cities. The image of the clock ticking away to midnight was intended to convey the sense of urgent peril, which Brown felt so viscerally on that 1962 flight to Washington. “He thought the world could end while he was on that flight,” said Rachel Bronson, the Bulletin’s current president. On Thursday, the Doomsday Clock will be unveiled for the 75th time, and we will find out what way the Bulletin’s panel of scientists and security experts will move the minute hand. For the past two years it has been stuck at 100 seconds to midnight. With Russia poised to attack Ukraine, it is hard to imagine the clock being set back, and that means that the experts assess we are in greater danger now than ever. The closest the clock came at the height of the cold war was two minutes to midnight in 1953 after the first detonation of a thermonuclear warhead, a hydrogen bomb. By the time of the Cuban missile crisis, the hands were at seven minutes to, but despite Brown’s apocalyptic editorial, the Bulletin decided not to move them forward because the shock of near catastrophe had given Washington and Moscow fresh incentive to work towards risk reduction and arms control. The furthest away from midnight the clock ever moved was 17 minutes, right at the end of the cold war. It has been slipping back towards extinction ever since. That is partly because of the increasing volatility of geopolitics, the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and the new existential threat of climate change, which was formally made a factor in the calculation in 2007. The Doomsday Clock image was originally the work of Martyl Langsdorf, a noted abstract landscape artist of the era, whose husband, Alexander, was a physicist on the Manhattan Project. When he and his anxious colleagues decided to turn their mimeographed internal newsletter into a magazine in 1947, they turned to her to design the cover of the new Bulletin. She reckoned she was “the only artist they knew”. The design was originally going to be based on a U for Uranium, but the increasingly alarmed dinner table talk among the scientists in the couple’s social circle pushed Langsdorf towards more urgent imagery. “She took the imagery of countdowns and rocket launches and put it into a clock,” Bronson said. She added that the original time on the clock, seven minutes to midnight, “conveyed urgency, but also hope, a sense that there’s something we can do about it. We can set it back. And all of that in an image that is not language-dependent.” It is an image designed to cut through the dense nature of the underlying science to engage the public in the issues. It has since appeared in cold war novels, episodes of Doctor Who, songs by The Who and Iron Maiden. Boris Johnson referred to the Doomsday Clock in his speech to the Cop26 summit in Glasgow in November, though he mistakenly said it was set at a minute to midnight. “He got the time wrong, but he used it and we agree with that part of it,” Bronson said. “We at the Bulletin believe that public engagement is crucial to this. In the US, we’re about to spend $1.8tn on a new nuclear arsenal. The public has to engage on this because it’s their money. “It’s really hard to stay engaged on an urgent issue that is 75 years old,” she added. “But it still is urgent, and through policy, and through art and through journalism, we have to be able to stave off the worst.”The UK defence minister, James Heappey, has urged his Conservative colleagues to wait for Sue Gray’s report before submitting letters of no confidence in the prime minister, calling for “cool heads” as Boris Johnson battles for his political future. Johnson will face the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday for the first time since No 10 was forced to apologise to the Queen over two parties held the night before Prince Philip’s funeral. Heappey conceded that Johnson had appeared under pressure in a Sky News interview on Tuesday. “He looked like the man who has the weight of the world on his shoulders,” he said. The minister acknowledged the intensity of public anger, saying he had had “hundreds of emails” from constituents, and expected the prime minister to have to make further apologies. “People are absolutely furious at what they have heard and seen,” he said. But Heappey called on Tory MPs to await the findings of Gray, who is the heading the investigation into alleged rule-breaking at Downing Street, before moving against Johnson. “I wish that they would wait. This feels like a time for cool heads in parliament,” he said. “I think we should all be wanting to wait to see what evidence she has gathered from across everybody she has spoken to and what judgments she comes to and then we can make a decision about what happens next.” He said he trusted the prime minister’s explanation, given last week, that he had believed the “bring your own booze” gathering he attended on 20 May 2020 was a “work event”. “I can see how the prime minister wouldn’t have known what it was he was going down the stairs to join. His diary is extraordinarily congested, put together in five-minute blocks, and he spends his day bouncing from high-level meeting to high-level meeting,” he said. If 54 letters are received from Conservative MPs by the chair of the backbench 1922 Committee, Graham Brady, he would call a vote of no confidence in the prime minister. If Johnson lost, his premiership would be over. “Red wall” Conservative MPs met on Tuesday to decide whether to put in their letters. They gathered in the office of the Rutland and Melton MP, Alicia Kearns, giving rise to the nickname the “pork pie plot”, with 10 or so believed to have sent in letters, and more waiting until Wednesday. Heappey appeared to agree that Johnson would have to resign if the facts laid out in the Gray report suggest he lied to parliament. “All of us are very clear on what signing the ministerial code means and you heard my colleagues the lord chancellor and the chancellor both reflect on that yesterday,” he said. Johnson is expected to update parliament on plans for lifting Covid restrictions, as No 10 battles to shift the focus away from more than a dozen lockdown-busting parties on to the government’s political agenda.Jay-Z, Meek Mill, Kelly Rowland and Killer Mike are among the star names arguing for a change in New York law that would prevent rap lyrics being used as evidence in criminal trials. The vocalists, joined by Fat Joe, Yo Gotti, Robin Thicke and more, have signed a letter urging lawmakers in New York state to back the proposed change and uphold freedom of expression. The legislation, titled Rap Music on Trial, was first proposed in November by state senators Brad Hoylman and Jamaal Bailey, to prevent prosecutors from citing lyrics except in cases of “clear and convincing proof” of a link between lyrics and a crime. “The right to free speech is enshrined in our federal and state constitutions,” Bailey said at the time. “The admission of art as criminal evidence only serves to erode this fundamental right, and the use of rap and hip-hop lyrics in particular is emblematic of the systemic racism that permeates our criminal justice system.” The legislation passed an initial stage in the state senate earlier this week. “This is a long time coming,” said Alex Spiro, Jay-Z’s lawyer, who drafted the letter. Speaking to Rolling Stone, he said: “By changing the law here, you do a lot of good for the cases that it affects, but you also send a message that progress is coming. We expect it will be followed in a lot of places.” In 2019, prosecutors in a case featuring rapper Tekashi 6ix9ine said they intended to include lyrics and music that “provide context” and “pertain to certain disputes”. The rapper was also questioned about lyrics to his hit Gummo while in court. During the murder trial of late rapper Drakeo the Ruler, who was acquitted in 2019, prosecutors included lyrics from his track Flex Freestyle during proceedings in an attempt to appoint guilt. The rapper Tay-K had a 2017 US hit with The Race before being convicted for murder – and both the song and its video were used by prosecutors during his trial. The practice is used in the UK, too. Prosecutors in a murder case against drill rapper Unknown T attempted to introduce his lyrics as evidence, though this was blocked by a judge, and the rapper was acquitted in 2020. Drill rapper Digga D, who has had nine Top 40 hits, was given a criminal behaviour order in 2018, the terms of which prevent him from using certain names, locations and themes in his lyrics. In a study of 30 appeal judgments between 2005 and 2020, London School of Economics law professor Abenaa Owusu-Bempah found that “prosecutors can use lyrics and videos to tell a story of a dangerous rapper that reflects longstanding stereotypes about Black males as criminals”. She said that “rap music is usually presented in court as ‘bad character evidence’,” but had also been used as direct evidence.Should noisy people be tolerated, celebrated or stifled? And are loud women particularly objectionable? Dr Annette Plaut was sacked from her post in the physics department of the University of Exeter after 29 years, and claims that the combination of her being “female and loud” led to her losing her job. She has just been awarded £101,000 for unfair dismissal. The university and the human resources department could not tolerate her volume, she said, because it “contradicts their stereotypical assumptions of how a woman should behave”. Clearly there is more to this case than simply volume. You don’t suddenly notice overnight that your colleague has the voice of Thor, God of Thunder, after 29 years, and the university argued during the tribunal that she was dismissed for the way she dealt with two PhD students. But the “loud” argument reveals something interesting. One person’s “valued” colleague – as Plaut was described – is another’s definition of “boisterous” and “overbearing”, as she was also called. Her reaction to the tribunal outcome? “I have a naturally loud voice. As such I have no ability to sense when I am speaking loudly.” The University of Exeter has said it will appeal against the decision. Is it really possible to be so unaware of how you come across? A few years ago a (male) friend and I were having drinks in a bar and gossiping, inconspicuously. Or so we thought. The bar was pretty empty but we could see a few other people were around so we kept our voices down. If you had asked me to describe how we were speaking, I would have said in something close to stage whispers. As the bell rang for last orders, a woman came over to our table with a face of thunder. “I just want you to know that you have ruined our evening with your booming voices. Not everyone wants to hear what you have to say at top volume.” Oh dear. We genuinely had no idea. So I get the defence of “no ability to sense when speaking loudly”. I dread to think of how ear-splitting we would have been were we not being our version of “discreet”. There’s a whole school of thought about why some of us speak more forcibly than others, some of it sympathetic, a lot of it not. In defence of the deafening, any number of innocent factors can play a role. Growing up in a voluble family. Overcompensating for shyness or anxiety. Momentary lapses of self-awareness, sometimes alcohol induced. Or a physical reason of some kind, from undiagnosed hearing loss to excessively hearty vocal muscles honed via rampant karaoke (guilty). In Plaut’s case, she argued that her way of speaking came from her “family background” and “is a perfectly normal and acceptable way to speak among people of middle and eastern European Jewish background”. She added that she had lived and worked for years in places such as New York and Germany where the volume of her voice passed unnoticed. It was only in genteel Exeter that people started to question things. As this case demonstrates, tolerance of the loud has a cultural dimension, or is at least influenced by context and surroundings. We stereotypically expect librarians and nurses to talk quietly. Teachers, politicians, thespians and “Americans” (especially New Yorkers) are generally allowed to be bombastic. There is something about loudness that is about more than volume. It’s not just a way of taking up space and attention. It’s a way of being brazen and unashamed. Who do they think they are, making all that noise? What makes them so special? To tell someone to pipe down is to remind them of their place. This is exactly what Plaut was getting at when she referenced being “loud and female”. There are two ideas at play here: “I don’t realise when I’m being ‘loud’.” And: “Why should I speak more softly to make you feel comfortable?” That night at the bar, my friend and I cringed. We hadn’t meant to ruin anyone’s evening. And we certainly weren’t about to start an argument about the level of decibels we had or hadn’t produced. Despite the fact that we were mystified, we apologised profusely, in the most dulcet tones we could manage. Which probably sounded like Brian Blessed giving a hurricane warning. This is the trouble, you see. Loudness, like beauty, is entirely subjective. It’s in the ear of the beholder. And some beholders are a lot more tolerant than others. Viv Groskop is a writer and the host of the podcast How to Own the Room: Women and the Art of Brilliant SpeakingBurberry has forecast a surge in profits after attracting younger shoppers with puffer jackets and trainers under the designer Riccardo Tisci and benefiting from a rebound in the luxury goods market as lockdowns unwind across the world. Fellow luxury brands Richemont and Prada also revealed strong trading as wealthy consumers splashed out on bags, watches and designer clothing after being unable to spend money on holidays and nights out because of Covid-19 restrictions. “As we emerge from the pandemic and people start to socialise and travel more it appears the wealthy are lapping up luxury items, with Burberry the latest name in this space to report strong trading,” said Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell. Burberry said full price sales were up 26% compared with pre-pandemic levels in the three months to 25 December after 10% growth in the previous quarter, as it sold more full-price items including Burberry trainers, raincoats and bags. The British luxury brand said it now expected to increase full-year profits by 35% year on year to between £500m and £515m, up from City analysts’ previous forecasts of just over £470m. The positive update came after Richemont, which owns brands including Cartier and Piaget, said sales rose 35%. That included a 41% rise in sales of jewellery, a 29% increase on watches and a 40% rise in fashion and accessories led by Chloé and Montblanc. Growth was strongest in the Middle East followed by the Americas and Asia. Prada said its sales were up 41% year on year and it had seen a “significant increase” in underlying profit as its customers had returned to physical stores. Burberry credited strong profits growth to its designer Tisci’s products attracting younger shoppers. Sales in Asia rose by 22% compared with the same quarter two years ago, up 5% on the previous three months, amid strong sales of coats, puffer jackets and different versions of its Lola bag. In Europe sales were down 4% on two years ago, with low numbers of tourists who accounted for 40% of Burberry’s sales before the pandemic. But the drop was a dramatic improvement on the 27% dive in the previous quarter as the chief operating officer, Julie Brown, said Burberry’s new image was proving attractive to more local shoppers. Sales in the US and Canada also continued to increase strongly as Brown said puffer jackets, a quilted coat and casual footwear featuring the Burberry check had helped attract more male shoppers. Brown said Burberry was seeing inflation, particularly on shipping and trucking costs, but she said the company was working hard not to pass those costs on to its shoppers. “We will keep the situation under review and will look for efficiencies in our cost base first,” she said. Gerry Murphy, the chair of Burberry, said: “Despite the ongoing challenges of the external environment, we are confident of finishing the year strongly and providing an excellent platform on which to build when our new chief executive, Jonathan Akeroyd, joins in April.” Burberry is in the process of switching management, after it poached Akeroyd from Versace to take over as chief executive from Marco Gobbetti, who was part way through a turnaround plan aimed at taking Burberry further upmarket, with prices in line with its French and Italian rivals. Gobbetti will step down at the end of the year, after saying he wanted to return home to Italy. Gobbetti brought Tisci to Burberry in 2018, having previously hired him at the luxury brand Givenchy.The Blundstone Arena in Hobart was recently the scene of English cricketing humiliation, but England Women have happier memories there. In January 2014, Charlotte Edwards hit 92 not out to inspire her team to a nine-wicket win in a T20 – an Ashes-winning knock in the new multi-format era. Edwards brushed tears from her eyes, lifted the trophy in triumph, and England had a nice, deserved night out on the town to celebrate (no police had to be called in to send them to bed, either). For a while, Edwards was the heroine of the hour; but cricket is a fickle mistress. Eighteen months later she surrendered the Ashes to Meg Lanning’s Australia, losing the Canterbury Test by 161 runs, and the media called for her head. By May 2016 she had lost a World T20 semi-final to the old enemy and paid for it dearly, losing the captaincy and her place in the England side. As Joe Root knows, England captains can have all the success in the world against other opponents but they will ultimately be judged by their record against Australia, an adage that equally applies in the women’s game. No England captain has won a Women’s Ashes series since Edwards triumphed at Hobart in 2014. Edwards’s successor, Heather Knight, is the latest to attempt the feat, in a series that begins on Thursday with three T20s closely followed by a Test and three ODIs. Knight has won a World Cup, reached the final of another (2018), and was denied the chance to play in the final of another (2020) by inclement weather, but success against Australia has consistently eluded her. Since she became captain in 2016, England have won just four out of 11 T20s against Australia – a win percentage of 36%. In ODIs the percentage is even lower (two won out of seven played). England have managed to cling on for draws in the Ashes Tests they have played under Knight – at Sydney in 2017 and Taunton in 2019 – but Australia dominated both matches. Perhaps it is frustration at this poor showing that has inspired Knight’s new approach of “trying to punch first and be aggressive … fighting fire with fire”. Will it work? The signs are not good. “I wouldn’t say we’ve started that well, to be totally honest,” said the England coach, Lisa Keightley, on Monday, an early contender for understatement of the tour. First, the schedule was rejigged at the 11th hour due to Covid, with the T20s brought forward, rendering England’s focus on red-ball practice during their camp in Oman irrelevant to the first leg of the series and leaving them with 10 days to acclimatise after landing in Australia. Then England’s first outdoor training session in Canberra was conducted in pouring rain. Finally, over the weekend, they played two warm-up T20 games against the England A side that has accompanied them. They lost both, despite Tammy Beaumont and Danni Wyatt being given two chances to bat in the second match. “We’ve got to get the players hitting the ball well and bowling in good areas and sharpening up,” Keightley said. Not much to do in the next three days, then. Admittedly, Australia’s preparations have not been free from disruption either. Several Women’s National Cricket League matches had to be called off due to the rapid spread of Omicron, leaving a number of their best players with little game-time since the WBBL ended in November. While Jess Jonassen (leg injury), Rachael Haynes and Megan Schutt (both parental leave) are returning to the side after extended periods of absence, the squad is far from full-strength. Frontline bowlers Sophie Molineux and Georgia Wareham are sitting out with injuries and the decision to bring in Alana King as leg-spin cover instead of Amanda-Jade Wellington has raised eyebrows. Alyssa Healy is fighting her way back from an elbow injury and a catastrophic loss of form at the back end of WBBL. The latest, most severe, blow occurred on Tuesday : news broke that Beth Mooney, Australia’s key in-form batter and leading WBBL run-scorer, sustained a fractured jaw during training and will have surgery. The Australian camp are suggesting she may still be fit by the end of the series, but that instinctively feels unlikely given the nature of the injury. The perpetual threat of a Covid outbreak hangs over the series. Both sides have already been affected, despite severe restrictions in place on socialising: a member of England’s support staff tested positive on Friday. Ellyse Perry’s arrival into Adelaide to join her teammates was also delayed by a Covid scare, though her positive PCR test was later found to have been the result of a previous, asymptomatic infection and she has been cleared to join the squad. The challenge Covid poses to the mental health of players should also not be overlooked. An Ashes series is always accompanied by extra scrutiny, but the intensity of this tour – which will immediately be followed by a 10-day quarantine in New Zealand before the World Cup – is bound to take its toll. “What I’ve learned on this journey of Covid is that everyone’s bucket gets full at different times and you can’t pick it,” Keightley said. “You think one day they’re OK and you talk to them two days later and they’re not coping. It is a challenge supporting teams and being an athlete over the last 18 months.” Over the next few weeks the battle will likely be fought off the pitch as well as on it. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Boba Fett was definitely dead. We all saw it: a partially blinded Han Solo unknowingly whacked him with a stick in Return of the Jedi, his jetpack malfunctioned, and then he fell into the mouth of a massive sand monster. You could tell by the way it swallowed and belched. Yet in The Book of Boba Fett, The Mandalorian spin-off series currently streaming on Disney+, we’re expected to believe that the iconic bounty hunter (now played by Temuera Morrison) actually survived in the acid-filled belly of the sarlacc, having siphoned oxygen from a stormtrooper’s helmet, before burning his way out with the flamethrower on his wrist, then blindly clawing through several metres of sand. Improbable, you might think, but then no one ever really dies in Star Wars. There are action figures and sequels to sell. There’s a precedent for Boba’s unlikely resurrection: plenty of non-canonical novels, comics and short stories have already depicted his escape from the sarlacc. But little did we know that this show was bringing him back only to kill him all over again. And by kill him I mean systematically take apart everything that ever made him the coolest and most mysterious character in a galaxy far, far away. In The Book of Boba Fett, the once-menacing freelancer has become a softie with a heart of gold. He has relinquished his title as a bounty hunter, become so curiously forgiving that he actually set free a Wookiee assassin just moments after it tried to murder him in his sleep, stroked a rancor behind its ear as if it were his oversized house cat and called a Tusken raider “mate”. It all started during an episode of The Mandalorian, in which Boba was properly reintroduced to audiences, where he spoke of his fear and disapproval of the Empire – one of his former and frequent clients. Within minutes, he was fighting for the light side for the very first time, having inexplicably been repositioned as a “good guy”. Or a guy with a moral compass, at least. Whatever he is now, he’s unrecognisable from the character that once fascinated Star Wars fans. This is the same Boba who previously had no problem working for notorious choker Darth Vader and notorious chokee Jabba the Hutt. When we were introduced to the live-action version of the character in The Empire Strikes Back (he actually made his first appearance in the animated segment of the infamous Star Wars Holiday Special in 1978), he was quite obviously a cold-blooded gun-for-hire with the sole aim of collecting his next bounty. It may have just been business, but he certainly wasn’t petting monsters and making friends. So why the sudden transformation? What originally made Boba the most interesting and mysterious character in the franchise was the fact that we knew absolutely nothing about him. Back then, he was just this cool, armoured bloke who stood on the side looking hard. He never took off his helmet and he barely spoke – he had a grand total of four lines in The Empire Strikes Back, and none at all in Return of the Jedi. And yet he still went on to become one of the most popular and talked about characters of the original trilogy. So much so that creator George Lucas even briefly considered making him the main villain in Jedi, with the ambitious intention of stretching out Luke Skywalker’s story over a number of subsequent trilogies. Making Boba Fett the main bad guy, or even a central character, would have diminished his all-important mystique, something that ultimately ended up happening anyway when he was dreadfully reintroduced as a child clone in Episode II: Attack of the Clones. And now it’s happening all over again. As this Disney+ series continues to examine his softer side in excruciatingly uninteresting detail, it feels as though the circle of bastardisation is almost complete. All we need now is a subplot in which he adopts a baby version of Yoda and spends at least two episodes wiping sick off its chin. Thanks to its treatment of the once badass, nihilistic bounty hunter, The Book of Boba Fett has turned out to be just another piece of bitterly disappointing, franchise-tarnishing tosh. Proof, if you ever needed it, that some parts of the galaxy are best left unexplored.Yorkshire have appointed Ottis Gibson as their new head coach on a three-year deal as the county begins rebuilding in the wake of the racism abuse scandal. The 52-year-old, who has been head coach for West Indies and South Africa as well as working as a bowling coach for England, is the latest new addition to a revamped backroom staff at Headingley. Gibson will start work at the end of February after his involvement with the Pakistan Super League side the Multan Sultans comes to an end. Last month Yorkshire announced the departures of 16 members of staff, including the entire coaching team. That included the director of cricket, Martyn Moxon, and first-team coach Andrew Gale. The county is trying to change its personnel and culture after the damaging allegations of racial harassment and bullying raised against the club by their former player Azeem Rafiq, which led to the loss of sponsors and the right to stage international matches at Headingley. Darren Gough has since been appointed as interim managing director of cricket, and Gibson will report in to him, the club said. Yorkshire plan to appoint two assistants shortly to work alongside Gibson. Lord Kamlesh Patel, who was appointed club chair in November, said: “We’re delighted to welcome Ottis to the club. His playing and coaching credentials speak for themselves and he has had a distinguished career performing at the highest level. “Ottis’s character and his commitment to buying into the process that we are going through at Yorkshire County Cricket Club shone through in our discussions. He is someone that I know will encourage dialogue and help foster a culture of inclusion at the club, as well as supporting and developing the world- class talent we have here and pushing them to the next level. “I look forward to working with Ottis over the coming weeks and months as we continue our rebuild of the club.” Gibson’s playing career as an all-rounder included stints with Durham, Glamorgan and Leicestershire. He also played two Tests and 15 one-day internationals for the West Indies. “I’m extremely honoured and excited to be given the opportunity to join Yorkshire County Cricket Club as head coach,” he said. “This is one of the most prestigious roles in English county cricket, and I am really looking forward to working with this talented group of players to take the club forward. I’ve spoken at length with Goughy about the direction the club is heading in and I’m excited to be a part of that future.”Britain’s cost of living crisis worsened in December after inflation jumped to 5.4% – its highest level in almost 30 years – driven by the higher cost of clothes, food and footwear. Heaping further pressure on Bank of England policymakers to raise interest rates when they meet next month, the price of furniture and eating out also increased as shortages of staff pushed up wage costs and hold-ups at UK ports hiked the cost of imports. The Bank expects the consumer prices index (CPI) to rise to 6% by April, while some analysts have forecast it could hit 7% unless the government decides to pump billions of pounds into the energy sector to cap spiralling heating costs. Ofgem, the energy regulator, must announce a rise in the price cap on energy bills in the next fortnight and it is understood ministers are scrambling to put together a package of measures to prevent an estimated annual increase of £500 per household. Speaking to MPs in parliament, the Bank’s governor, Andrew Bailey, said financial markets now expected energy prices to remain high until mid-2023. This follows forecasts only a few months ago of a decline this summer. Bailey said energy prices had been a significant inflationary pressure last year and were responsible for about 1.5 percentage points of November’s 5.1% inflation rate. The Labour MP Rushanara Ali said that implied Ofgem’s cap on bills in April would have the effect of reducing inflation and easing the cost of living crisis. “The gas price story, which is a European story, is not something we can deal with and the UK government cannot deal with on its own. But there are choices to be made and the impact will have a far bigger effect on lower income households,” she said. “If you get pressure on cost of living and real earnings, that will tend to restrain demand in the economy and that could lead to higher unemployment and that would bring inflation down. It has happened before.” Oil prices have made a large contribution to the increasing cost of living, a trend that has continued this year after Brent crude rose by 15% rise this month to more than $80 a barrel. Analysts at Goldman Sachs think it will hit $100 a barrel later this year. Figures for wages in November showed pay packets increased by 4.2%, including bonuses, on the previous year, but fell behind the rising cost of living by 0.9%. Unless there was a leap in wages in December, the increase in prices will leave the average worker even worse off. The only positive sign for the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, who has come under intense pressure to provide funds for low income families to cope with rising costs, was that the Office for National Statistics reported a downward trend in the monthly rise in CPI. It increased by 0.5% in December, down from 0.7% in November and 1.1% in October. The cost of goods rose by 6.9% while services increased by only 3.1%, giving hope that once global shortages of goods begin to ease, the inflation rate could fall steeply back towards the Bank’s 2% target. The Resolution Foundation said: “While volatile, a fall in output price inflation for goods in December – generally a leading indicator of broader inflation – offers some hope that inflationary pressures could start to ease for some goods.” Kitty Ussher, the chief economist at the Institute of Directors, said she was concerned that the increase from 5.1% in November came mainly from higher food prices. “Not only does this provide additional evidence that inflation is becoming endemic rather than transitory, it also bodes ill for households facing multiple rises in the cost of living this spring. We therefore expect interest rates to rise again when the Bank of England monetary policy committee next meets in early February.” The Bank increased its base interest rate from 0.1% to 0.25% in December and is expected to make a further increase to 0.5% in February. Analysts expect further rises this year to take the base rate above 1%. Sunak said he was aware of the cost of living pressures, adding: “We will continue to listen to people’s concerns as we have done throughout the pandemic. “We’re cutting the universal credit taper to make sure work pays, freezing alcohol and fuel duties to keep costs down and providing targeted support to help households with their energy bills.” Unions complained that millions of workers on low incomes would be hit by the cost of living crisis. The Unison general secretary, Christina McAnea, representing thousands of public sector workers, said ministers would need to re-examine decisions to keep wage rises low. “The figures make a mockery of the 1.75% pay offer for school and council staff. The government must boost the money available so wages there can keep up with rocketing prices too. “Health and care services, already thousands of workers short, are likely to be the biggest losers. Staff are likely to jump ship for more lucrative, less stressful work, where there’s also no requirement to be Covid jabbed.”A man has died and two people have been seriously injured in Lancashire after a vehicle and a trailer fell into a river when a bridge collapsed. Eleven people were thrown from a Polaris Ranger and its trailer when a crossing on a farm in the Moor Lane area of Roeburndale gave way at about 4.25pm on Tuesday, Lancashire police said. The force confirmed that the people in the vehicles were from a shooting party who were travelling on private land. One man died and two were seriously injured. One sustained a serious head injury and was taken to Royal Preston hospital, and the other was being treated for a back injury. Eight others were injured and taken to Royal Lancaster Infirmary. Health and Safety Executive officials and detectives from Lancashire police were investigating the incident on Wednesday. DI Kirsty Wyatt said: “My thoughts are very much with all those involved in what is a very sad and tragic incident. One man has sadly died and a number of people have suffered serious injuries. “At this time we believe the vehicle was pulling the trailer, containing a number of people, when a bridge gave way. Those people were then thrown from the vehicle and trailer. Our investigation is at its very early stages and inquiries are ongoing to establish what happened.” Ambulance, fire and mountain rescue crews were called to the scene. Police said road closures were in place and were expected to continue for some time.When Neil Crittenden heard that an extreme winter storm was about to hit Oklahoma last winter, he did what officials advised him to do and kept his heat on and water running so that his pipes wouldn’t freeze. The 40-year-old Oklahoma City resident even used hair dryers to keep them thawed. What Crittenden didn’t know at the time was that the energy he used was going to cost him significantly. As winter storm Uri swept across the south central US last February, utilities that weren’t prepared scrambled. The storm caused blackouts in several states and resulted in the deaths of at least 223 people. Oklahoma’s gas supply was in dire straits, with demand surging and the cold freezing critical equipment. To keep the heat on, the state’s biggest gas company, Oklahoma Natural Gas, made a last-minute decision: it purchased fuel from the wildly expensive spot market at nearly 600 times the usual price. Now, nearly a year later, officials say residents like Crittenden have to foot the entire $1.37bn bill. The state’s utility regulator, the Oklahoma Corporation Commission, is expected to approve the plan later this month. “Imagine if you went to the gas station and filled up $50 of gas for your car based on the prices the sign says. And then two months later, you get told you actually have to engage in a payment plan to pay off a 1,000 times that price,” Crittenden said. Instead of challenging the prices the utility and its customers were charged, Oklahoma is readying a plan to use securitization – which works similar to a credit card – to cover the debt. It will pay off the $1.4bn, plus interest, by charging customers as much as $7.80 a month over the next 25 years. Many states have used securitization to cover climate-related costs, like repairing downed power lines after a hurricane. But it has rarely been used for fuel costs. Energy and economics experts say it can be misused to prop up unprepared energy systems that are being tested by worsening extreme weather. “It sets the precedent that there can be basically no upper limits to the cost of gas that would be passed on to a consumer,” said Kylah McNabb, an energy consultant and a former policy adviser to Oklahoma’s secretary of energy and environment under the former Republican governor Mary Fallin. “That’s scary to me as a consumer.” Consumer watchdogs are wondering why Oklahoma Natural Gas wasn’t better prepared – with emergency fuel contracts or weatherized power plants. And they want to know who is profiting off the $1.4bn – a matter state regulators have agreed to keep secret. They say state leaders haven’t adequately questioned the charges and have instead rushed to make a plan to pay off the debt – in part because the oil and gas industry is so powerful in Oklahoma. The state is the fourth biggest producer of gas in the country. Critics say Oklahoma’s story is part of a national trend of regulators failing to challenge the industries they oversee, as climate change worsens and extreme weather becomes more common. “Regulators wield tremendous power over energy policy in the United States, but too often defer to the very utilities they are supposed to regulate. Weak regulation means higher rates for consumers and more carbon pollution,” said Charlie Spatz, a researcher at Energy and Policy Institute, a utility watchdog. Oklahoma leaders counter they are getting customers a good deal, ensuring a lower interest rate from banks by charging a flat fee on monthly power bills, regardless of how much energy a customer used during the storm. They are also mandating a $687 “exit fee” for gas customers who opt to switch from using gas for heating and cooking to electric. Oklahoma Natural Gas says it was prepared for the storm, in part because it had purchased gas at lower costs in the summer and put it in storage for the winter. In a statement it said the exit fee was not meant to be punitive and would “ensure that all customers pay their fair share”. The Corporation Commission said regulators could not comment on pending cases. But one commissioner, Republican Bob Anthony, has signaled his discontent with the way the governing body has voted on recent securitization cases stemming from the storm. “[The commissioners] have the right to hold any of these companies in contempt, and you have the right to examine their records at any time – we have the right to demand special reports,” Anthony said. He recently voted against allowing an Oklahoma electric utility to pursue securitization. The other two Republican commissioners approved the request. “I’m disappointed when people want to, ‘go along and get along’, because we are here to provide justice,” Anthony said. “I don’t think my job as a commissioner is to impose extensive interest obligations on ratepayers.” When in debt State officials warned Oklahomans about higher prices in the lead-up to the winter storm, but no one expected they could surge from $2 to $3 per thousand cubic feet to almost $1,200. Oklahoma’s price increases were among the highest in the region, three times higher than spot prices at neighboring fuel trading locations in Houston, according to the Energy Information Administration. Monthly bills were projected to be in the thousands. State leaders recognized that would cause extreme hardship. Oklahoma has the eighth-highest poverty rate in the country and was already struggling to recover from the coronavirus pandemic. Nearly a week after the storm hit, the state’s then attorney general, Mike Hunter, announced that he was looking into evidence of market manipulation by utilities. His findings could have forced the gas companies involved to reduce their charges to the utility and its customers. But a few months later an extramarital affair forced him to step down, and his replacement John O’Connor has since focused largely on challenging federal Covid-19 vaccination regulations and resuming the state’s death penalty. When state legislators formed a special committee to review the storm costs, Oklahomans hadn’t been billed for the massive fuel costs, so they weren’t engaged. Legislators introduced the securitization bill in early April 2021. The governor signed it into law on 23 April. It was meant to be just one option, but lawmakers and regulators at the Corporation Commission never revisited whether Oklahoma Natural gas customers should have to pay the $1.4bn. Ashok Gupta, senior energy economist at the environmental group Natural Resources Defense Counsel, said that was “a failure of the regulatory body to do its job effectively even from a procedural point of view”. Other state’s regulators have rejected utility requests to cover debt from storm Uri. In Minnesota, officials denied a gas utility’s request to recover $500m. A small town in south-eastern Kansas sued BP Energy in March for price gouging. Oklahoma regulators have clawed back money from natural gas utilities before when they thought they overpaid for fuel. After a 2002 cold snap, the Corporation Commission required Oklahoma Natural Gas to refund $34m to customers. Oklahomans have pushed back on the bill increases they have been told to expect. Fern McIntosh of Tulsa, in response to a call for public comment, pleaded with policymakers. “I am a low-income retired lady … I barely eat now,” she said. Who is profiting? Consumer advocates have charged that regulators are too close with the industry they oversee. Recent reports point out that the Corporation Commission’s three elected officials have each received more than $200,000 in campaign donations from employees, subsidiaries or political action committees tied to the companies they regulate, according to campaign finance reports. Two commissioners, Todd Heitt and Dana Murphy, did not respond to a request for comment about their campaign donations. Anthony said his votes were independent and that his voting record had shown that. Two days after the historic February storm, Oklahoma Natural Gas submitted a “protective order” to keep private the names of gas companies that benefited from the price spike. The Corporation Commission, which oversees utilities, agreed within 48 hours. Oklahoma Natural Gas said its request for a confidentiality provision with its suppliers was “industry standard”. But the huge price surge – more than 600 times the normal prices – has led to calls for greater transparency. The Corporation Commission’s public utility division, which operates independently from its elected commissioners, has filed a request to compel Oklahoma utilities to disclose their suppliers from during the storm. “As a ratepayer, I would want to know, too,” said Brandy Wreath, director of that division. But Wreath argued Oklahoma Natural Gas was not to blame for the costs, since it didn’t make money off gas sales, and he noted the attorneys and experts involved in the case were able to scrutinize who profited off the gas sale. Wreath said the federal government was ultimately responsible for ensuring customers are protected in natural gas markets. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, which has been investigating possible price manipulation in the natural gas and electricity markets, found 14 suspicious trades but hasn’t identified them. That work is unlikely to be complete before Oklahoma’s deal is finalized. Most Oklahomans became aware of the higher bills they would be paying only after receiving a November letter from the utility requesting them to weigh in on the plan already under way. Paul Betow, a retired 61-year-old Muskogee resident who has lived in Oklahoma all of his life, had a grim take. “They are trying to pass this off and make it average out for 28 years,” Betow said. “I will be dead in 28 years.” This story is a collaboration of Floodlight and Oklahoma Watch.Vampire bats “have each other’s backs”, according to one of the extraordinary stories in this fascinating book. Should one bat be hungry, a roost mate will regurgitate a nutritious meal of semi-digested blood to help it live to bite another day. In a similar display of apparent altruism, a bee with a parasite will isolate itself rather than infect the rest of the colony – a Captain Oates-like sacrifice on the bee’s part. And, say what you like about rats; in experiments they will open a door to let a cold, wet stranger into their cosy nests. “We can trace direct and important parallels between our own societies and those of the animals with whom we share the planet,” writes Ashley Ward, a professor in animal behaviour. “By understanding animals on their own terms, we can understand ourselves so much the better.” Actually, he draws very few explicit connections between animal behaviour and our own, and is cautious about ascribing emotions or motivations to the creatures he studies – even in tear-jerking anecdotes about how elephants and wolves appear to mourn. But it’s hard not to take from some of his stories the idea that humans could learn a lot from social animals, for all our massive brains and our ability to pass knowledge down generations. “Our instinct for co-operation has provided the foundation for human civilisation,” he points out. We need that now more than ever. Ward describes this book as his attempt “to distil the wonder that I still feel in the company of animals”, and it certainly does that. He seems intent on arousing sympathy for the creepiest of creatures, and while that means that you’ll read some chapters through your fingers as he describes the causes of homicidal locust swarms or the scent of “hyena butter”, any writer who can evoke the existential sadness of a lonely cockroach, or make krill thrilling, or describe a snorkelling colleague being engulfed in a “gargantuan cetacean bum detonation” is a real gift to science communication. Means of cooperation vary widely across species, and many of them have already helped humans to live better. Fish shoals and starling murmurations, for instance, inspired systems to prevent driverless cars from crashing. Swarm intelligence, or “the wisdom of the crowd”, explains the effectiveness of search engines such as Google. On the other hand, it is the natural tendency of fish to shoal that has enabled people, with our huge trawlers and vast nets, to push some species to the brink. If humans had more of a shoal mentality, would we be better able to think about what’s best for the future of the entire group? Some thought-provoking chapters about baboons, bonobos and chimpanzees show how humans could learn from our closest relatives, too. At their best, complex societies are often founded on networking rather than domination by strength, Ward suggests. The alpha male “must be a relationship-builder, rather than a despot”; those who cheat are often punished; and “the perception of fairness may be an essential part of the glue that binds them”. Ward also explains how bonobos greet foreign troupes with a feast in a fruit tree and an afternoon of promiscuous and pansexual genital rubbing, so it is important not to extrapolate too directly from animals to ourselves, after all. Perhaps humans could start by just trying to be a bit more bat. • The Social Lives of Animals: How Co-Operation Conquered the Natural World is published by Profile (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.About 40 miles south of San Francisco, three futuristic structures rise from the earth. With sloping roofs clad in thousands of overlapping tiles, the buildings could be mistaken for the world’s most architecturally advanced circus tent. They are, in fact, part of Google’s new Bay View campus, which is due to welcome employees this year – pandemic allowing – and is situated a few miles east of its existing HQ campus in Mountain View. The firm says the finished buildings will have 90,000 tiles which form a “solar skin” roof, which its designers have named “dragonscale” and estimate will generate almost 7 megawatts of power, or 40% of the electricity needs of the campus. It sees this as part of its efforts to hit the pledge made by CEO Sundar Pichai that Google will run every data center and campus on carbon-free energy by 2030. Corporations have never been under more pressure to follow through and make meaningful progress on carbon emissions from regulators and amid greater scrutiny around “greenwashing” from environmentalists – and their own employees. Demand for low-emission offices is larger than it ever has been, according to several US architects the Guardian spoke to. That’s especially true in California, where manifestations of the climate crisis are obvious: hotter summers, drought and an annual wildfire season. “Buildings are awful for the environment,” said Eric Corey Freed, the sustainability director at architecture firm CannonDesign. “If we’re going to solve climate change, we have to fix our buildings.” In the US, buildings consumed around 40% of the country’s electricity in 2020, according to data from the US Energy Information Administration, and are also one of the planet’s biggest emitters of greenhouse gasses, accounting for 37% of the world’s energy-related CO2 emissions. That’s not including all the emissions from refrigerants – chemicals that maintain air conditioning systems and refrigerators – which have a global warming potential that’s hundreds to thousands of times higher than carbon dioxide. Designers must consider the “operational carbon” of running the building and the “embodied carbon” of creating it, such as the emissions from producing materials, constructing the project and transporting waste offsite. Freed is optimistic, however, because the costs of being sustainable are coming down. “Considering solar [panels] for your campus or your building is so much less expensive than it used to be,” added Maria Papiez, the director of sustainable design for EwingCole. “That really was only for the Googles in the past, who had the dollars to do that. And now, it’s the least expensive form of electricity in some places.” As well as the “dragonscale” solar panels, Google’s new campus also plans to have a geothermal battery underground where it will store heat to warm the building, Asim Tahir, the tech giant’s lead on its sustainable energy strategy, told Grist. The idea behind all the Bay View innovations is “to kickstart this market in the US by showing it can be done”, Tahir said. Google has been working on the project with architecture firms Heatherwick Studio and Bjarke Ingels Group (BIG) as well as Switzerland-based company SunStyle, which has created arrays of solar panels on multiple buildings in Europe and wants to expand in the US. “I really do like the idea of a tipping point,” said Papiez of EwingCole. “Once we get enough critical mass, there’s this opportunity to really tip in the right direction.” Chris Chatto, a principal at architecture firm ZGF who has focused on sustainability for the past 15 years, says that he has seen a substantial uptick in clients requesting sustainable buildings. “Honestly, the amount of conversations I’ve had in the last three to six months is probably the same amount that I’ve had in the last few years,” he said. ZGF is currently working with Microsoft, which has also made major goals to cut down carbon emissions. “I think in some ways”, he added, “we’ve probably seen more consistent signals and interest from the tech industry on the west coast.” Architect Anthony Brower, a Leed fellow and director of sustainability at architecture firm Gensler has seen this too, beyond just the big tech giants. “Some clients have very general requests,” he said, “They want to see sustainability integrated into their work. Other clients are getting very specific about exactly what they want in a very sophisticated manner.” Recruitment and regulations Aside from contributing to global climate goals, sustainable architecture has increasingly become a recruitment strategy, specifically when competing for Gen-Z workers who deeply care about the climate and want to work for a company that embodies their values. Even Pichai, Google’s CEO, said that shifting to renewables will help the company attract employees. “If you don’t do this correctly, you won’t be able to attract talent,” Pichai told Bloomberg. “When I look at the younger generation, people who are teenagers now, I can’t see them making the choice to work for a company which they feel is polluting.” Freed agrees, noting that employees often enjoy the experience of being in a sustainable building more than a traditional office, even if they don’t know why, in part because sustainable spaces are often filled with light and natural materials. As Freed put it, “The spaces are just better to be in.” But this movement isn’t just about recruiting or doing something ethical. As laws and building codes are updated, companies face mounting pressure to put resources behind sustainable projects. By 2030, California has a goal to bring its greenhouse gas emissions 40% below 1990 levels. Corporations also don’t want to be penalized for refusing to comply with potentially more stringent laws down the line. “There are carbon emission laws where building owners are being required to essentially increase their carbon efficiency … and if they don’t, they’re being fined,” said Chatto, the architect at ZGF. These signals are changing how investors think about their buildings. “At least some of our clients are recognizing they’re going to hold on to the building for 10 years. Then when they want to sell and recoup and make a profit on their investment, it could be a very, very different world 10 years from now,” he said. One of California’s recent building laws may incentivize companies to move away from some of the most polluting building materials. In July, the state gave the green light to mass timber buildings up to 18 stories high. Mass timber – smaller pieces of wood fused into strong slabs – is heralded as a more sustainable alternative to steel and concrete, and has been widely used in Europe for two decades already. Before the code update, California limited mass timber structures for commercial use to six stories, making it impossible for many projects to use. Mass timber presents an exciting prospect in California. The material has a naturally lower carbon footprint than concrete and steel, and even sequesters carbon, pulling it out of the atmosphere, like trees, to turn a building into a carbon sink. California’s first multi-story, fully mass timber building, 1 De Haro, developed by SKS Partners and designed by Perkins&amp;Will, was recently completed in San Francisco. With floor-to-ceiling glass windows paired with raw wood beams and ceilings, the space looks warm yet pristine. The project is zoned to be part office, part space for light manufacturing. With its pledge to become carbon free, Google is attempting a bold feat. The goal is a steep one, especially since it’s not only responsible for the output of its campuses, but massive data centers housing its servers. It’s worth noting that Google’s plan does not account for the company’s scope 3 emissions – emissions that tie back to the company, but that the company may not control. These include the manufacturing, production materials, and transport of Chromebooks and Pixel, according to Grist. Though this isn’t foul play, it’s a shortcoming of the net-zero metric and applies to companies across the board. To move the needle, architects continue to push sustainable workplaces as tools for change. “It’s been an exciting time to be in sustainability”, Freed said, “to see these pressures mounting, and companies now not only have to take it seriously, they want to, because they’re seeing these overarching trends.” • This article was amended on 21 January 2022 to refer to 7 megawatts of power, not energy.It’s common enough in theatre and opera to preserve a classic text and entirely reconceive its production; less so in ballet. English National Ballet director Tamara Rojo has excellent reasons for a new take on Marius Petipa’s 19th-century Raymonda, an orientalist crusader story of a virtuous maid, noble knight and evil Saracen. She shifts the action to the Crimean war, where a young Englishwoman has followed her soldier fiance, and discovers a sense of vocation in nursing. It sounds like a canny move, setting the scene for a Victorian costume drama about a woman’s choices, inspired by the spirit of national treasure Florence Nightingale – perfect BBC primetime material. Of course, score, sets, style, roles and steps had to be reworked to fit the rethink, but never mind purism: does it work? In parts, but not as a whole. The highlight is Raymonda’s dream scene. It harnesses the essence of balletic magic – a stage flooded with moonlight and dancers in gauzy white – but peoples this traditionally female realm with both men and women, their ordered ranks, crossing runs and sighing spirals engendering an almost spiritual sense of the tender with the wounded. You believe that in nursing, Raymonda really has seen a higher purpose. But nursing, and indeed the war itself, are marginal to the ballet – sometimes literally, as when bouncy soldiers and smiley wenches hog the stage while casualties and carers remain discreetly on the sidelines. True, the figure of Sister Clemence (Precious Adams) is an intermittent call to conscience, but Raymonda (Shiori Kase) is more exercised by another dilemma: should she choose good English soldier John de Bryan (Isaac Hernández) – husband material, basically – or flashy Turkish ambassador Abdur Rahman (Jeffrey Cirio)? Rojo introduces some effective ambivalence to these interactions, Kase and Hernández in particular often starting their duets physically at odds with each other. But a lot of choreographic action is hard-coded into the score and steps, and sprightly folk dancers in their finest keep bounding in from all over to jolly things along, regardless. A bold concept, lavishly produced with great music and great dancing, but it’s not so great drama when the heroine finally chooses her vocation, and it feels like the most interesting part of her story is about to begin. Raymonda is at the London Coliseum until 23 JanuaryKwajo Tweneboa adored his father. They were very similar: they both enjoyed a laugh, had an interest in current affairs and made sacrifices to care for others. Then, in January 2020, Tweneboa watched his father, who suddenly became terminally ill with cancer, die. All the while, cockroaches, mice and flies infested their dilapidated housing association flat on the Eastfields estate in Mitcham, south London. Tweneboa, a 23-year-old student, shared the flat with his two sisters, 24 and 21. He says he asked the housing association, Clarion, to make repairs for more than a year, with little success, before deciding to take further action. Since then, he has become a champion for his neighbours and all those living in similarly squalid conditions, forcing landlords and housing associations to acknowledge their responsibilities and make urgent, necessary repairs. “I’m willing to take on absolutely everyone and anyone to ensure this issue is spoken about,” he says. “It’s been going on for way too long.” Speaking via a video call, Tweneboa is eloquent and passionate as he lists the appalling conditions his family had to endure after moving into the flat in 2018. He says the pest infestation made home cooking impossible, so the family lived on takeaways. There was mould on walls. In one room, there was no ceiling, just exposed beams and floorboards from the flat above. Cabinets rotted and water poured through light fixtures, which Tweneboa claims were surrounded by asbestos. “I couldn’t even bathe in my own house. I had to go to the gym,” Tweneboa says. Despite repeated appeals to Clarion – Europe’s largest housing association – he says he received little help. (Clarion denies this.) When Clarion did respond, they sent the wrong people to fix the wrong thing. Tweneboa says he complained about the missing ceiling in February 2020, but no one came to fix it until October. “Instead, they sent a roofing team out – it was stupid things like that. They didn’t actually put the ceiling back up until the following year.” Meanwhile, Tweneboa’s father, a former care worker, was undergoing treatment for stage 4 oesophageal cancer. He was diagnosed in November 2018, 10 months after they moved in, and cared for at home by Macmillan nurses. Tweneboa was shocked by his father’s sudden deterioration. “I’ve never experienced anything like that before,” he says. “He would just sleep for days on end. It wiped him out. I believe he deteriorated as quickly as he did as a result of the conditions he was living in.” The nurses struggled to care for Tweneboa’s father due to the dire state of the property. “They were finding it difficult to bathe him in the bathroom, for example, as it had no lights and the tiles were falling apart.” *** Landlords ignoring their tenants’ requests is an all-too-common practice. In October, the Housing Ombudsman’s report on damp and mould in socially rented properties found evidence of “maladministration” among 56% of the 142 landlords they investigated over a two-year period, rising to 64% for complaint-handling alone. The report said: “This failure rate was often the result of inaction, excessive delays or poor communication.” The roots of Britain’s housing crisis can be traced to Margaret Thatcher’s government and the 1980 Housing Act, which gave council tenants the right to buy their council homes. Councils enticed tenants with the offer of 100% mortgages and generous discounts on the value of their property. Wealthier tenants were often able to transform their homes before selling them or becoming landlords themselves, but this resulted in a drop in the numbers of properties available for those who still required social housing. Today, getting social housing – and having it repaired – can feel like a lottery. The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (now the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities) had its budget cut in half in 2010, while austerity has the housing departments of councils short-staffed and unable to respond quickly to complaints. When Thatcher took power in 1979, the average council tenant paid £6.40 in rent a week. When John Major took office in 1992, tenants were forking out £30 a week – a rise of 370%. However, the average pay for full-time manual workers rose by only 189% over the same period, which means the proportion of income spent on rent by those workers had increased by about 62% by 1992. Councils have not replaced the properties they sold and many tenants who remain in social housing feel as if they have been forgotten. The lack of social housing stock also forces many low-income households into the lower end of the private rental market, where they have even fewer rights than social renters, who can usually rent their homes for life. Assured shorthold tenancies allow private landlords to issue no-fault eviction notices without giving a reason, which means some landlords will ignore tenants’ complaints about essential repairs and address them at their own convenience – especially when dealing with low-income tenants who feel they have few options. One of the critical problems with housing in the UK is that many of the buildings are old: 81% were built before 1990, 35% were built before 1945 and 20% were built a century ago. Austerity has compounded this to create the housing misery we see today. The Good Home Inquiry, published by the Centre for Ageing Better in September, found that 4.1m homes do not meet the decent homes standard (DHS), the statutory minimum standard for housing. This states that homes must be free of dangerous hazards, have modern facilities, be in a reasonable state of repair and have effective insulation and heating. Tweneboa’s home fell well short of these criteria. Tweneboa and his sisters had lived with their father since they were children (his mother also lives in London). Before moving to Eastfields, they had spent years in cramped temporary accommodation, unable to afford the cost of a mortgage or the high rents of private accommodation. Once, they were housed in a one-room converted garage. “There was mould growing on to the beds and we had a water [pipe] burst during winter, so we had to call the fire brigade. It was just absolutely horrific.” Tweneboa’s father fought for years to get the family into social housing; Eastfields was the only permanent accommodation offered to the family. *** A year after his father died, Tweneboa took matters into his own hands. In May, he decided to shame the housing association on Twitter, posting a collection of photos showing his family’s living conditions. He wrote: “Clarion Housing has to be one of the worst council housing in London. Since my dad passed away in 2020 they’ve left me in a property which has been described as ‘unliveable’ and when I’ve called to chase a leak which I reported 5 days ago they’ve told me they’re busy.” The tweets went viral, attracting attention from the national press. Tweneboa also started a petition asking Clarion’s chief executive, Clare Miller, to resign. The petition noted how Miller was paid £400,000 a year while “her tenants live in conditions not fit for animals”. The negative press appeared to spur Clarion into action. They repaired Tweneboa’s flat over the summer and issued an apology stating: “We acknowledge the inconvenience the repairs issues at this property have caused and apologise if Mr Tweneboa feels we haven’t provided the service expected from us.” “That sentence really annoyed me,” Tweneboa says. “So I contacted every single house on my estate and, within half an hour, I had constant messages or photos, complaints of everyone else suffering with the same disrepair – in some cases, even worse.” Tweneboa says he discovered that some tenants on Eastfields had been complaining about their living conditions for decades. A family of six complained they were contending with dampness so severe that mushrooms had sprouted all over their home. Other tenants reported collapsed ceilings, broken fire doors – which allowed strangers to trespass, use drugs and relieve themselves in the communal hallways – and hordes of mice scurrying around inside the walls. Tweneboa posted a thread on Twitter with more photographs and descriptions of the disrepair, forcing Clarion to issue a further response: “We recognise that some repairs and pest control measures have taken too long over the last six months and apologise to all affected residents.” The housing association also promised “a continuing planned investment programme”, which included decorating and updates to appliances. After he called out Clarion online, Tweneboa’s inbox blew up. “I’ve had hundreds, if not thousands, of people contact me from across the country,” he says. One family said they had to wash their children on their high-rise balcony during the height of winter because their shower had broken. Clarion allegedly told the mother of the family to use the toilet and the kitchen sink; her son ended up in hospital due to the cold conditions. A woman in Westminster claimed her water heating pipe exploded at 4am, flooding her flat and leaving her with burns. Tweneboa also heard from tenants struggling with mould, damp, disrepair, infestation and neglect. “We’ve been suffering,” he says. “This should be a national scandal, but it’s been kept under wraps and ignored for so long. I’ve realised that this has been going on for absolutely decades, longer than I’ve been alive, but people in power just don’t care.” In 2017, 72 people died in the Grenfell Tower fire. The disaster exposed the high level of neglect for the country’s poorest households and highlighted how slow landlords can be to react to serious complaints. Concerns had been raised about the materials used in the building’s external cladding years before the Kensington high-rise went up in flames. The catastrophe inspired books, documentaries and films and galvanised housing campaigners. Four years later, though, not much has changed for the UK’s poorest tenants. Tweneboa says he thought that, after Grenfell, councils would be more conscientious about housing safety. “But what I learned is that people’s lives are still being put at risk. I have no doubt that people have died as a result of living in social housing.” His intuitions are correct. In 2019, E3G, a climate change thinktank, reported that 17,000 people died due to cold households in the winter of 2017/18 – the sixth-worst figure in a study of 30 European countries. Studies have shown that poor living conditions can have a profound impact on people’s physical and mental wellbeing. Since its public shaming, Clarion claims to have knocked on the door of “each and every home” in Eastfields to inform residents of its plans for the area. It has also opened a new on-site office and announced a £1.3bn regeneration project in Merton, including the Eastfields estate. A Clarion spokesperson says: “Clarion Housing Group and Merton council have a joint vision for the future of the Eastfields estate, which is a community that benefits from regeneration and brings forward hundreds of new affordable homes. “Since Mr Tweneboa’s case first came to light last year, we have invested significantly into existing homes, apologised to residents where our service fell short and published a comprehensive lessons learned report. Our focus now is on the future and working with the council, our residents and key partners to create a community that everyone living in Eastfields will feel proud to call home.” After everything Tweneboa has been through, does he feel as if he has made a difference? “My community definitely values me because of how outspoken I’ve been. But Clarion only put out their statements when I get the media involved. They’ve never been willing to talk to me directly. They don’t care. [But] I don’t need to feel valued by them; the only thing I care about is people who are suffering under the same conditions as I did.” On the Eastfields estate, Clarion says it has completed more than 600 repairs since June 2021, as well as kitchen and bathroom replacements at 24 properties, as part of their investment programme. Although his father never got to see these achievements, Tweneboa knows he would be pleased to see him helping so many people. “He would be proud and he would say: ‘Keep going and keep doing it until they listen.’”Sometimes a video game can be thoroughly entertaining, not for any new ideas it brings to the table, but for the way in which it combines a lot of old ideas into an excitingly fresh experience. The latest shooter from Ubisoft’s Tom Clancy interactive universe is a fine example. Set in an alternative Rainbow Six timeline where Earth has been invaded by a race of swampy, Lovecraftian aliens known as the Archaeans, it stars the spec-ops warriors from the multiplayer shooter hit Siege as they set out to kick ET’s ass. Players form teams of three operatives, each with their own special skills and weapons, and then go into alien invasion sites to kill monsters and get things done. Every site is divided into three escalatingly difficult zones, with different objectives, and players can choose to exfiltrate after each section or gamble on not getting killed and continue on to the end, for greater rewards. The key is to take things slowly and carefully. Believe me, the run-and-gun approach is not an option here. As in Siege, you can send in a remote control buggy to check out unexplored areas and tag enemies and mission objectives before risking your own bodies, which is good because the aliens don’t mess about: some tear at you with blade-like limbs, some shoot blue spikes, some gambol up to you on all-fours and then explode like some sort of weaponised labrador. Plus, if you get into a noisy shootout, each environment is littered with boil-like seed pods that produce new enemies until you destroy them. Stealth, careful team management and the inventive use of gadgets such as motion trackers and sentry guns, is the key, especially in the early stages where your health gauge is puny and your body armour is apparently made out of balsa wood and hope. The zones themselves take in everything from New York hotels to San Francisco punk clubs and Alaska refineries. Locations are dark and twisty and multilevelled and, as in Siege, there are walls you can smash down and doorways you can barricade in order to control the flow of the action. When you complete a sub-zone you get awarded a bunch of points for completing tasks and doing extra challenges, and all this goes toward levelling up your equipment and researching handy new gadgets such as claymores and scan grenades, which highlight all the enemies in an area. What it feels like then is a tactical co-op shooter crossed with Call of Duty’s zombie mode crossed with the XCOM turn-based strategy games. You’re not just hunting and shooting the aliens, you’re investigating their biology and using it to create new defences (which is very XCOM), but occasionally a mission will require you to defend a key section for several seconds as the monsters team toward you, which feels very like zombies, or any frenzied horde mode shooter. The interplay between tense exploration and these moments of loud, lethal action is extremely well-handled, and trying to complete an objective when you’re all on 1% of health and you can hear the aliens breathing nearby is genuinely nerve-shredding stuff. As if that wasn’t enough pressure, there’s an extra resurrection mechanic ripped from the roguelite genre. When operatives are incapacitated during a mission, they’re left behind and you have to go back and rescue them on a later incursion. The rescue sequence involves you yanking the character from a horrible gooey tree-monster before it consumes them – an idea surely inspired by co-op horror title Dead By Daylight. Clearly, the developers of Extraction saw the old Oscar Wilde quote – “talent borrows, genius steals” – and nicked it for their design document. But honestly, it doesn’t matter. This is an enthralling strategy shooter with thorough world-building, a well-balanced progression system and atmospheric locations. The soundtrack, too, is excellent, a mix of John Carpenter-esque synth tracks and spooky cello sonatas that really immerse you in the fiction. Playing with two pals is the optimum experience, but you can choose to be placed with strangers or to go it alone – in which case it becomes a survival horror experience akin to the more shooty Resident Evil titles. There are plenty of co-op shooters on the market, and some intriguing titles on the way (Sons of the Forest, Gotham Knights, Redfall), but Extraction has military gadgets, dank horror and heart-stopping stealth, and those are qualities that, although not original, make for a heck of a game. • Tom Clancy’s Rainbow Six Extraction is out on 20 January; £45.It has not been a good start to 2022 for American democracy. MLK Day came and went, and even though Democratic leaders, including President Biden, are finally pushing hard to pass federal legislation that would protect voting rights, they have so far been unable to deliver: while Republicans remain united in obstruction, Democratic senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema keep chasing the chimera of “bipartisanship”. As Democrats are likely to lose either the House or the Senate in this year’s midterm elections, it might soon become impossible to stop America’s slide into authoritarianism. I understand this may sound hyperbolic. Donald Trump was voted out, his coup attempt failed; Joe Biden is president, and Democrats have the majority in Congress. How bad could it possibly be? But since the 2020 election, Republicans have actually escalated their assault on the political system, particularly on the state and local levels. They remain united behind Trump, and they have decided that if they cannot have democracy and Republican rule, then democracy has to go. In states where Republicans are in charge, they are fully committed to erecting one-party-rule systems. The playbook is always the same: aggressive partisan gerrymandering, voter suppression laws, facilitating future election subversion by purging state and local election boards and giving Republican-led state legislatures more power over how elections are run; and they are flanking these measures by criminalizing protest in order to pre-empt a mobilization of civil society. These initiatives are not subtle, and Republicans undoubtedly feel emboldened by the fact that the conservative majority on the US supreme court is clearly on their side. How are Republicans justifying their assault on democracy? They consider themselves the sole proponents of “real America”, and they believe to be defending it against the insidious forces of leftism and “wokeism” that have supposedly captured the Democratic party. What follows from that proposition is that Democratic governance – whether or not it has the support of a majority of the electorate – is fundamentally illegitimate: the Democratic party is not simply a political opponent, but a radically “un-American” enemy. Trump is himself a result, not the cause, of this conservative turn against democracy. The Republican party has been on an anti-democratic trajectory for a long time. For several decades, the Republican party has been focused almost exclusively on the interests and sensibilities of white conservatives who tend to define “real America” as a predominantly white, Christian, patriarchal nation. America, to them, is supposed to be a place where white Christian men are at the top. As a political project, modern US conservatism has been animated by the goal of preserving that white Christian nationalist version of “real America” since at least the 1950s; it has been the Republicans’ overriding concern since the 1970s, when conservatives came to dominate the party. Due to political, cultural and most importantly demographic changes, Republicans no longer have majority support for this political project – certainly not on the federal level, and even in many “red” states, their position is becoming increasingly tenuous. That’s the paradox at the heart of the current political situation: yes, democracy is in grave danger because reactionary forces are on the offensive. But they are not attacking out of a sense of strength, but because they are feeling their backs against the wall. And they are reacting to something real. America has indeed become less white, less Christian, more liberal – has moved closer to the promise of multiracial, pluralistic democracy. No one understands this better than Republicans themselves. In a functioning democratic system, they would have to either widen their focus beyond the interests and sensibilities of white conservatives, which they are not willing to do; or relinquish power, which they reject. They have chosen a different path – determined to do whatever it takes to protect their hold on power and preserve traditional hierarchies. Could it actually happen here? Without effective federal legislation to protect and reform democracy, the country will rapidly turn into a dysfunctional pseudo-democratic system at the national level – and on the state level will be divided into democracy in one half of the states, and authoritarian one-party rule in the other. As a whole, America would cease to be a democracy. If that sounds far-fetched, remember that it would in many ways constitute a return to what was the norm until quite recently. Before the civil rights legislation of the 1960s, America was fairly democratic only if you happened to be a white Christian man – and something entirely different if you were not. The Reconstruction period after the civil war was a notable exception – which only strengthens the argument: America’s first attempt at multiracial democracy was quickly drowned in white reactionary violence and supposedly “race-neutral” laws. Jim Crow apartheid became the reality in a significant portion of the country: an authoritarian system in which the rule of southern Democrats was never in question, allowing these Dixiecrats to entrench white supremacy while also shaping and obstructing national policy. Will the US finally become a functioning multiracial, pluralistic democracy – or will the history books record the years from the mid-1960s through the early 2020s as a fairly short-lived and ultimately aborted experiment, before a more restricted, white man’s democracy was restored? It is crucial we acknowledge that the stakes in the current fight over voting rights legislation are enormously high. And not just for America: as we are witnessing a similar conflict shape the political, social and cultural landscape in many western democracies, this is a struggle of world-historic significance. Thomas Zimmer is a historian and DAAD visiting professor at Georgetown University where he focuses on the history of democracy and its discontents in the United StatesHistorians have voiced their scepticism about a book that has identified a Jewish notary as the prime suspect for the betrayal of Anne Frank and her family to the Nazis. The Betrayal of Anne Frank, by Rosemary Sullivan, based on research gathered by retired FBI detective Vince Pankoke was published on Tuesday by HarperCollins with some fanfare. A CBS 60 Minutes programme on Sunday evening highlighted the book’s tentative findings which were widely covered in the media, including the Guardian. But researchers have now raised doubts about the central theory that Arnold van den Bergh, who died of throat cancer in 1950, probably led the police to the Frank family’s hiding place above a canal-side warehouse in the Jordaan area of Amsterdam on 4 August 1944. The book claimed that as a member of the Jewish council in Amsterdam, an administrative body the German authorities forced Jews to establish, van den Bergh would have had access to the places in which Jewish people were hiding. But David Barnouw, a Dutch author of the 2003 book Who Betrayed Anne Frank?, said he was not convinced. He said: “The researchers rightly subject their findings to all sorts of caveats. However, they are very firm in their conviction of that poor notary. While I wonder whether he had access to a list of Jewish hiding places. The Jewish Council was far too law-abiding to make such a list, I think.” The book, a result of a six-year investigation, suggests that van den Bergh, who acted as notary in the forced sale of works of art to prominent Nazis such as Hermann Göring, had been forced by risks to his own life to use addresses of hiding places as a form of life insurance for his family. Neither he nor his daughter were deported to the Nazi camps. The investigators said they had found references to addresses being kept by the Jewish council. A further key piece of evidence was said to have been an anonymous note delivered after the war to Anne’s father, Otto Frank, the sole survivor among the direct family. The note stated that van den Bergh had given away addresses to the Nazis including that in which Otto, Anne, her mother Edith, sister Margot, Hermann, Auguste and Peter van Pels, and Fritz Pfeffer, had sought to evade capture. The Franks hid for two years in a concealed annexe in the Jordaan area of Amsterdam before their arrest. Ronald Leopold, director of the Anne Frank House, praised the investigation but he also counselled against taking the findings as definitive. He said: “I have great appreciation for the impressive work of the team, the research has been carefully carried out. A lot of new information has been found, sufficient reason to follow the trail of notary van den Bergh. “The most special find is the copy of the note. But many puzzle pieces remain. About the lists that would have been with the Jewish council, about the note and about the notary himself. These are all things that need to be investigated in order to strengthen the credibility of this theory.” Despite a series of investigations, including two by the Dutch police, the mystery of who led the Nazis to the annexe remains unsolved. Otto Frank, who died in 1980, was thought to have a strong suspicion of that person’s identity but he never divulged it in public. Following the arrest of the family, Anne was sent to Westerbork transit camp, and on to Auschwitz concentration camp before finally ending up in Bergen-Belsen, where she died in February 1945 at the age of 15, possibly from typhus. Her published diary spans the period in hiding between 1942 and her last entry on 1 August 1944. Writing in the Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant, Hanco Jürgens, a research assistant at the Germany Institute Amsterdam, said: “It seems much more likely that the arrest was coincidental. After all, five months earlier, two employees had been arrested for the clandestine trade in coupons. “It could therefore equally be a regular check that resulted in the discovery of the hiding place. The fact that the people in hiding had to wait a long time for an arrest car points to this. But this theory is also based on assumptions.”A cross-party committee of councillors is to decide the future of the Sheffield city council chief executive, Kate Josephs, a week after she apologised for having leaving drinks in Whitehall during lockdown. Josephs led the government’s Covid-19 taskforce from July to December 2020. After details of the gathering emerged in the media she released a statement admitting it took place and saying she was “truly sorry”. Sheffield city council, her current employer, said a committee of councillors would be set up “to consider what steps, if any, should be taken next”. Terry Fox, the leader of Sheffield city council, said: “I have heard strong and emotional views from across the city. I absolutely understand the reaction after all that Sheffield has been through these last couple of years. “We now need to let the committee carry out this work and we also continue to await the outcome of the Cabinet Office’s wider report. There is nothing further to add at this time.” The council said there was a prescribed statutory procedure for roles at this level in local government, which meant it had to be dealt with by a cross-party committee. Josephs, it said, had this week taken a short period of annual leave. There is no deadline for the committee to report. “We expect the committee to begin work in the coming days,” the council said. “While we cannot yet know how long it will take, we expect it to move at pace. We expect that it will also take in the findings of the Sue Gray report.” Josephs’ leaving drinks gathering was attended by dozens of officials from the Cabinet Office’s Covid-19 taskforce. On the day it was held the government’s official Twitter feed replied to a query asking if employers could hold Christmas parties at the end of the working day. The feed said: “Hi Mick, although there are exemptions for work purposes, you must not have a work Christmas lunch or party, where that is a primarily social activity and is not otherwise permitted by the rules in your tier.” In her statement Josephs, who was director general of the taskforce, said of the leaving drinks gathering: “I am truly sorry that I did this and for the anger that people will feel as a result. Sheffield has suffered greatly during this pandemic and I apologise unreservedly.”Mark Zuckerberg has a fascination with ancient Rome, but last week a court decision threatened the future of another empire: his own. Judge James Boasberg said the US competition watchdog can pursue the break up of Meta – the owner of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp – paving the way for a costly and lengthy legal battle. Boasberg had dismissed the Federal Trade Commission’s first attempt in June, but this time he was swayed by a revised FTC complaint under its new chair, Lina Khan. As the judge stressed in his 48-page decision, it is “anyone’s guess” whether the FTC will win its case against a $920bn (£675bn) business that can afford very decent lawyers. Boasberg, a Washington-based district judge who hears cases under federal law, has simply ruled that the FTC has a “plausible claim” under the Sherman Act, which prevents monopolistic companies from ripping off consumers. Even so, Boasberg has given the FTC’s case a boost. He is allowing the claim to proceed even though Meta operates in what competition experts call a zero-price market. As billions of people around the world know, Meta’s services are free – how can consumers in the US be harmed economically by a service they don’t pay for? The FTC argues that by acquiring Instagram and WhatsApp, Meta stifled competition and ended up giving a poor deal to consumers in the market for “personal social networking” services. It argues that the acquisition of these companies was anticompetitive because it led to poorer service – for instance lower levels of service quality in privacy and data protection – and less choice for consumers. On the latter, the FTC cites the fact that Meta (then Facebook Inc) shut down an app designed to compete with Instagram once it had bought the photo sharing service in 2012. The complaint also alleges that Meta benefits from barriers to entry in the social networking market such as high switching costs, ie the difficulty of moving to a new social network and taking all your photos and associated data with you. Meta their match Rebecca Allensworth, professor of law at Vanderbilt University in the US, says the decision is “a really bad sign” for Meta. “I think the judge sounded very approving of all the arguments made by the FTC. At the same time, it’s the beginning of the beginning [of the case].” Allensworth added that it was a “big win” for the FTC that Boasberg accepted a more subjective definition of competition in the social media market, instead of expecting the watchdog to crunch through economic data. The FTC has also peppered its complaint with quotes from Meta executives, which Boasberg picks up on. For instance, Boasberg refers to statements made by Zuckerberg about Meta’s structural advantages in the market. He also refers to an email in which the Meta founder states that it is “better to buy than compete.” Boasberg’s decision carries a Zuckerberg quote stating that he saw messaging as a threat and would pay $1bn for WhatsApp “if he could get them” (he ultimately paid $19bn for the business in 2014). The complaint states that Meta’s share of the personal social networking services market has not dropped below 70% in the US since 2016 and is now as high as 80% on smartphones. “Facebook [Inc]’s market share comfortably exceeds the levels that courts ordinarily find sufficient to establish monopoly power,” wrote Boasberg. However, nothing has been proven yet. Whether Meta is indeed a monopoly, and commits anticompetitive harm from this position will be settled at the end of the formal legal contest that is about to unfold. Kind of a big deal The next stage for the FTC is a process known as discovery, where it seeks evidence from Meta to back up its case. The burden of proof in this lawsuit is on the FTC, which means it must seek documents from the company it is accusing of anti-competitive behaviour in order to prove that its accusations are correct. This stage – where the FTC makes document requests and Meta no doubt challenges them – could take some time. After the discovery process, the FTC might seek a summary judgment in its favour – as Meta may, too – but it is possible in such a weighty, complex case that the judge will send it for a full-blown trial. And even if the FTC wins at any of these stages, Meta will have recourse to an appeals process. As a result, any FTC-led breakup process could take years. Allensworth acknowledges that Boasberg’s ruling is a “big deal” and says Meta is certainly a break-up candidate because it has units that can be hived off, but there is a long way to go. “I hate to make a prediction about whether or not a break-up will or won’t happen. Obviously, having your suit not dismissed is a necessary – but not sufficient – step in the direction of being broken up. But to say ‘they need to be shaking in their boots about being broken up at this point’ is definitely more than we can really say about the suit right now.” The wrath of Khan Meta responded to the decision by pointing out that Boasberg had rejected one element of the complaint. Boasberg said the FTC could not press allegations that Facebook blocked competing apps from accessing its platform as a way to maintain its dominance, saying the policies had been abandoned in 2018. Meta added: “We’re confident the evidence will reveal the fundamental weakness of the claims. Our investments in Instagram and WhatsApp transformed them into what they are today. They have been good for competition, and good for the people and businesses that choose to use our products.” Barry Lynn, executive director of the Washington-based Open Markets Institute, which researches the impact of monopolies and how to strengthen competition policy, says a break-up will weaken Mark Zuckerberg’s empire. “The power of the corporation vis-a-vis the government, vis-a-vis advertisers and vis-a-vis users becomes much less because you have broken it into three parts. The final few pages of the Boasberg decision deal with Meta’s attempts to have Khan, the chair of the FTC, withdrawn from the case for various reasons which include her having advised a Congress committee – before she was appointed to the FTC – that Meta had broken the Sherman Act. Boasberg dismissed this, saying that Khan’s role in the case is more prosecutor than judge and that people in that position are allowed to show some zeal in enforcing the law. Khan used to work for Lynn at the OMI, as its legal director. Asked if Khan has the determination to win the case, Lynn says: “absolutely.” If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.Good morning. There is good news from New York City and some north-eastern US states, which appear to have recorded rapid decreases in their numbers of Covid-19 cases in recent days, raising the possibility that the Omicron wave has already peaked in some parts of America. The rolling seven-day average of new cases in New York City was below 28,000 a day on 16 January, down from an average of more than 40,000 on 9 January. Similar patterns have been observed in the state as a whole and other nearby regions. “The Covid forecast is improving … the Covid clouds are parting,” the New York governor, Kathy Hochul, said in a statement Sunday after releasing figures that showed positivity rates in the state were falling sharply. “Overall, the prognosis, the forecast, for Covid is much brighter than it had been before.” How many cases are there in New York? About 400,000 tests were conducted in New York on Saturday, with a positivity rate of 12.9%. The rate was almost 20% a week ago, based on a similar number of tests. Former NY Post editor sues News Corp and Col Allan, alleging sexual harassment Michelle Gotthelf, a former senior New York Post editor, has launched legal action accusing the tabloid’s longtime editor-in-chief, Col Allan, of sexually harassing and verbally abusing her, including propositioning her for sex. In a complaint filed in the US federal court system on Tuesday, Gotthelf accused the Post’s owner, News Corp, Allan and the paper’s current editor-in-chief, Keith Poole, of breaching New York employment law by discriminating against her on the basis of her sex and retaliating against her when she complained. She also claimed Allan had intervened in coverage of Donald Trump, demanding that a story about the then-president being accused of rape be removed from the paper’s website, of which she was editor-in-chief, and calling the complaint “baseless shit”. What sparked the legal action? Gotthelf said Poole fired her last week, ending her 20-year career at News Corp. She alleges Allan created a hostile work environment for her. What else does she say in the lawsuit? The sexual harassment allegedly peaked in 2015 when she alleged that Allan had propositioned her for sex, saying: “We should sleep together”. Her rejection allegedly resulted in Allan becoming more abusive. What has Allan said? The Guardian has been unable to contact Allan for comment. A spokesperson for News Corp and the Post said in a statement: “Any suggestion of wrongdoing related to the management changes announced today is meritless.” André Leon Talley, influential fashion journalist, dies aged 73 André Leon Talley, the influential fashion journalist and former editor-at-large of US Vogue under Anna Wintour, has died at the age of 73. TMZ reported that Talley died of an unknown illness at New York hospital on Tuesday. His death was later confirmed by his literary agent, David Vigliano. A larger-than-life character – and 6ft 7ins tall – Talley was a pioneering figure in the fashion world, as known for his biting comments and flamboyant presence as the statement kaftans, hats and robes he frequently wore. In a career that spanned six decades, Talley used his position to champion diversity on the runway and behind the scenes in the fashion world. What have people said in tribute? The designer Diane von Furstenberg, a close friend, said: “No one saw the world in a more glamorous way than you did. No one was grander and more soulful than you were.” In other news … Australia and New Zealand have started to dispatch aid to Tonga, despite fears that relief workers could bring a “tsunami of Covid” cases to the Pacific Island nation that has so far recorded just one case of the virus. The US congressional committee investigating the Capitol attack has issued a blitz of subpoenas to some of Donald Trump’s top lawyers, including Rudy Giuliani, Boris Epshteyn, Sidney Powell and Jenna Ellis. A 14-year-old indigenous activist has been murdered in Colombia, the latest in a spate of killings of environmentalists and social leaders in the country. Breiner David Cucuñame was shot dead on Friday. Healthcare workers and first responders are displaying post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms like veterans who served in combat, research indicates, and experts say many could leave the profession as a result of their experiences. Don’t miss this: Can a blockbuster still win big at the Oscars? Nobody was talking much about Oscars when Spider-Man: No Way Home was released in cinemas last month, but it was easy enough to see that they soon would be. The film swung on to screens as a pre-ordained saviour of cinema, the hopes of an industry pinned on its well-worn spandex bodysuit. By the end of December, the film’s formal Oscar campaign for best picture had been launched, reigniting a debate over what kind of film the academy should be rewarding. Climate check: Expanding national parks not enough to protect nature Expanding national parks and protected areas will not be enough to halt the destruction of nature, and urgent action on overconsumption, harmful subsidies and the climate crisis is also required to halt biodiversity loss, scientists say. Governments are expected to commit to a Paris-style agreement for nature at Cop15 in Kunming, China, later this year, but experts say the plan falls short. Last Thing: who is behind the Adelaide’s googly eyes wave? A serial prankster has been leaving a trail of novelty oversized googly eyes across metropolitan Adelaide in Australia, from fast-food and liquor store mascots to one of the city’s most recognisable colonial monuments. The eyes first appeared in the early hours of 11 January and Adelaide residents have since had their own eyes glued to a low-stakes whodunnit. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comKPMG has been fined £3m for failures during its audit of the Bargain Booze owner Conviviality and severely reprimanded in the latest blow to its reputation. The accounting regulator, the Financial Reporting Council (FRC), found “a serious lack of competence” in KPMG’s 2017 audit of the company, which collapsed within nine months of the accounts being signed off. The initial fine was £4.3m, but this was reduced because the firm admitted the failings. The KPMG partner in charge of the audit, Nicola Quayle, was also fined £110,000 and given a severe reprimand. Quayle, who previously led KPMG’s Manchester office and sat on its UK board, will pay £80,850, after receiving a discount for admitting the failures. Conviviality was the owner of brands including Wine Rack and the high-end wine retailer Bibendum, and it also distributed drinks to major hospitality chains including JD Wetherspoon, Yates and Slug and Lettuce. It was worth £500m and had 4,000 staff in March 2018, but by early April it had collapsed into administration after investors realised that its series of acquisitions had left it overextended. It is the latest in a string of audit scandals for KPMG. It has also admitted misconduct over its audit of Carillion, the government contractor that went bust in 2018. A disciplinary tribunal heard on Tuesday that the partner leading that audit was deliberately trying to portray himself as negligent to avoid a charge of misconduct, according to counsel for another member of the audit team. The partner denied the allegation and denies misconduct. KPMG also received a near-record fine of £13m for misconduct in August related to a conflict of interest in the sale of the bed company Silentnight to a private equity firm. The FRC said “KPMG should have been more professionally sceptical” of Conviviality’s claims to have somehow exceeded earnings targets at the last minute. It also failed to check adequately for fraud and failed to obtain evidence of the company’s claims across five separate areas, the regulator said. The deputy executive counsel to the FRC, Claudia Mortimore, said: “The audit failings in this case were serious, spanned several significant areas of the financial statements and related to a number of fundamental auditing standards including the requirement to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence, apply sufficient professional scepticism, and prepare proper audit documentation. The sanctions reflect the seriousness of the failings. “The sanctions also reflect the poor regulatory track record of each of the respondents and are intended to enhance the quality and reliability of future audits.” The regulator also found, however, that the failures were not “intentional, dishonest, deliberate or reckless”. The chief executive of KPMG in the UK, Jon Holt, said: “I’m sorry that our work wasn’t good enough in this instance. I am committed to resolving, and learning from, our past cases and this development marks another step forward in dealing with these matters. We have fully cooperated with the FRC throughout their investigation.”Baked beans, but not as we know them – for all the tales of Native Americans “gifting” the notion to early European immigrants, there is (as yet) no evidence of them cooking beans in this way, and Keith Stavely and Kathleen Fitzgerald’s America’s Founding Food suggests that the “immediate progenitor” of this New England classic is more likely to have been a ham-flavoured pease pottage from Old England. Whatever the truth, however, the beans – and the molasses used to flavour them – make this an indisputably American dish, and a useful one for those Puritans who kept the Sabbath holy, because it could be prepared on a Saturday and, according to Eleanor Early’s 1954 New England Cookbook, taken from the oven on Sunday morning for breakfast, before being returned there to keep warm for their return from church. The mind boggles to think of the cumulative effect of such a bean-heavy diet on a household, but at least these baked beans, sweet from molasses, tangy with cider vinegar and rich with pork fat, are more of a balanced meal than our own beloved turquoise tins – rather like an American cassoulet, in fact, and just as worthy of your time in the kitchen. Though, actually, the oven does most of the work. The beans Let’s start with the easy bit. Early mentions tend to be fairly non-specific as to which variety to use, though white peas and navy beans pop up in a few examples. Joe Yonan, who includes his own version of “an old Vermont family recipe” for New England baked beans in his book Cool Beans, prefers, “Jacob’s cattle or other plump, creamy beans, such as … borlotti or pinto”. Unsurprisingly, they’re fairly interchangeable after so long in the oven, so use whatever you have to hand. The question of preparation is a more interesting one. Most writers soak the beans in cold water before use, so when I see that Yonan skips this step, I’m so unnerved I contact him on Twitter to check I’ve not missed anything. He confirms he rarely bothers unless he’s not sure how old the beans are: “It usually doesn’t speed things up enough to make it worth it, and I get more flavour and colour in the beans when I skip it.” He does, however, suggest adding kombu, or dried kelp, which, I learn from Cook’s Illustrated magazine, apparently “neutralises difficult-to-digest small carbohydrates in beans” and, as a rich source of glutamates, “boosts bean flavour [and] also improves texture: pinto beans soaked and then cooked in water with a strip of kombu had soft skins and smooth interiors; soaked beans cooked in water alone were more grainy and tough”. This is, apparently, because the seaweed’s “sodium and potassium ions trade places with minerals in the beans to create a smoother, creamier consistency”. All you really need to know, though, is that it works. If you don’t happen to have kombu handy and don’t want to buy any for future bean cooking (it keeps for ages), then both Cook’s Illustrated (CI) and Yonan recommend soaking them with a tablespoon of coarse salt instead. Rather than making them tough, as culinary lore suggests, “the sodium in the salt solution replaces some of the calcium and magnesium in the bean skins, making them more permeable and resulting in more tender beans inside and out”. Less scientifically, but equally usefully, Florence Brobeck’s 1937 New York Times piece on “Yankee cooks” explains that “any old-fashioned cook knows that the only way to tell when [the beans are softened] is to lift out a spoonful … and blow on them. If they’re done, the pale shells blow off.” At this point, you’re ready to turn down the heat and slow-cook them, just like those Sabbath-keeping Puritans. (If you’re absolutely desperate for Boston baked beans, and don’t have a few hours to play with, you could do worse than trying the recipe using tinned beans in The Joy of Cooking, which requires only an hour in the oven – they lack the depth of flavour of the slow-braised variety, but they’re still pretty good.) The meat Early colonists had to stretch a little protein a long way, so the meat in Boston baked beans tends to be a fairly minor element, albeit one with a disproportionate importance to the finished dish, because the salt pork or bacon melts its fatty, savoury flavour into the sauce, which means Yonan has a challenge on his hands to make it plant-based. He gets away with it thanks to the judicious application of smoked paprika, though we do think his beans would be even better with a knob of butter (or some oil) stirred in at the end. If you do eat meat, however, this is a very good dish to make the most of minimal amounts of it. As CI observes, salt pork, the traditional choice, can be so mild as to be underwhelming, while their testers found that smoked bacon was “too smoky and overwhelming” on its own – the two together, they decided, gave the perfect combination of heartiness and richness. As salt pork is not easily obtainable in the UK, I make a slab of my own from pork belly, a process that takes four days. Having done this, I feel able confidently to assure you that fat green streaky bacon makes a very good substitute – I don’t think you need the smoked sort, either, though feel free to use it instead if you prefer. More important, in my opinion, is how you distribute it. Most recipes call for it to be cut into chunks, which dry out and disappear after so long in the oven, but Brobeck leaves it in a single slab, and “nestles” it amid the beans, so it ends up deliciously soft and tender, but still recognisably bacon. That said, many rashers are now cut so thinly that you may need to go to a butcher who slices their own, or make some salt pork, or stick a few slices together and hope for the best. Seasonings and aromatics Onion, though “a controversial ingredient in classic recipes”, according to CI, adds savoury balance to the sweetness of the mandatory molasses, so I’ll be including it – though, again, rather than chopping it into small pieces and browning it first, I’ll be adding it in halves, so it infuses the sauce. This saves you dicing something that, after five hours in the oven, is unlikely to be recognisable anyway, and also, I think, gives a more oniony end result. We all prefer the heat of mustard to the faintly British-tasting sweet-and-sour ketchup in The Joy of Cooking recipe. I’m unable to track down any brown mustard, which CI recommends for “imparting a pleasant sharpness without drawing attention to itself” – it seems to have disappeared from shelves here – so I try wholegrain instead, but, as with Daniel Gritzer’s take for Serious Eats, which uses tangy dijon, I miss the fire of the English mustard in Yonan and Brobeck’s recipes. That said, I like wholegrain enough to add a little at the end instead, along with the cider vinegar essential for cutting through the sugar of the molasses. As for those molasses, which is the ingredient that gives New England baked beans their characteristic bittersweet note, it’s easily found in healthfood shops and online, but you can substitute the more one-dimensional treacle if you don’t want to invest in a jar. Yonan also uses maple syrup, but I’d prefer my beans to be less sweet than most modern versions; Lydia Maria Child’s 1832 recipe makes no mention of sweeteners, while Amanda Hesser, editor of The Essential New York Times Cookbook, notes that Brobeck’s recipe isn’t “nearly as sweet and syrupy” as “cloying modern baked beans … [with] an actual balance of sweet and savoury”, which is exactly why I enjoy it so much. If you’re not adding meat, you may wish, like Yonan, to up the spice content: he adds ginger and the aforementioned smoked paprika, but it strikes me that cloves would be good, too, as would the all-American chilli pepper. The method With such a simple dish, the method is all-important. CI writes that, “to a certain extent, flavour and texture [are] in opposition. The longer the beans cook, the better the sauce’s flavour, but past a certain crucial moment of equilibrium, time works against the beans, turning them into mush”. The best way to deal with this is to cook the beans fast (either in the oven or on the hob), and then turn the heat right down and braise them until soft and creamy. Personally, I don’t mind if a few disintegrate to thicken the sauce, but they should still be loose, rather than a starchy mush. On which note, do not throw away the bean cooking liquid and replace it with fresh water, as Brobeck suggests – Gritzer nails it when he calls this “a terrible idea. That bean water is loaded with bean starch and flavour, two things you absolutely want to keep in the bean pot.” You should, however, drain off any excess before moving on to the second stage: for maximum flavour, the beans should at all times be barely covered. Once they are done, however, you can remove the lid and leave the sauce to reduce. Serve with brown bread and pickles, to be true to Brobeck’s recipe, or “over-roasted potatoes and with a garden-fresh salad”, as Yonan recommends for a “true Maine homesteaders’ meal”. Just don’t tell the folks in Boston. Perfect Boston baked beans Prep 5 min Cook 5 hr Serves 6-8 450g small dried beans 1 strip of kombu 2 tsp English mustard powder, made up with a little cold water 1 tsp salt 3 tbsp molasses 225g unsmoked streaky bacon, preferably in one thick slab 1 onion, peeled and cut in half 1 tbsp cider vinegar 1 tbsp wholegrain mustard (optional) Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Put the beans in an ovenproof pot for which you have a lid and add cold water to cover by about 4cm. Add the kombu and bring up to a simmer on the hob (alternatively, do this in a saucepan and transfer to an ovenproof dish afterwards). Cover the pan, transfer to the oven and bake for 60-90 minutes, until the beans are soft and the skins come away when you blow on them. Turn down the oven to 150C (130C fan)/300F/gas 2. Drain enough liquid from the beans into another container until what’s left in the pan comes just above the level of the beans, then stir the English mustard, salt and molasses into the beans. Push the bacon, skin side up if it still has its rind, and the onion cut side down into the beans, cover again and bake for three to four hours longer, until the beans are creamy and soft; if at any stage the beans look like they’re drying out, use the reserved drained liquor to top them up as necessary. Once the beans are done, take off the lid and put back in the oven for a final 45-60 minutes, until the sauce is thick. Stir in the vinegar and wholegrain mustard, if using, then season to taste, adding more molasses if you’d like it sweeter. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • Are Boston, or indeed New England baked beans the noble original, and the tinned version we’ve made our own just a pale and gloopy imitation? How do you make yours, and what do you like to serve them with?Ian McEwan’s “most epic book to date”, moving from the end of the second world war to the current pandemic and exploring the impact of childhood trauma, will be published this autumn. The Booker prize-winning author of Amsterdam, Atonement, and most recently Brexit satire The Cockroach, will release his new novel Lessons this September. McEwan’s publisher Jonathan Cape described it as “a powerful meditation on history and humanity told through the prism of one man’s lifetime”. It follows protagonist Roland Baines from his time at an “unusual” boarding school at the age of 11, when his vulnerability attracts piano teacher Miss Miriam Cornell, to the disappearance of his wife, leaving him to care for his young son alone. Parenthood, as McEwan explores it in the book, is a “double helix of labour and love”. Cape said the novel sees the author explore what can be learned from the traumas of the past, what parenthood can teach us about ourselves, and how global events “shape our lives and memories”. “Haunted by lost opportunities, [Roland] seeks solace through every possible means – music, literature, family, friends, sex, politics and love,” said Cape. Publishing director Michal Shavit, who acquired the novel, called it “not only [McEwan’s] most epic book to date”, but also “one of, if not, his finest”. “A universal story of love, acceptance and sacrifice, longing, desire and of harm in childhood and its long term impact,” she said. “Set against the most amazing backdrop of world defining events, this is the story of an extraordinary century and an ordinary man grappling with all that it is to be human.”One of the ugliest and most fatuous chapters in Home Office history arrived in 2013, when under the auspices of the then home secretary Theresa May, vans toured London areas with high immigrant populations displaying the sign: “In the UK illegally? Go home or face arrest.” Of course, this ridiculous piece of toxic bossiness was not really addressed to illegal immigrants: Home Office officials were well aware that they themselves would be unable or unwilling to respond. It was a piece of taxpayer-funded party-political posturing, dogwhistling or humanwhistling to the bigots and intended as part of a charmless new policy of “hostile environment” – making things unpleasant in the country generally, a way of trying to pressure people to leave of their own free will. Sonita Gale’s interesting and highly pertinent documentary is about how that nasty little malaise spread outwards, but is coming to a crisis now that Brexit has brought it home to the governing classes just how reliant our service industry is on casual labour, and how reliant the NHS is on immigrants. Many of these are former students applying for leave to remain, but have thereby been denied public funds, and so were ineligible for furlough payments or any support as the lockdown hit. It has meant utter poverty and Kafkaesque bureaucracy – for once, that adjective really is justified. And this brings us to the other, truly sinister part of this story, uncovered by Gale’s film: the staggering sums of money charged directly to the immigrants themselves, thousands of pounds simply to make these applications, far in excess of any conceivable administration costs – again, a hostile state-mugging of otherwise innocent people, a deliberate use of deterrent pauperisation. This is a powerful film, though in her reporting of the Windrush scandal, Gale could have acknowledged the work of the Guardian’s Amelia Gentleman. • Hostile is released on 21 January in cinemas.The US presidency was supposed to be something different, something novel, compared with the fossilised monarchical rule that it supplanted after the American revolution. Born of Enlightenment theory, settler colonialism and 18th-century warfare, the US constitution gave the chief executive primarily an enforcement role, with the authority to lead armed forces in the event of foreign encroachment or domestic unrest but stripped of the capacity to legislate or issue judicial decisions. The architects of the new republic meant for the president to preside over a citizenry well-endowed with rights, not to rule over cowed subjects. Chief executives from George Washington and Abraham Lincoln to Franklin Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan have been sorely tested by both the responsibilities and the limitations of the country’s highest, loneliest office. Through civil war, economic catastrophes, foreign misadventures, social upheavals and plagues, the presidency has endured, but it – and the 45 men who have occupied the job – has been moulded and often humbled by the promise and perils of the office. Is the US presidency – indeed, American democracy – equal to the dire challenges of the 21st century? One could certainly argue that it isn’t, based on the ongoing bungling of the Covid-19 response, the horrifying (and presidentially inspired) insurrection of 6 January 2021 and the glacially slow and fickle efforts to address everything from climate change to widening social inequality. If the founding fathers meant to circumscribe the power of the presidency out of a well-founded fear of kingly abuses, then they would surely comprehend the creeping threat that authoritarianism and political extremism present to the US system of government today. Nevertheless, they probably could not have guessed that the hard lessons that they had learned about the fragility of democracy would be so fiercely resisted or blithely ignored more than two centuries after they beseeched a patrician general from the Virginia countryside to preside over their fledgling experiment in government by the people. Of the many works that I have found useful in thinking about the history of the US presidency and for writing my newest book, The Black President: Hope and Fury in the Age of Obama, these 10 have been among the most helpful. They are a mix of biographies, memoirs and reportage which, taken together, represent some of the best writings by and about the small group of powerful people who have occupied the White House. 1. Never Caught: The Washingtons’ Relentless Pursuit of Their Runaway Slave, Ona Judge by Erica Armstrong Dunbar (2017) Dunbar’s important book is less a biography of George Washington, Martha Washington, or Ona Judge, the runaway enslaved woman whom the first couple made such extraordinary efforts to recapture, than a look into the power and privilege of a slaveholding elite forcing its way through a new republic rhetorically committed to liberty. The relentless pursuit of Judge by the Washingtons after her bold flight from the new US capital in Philadelphia is expertly told by Dunbar. 2. The Hemingses of Monticello: An American Family by Annette Gordon-Reed (2008) This history of overlapping, intertwined families vivifies the world around Thomas Jefferson, the third US president, while skilfully making more legible the travails and aspirations of the enslaved people on his storied estate at Monticello. The decades-long relationship between Jefferson and Sally Hemings, one of the Black women he owned and who bore several of his children, occupies the core of the book, but Gordon-Reed manages to craft a complicated and often contradictory history that extends far beyond the tangle of race, gender, and status that marked the Jeffersons and the Hemingses’ commingled journey through US history. 3. Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln by Doris Kearns Goodwin (2005) This book follows the intersecting biographical tributaries of the powerful, ambitious men whom Abraham Lincoln, the nation’s 16th president, was able to steer toward the rushing river of his own turbulent civil war presidency. Lincoln as political strategist and savvy tactician is the frame that Goodwin points up most dramatically. But the book also succeeds at conveying Lincoln as a beleaguered and empathic head of state whose mettle is tried time and again by those around him and news from the battlefield. 4. Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S Grant (1885-1886) Rightly considered by many historians and literary critics as among the best of presidential autobiographies, this book was completed a generation after the Confederate surrender at Appomattox as Grant succumbed to a slow strangulation by throat cancer in the 1880s. The memoirs provide a vantage point on the nation’s bloodiest and most defining conflict that only a soldier elemental to the war and its aftermath could offer. 5. Theodore Rex by Edmund Morris (2001) As the best biographical volume on America’s 26th president, Theodore Roosevelt, Morris’s book draws bold-coloured portraits of outsized historical figures, with equally knowing shades of nuance and frailty. Morris has the contextual eye of the historian and sets scenes that are alive and convincing. He also conveys mood and meaning as well as any novelist. 6. Franklin D Roosevelt and the New Deal, 1932-1940 by William Leuchtenburg (1963) Dated, frayed, and surpassed by newer research and more eloquent storytellers, Leuchtenburg’s volume on the first two presidential terms of Franklin Roosevelt still stands the test of time as a scholarly, well-researched, and jargon-free narration of arguably the most consequential presidency of the 20th century. It is the tale of the rise of the liberal welfare state against the backdrop of the Great Depression and the gathering clouds of world war. Leuchtenburg tells the story well and sets the standard for future researchers. 7. The Making of the President, 1960 by Theodore White (1961) White’s fascinating chronicle of the 1960 presidential race is the starting point of quality, book-length journalistic coverage of modern American politics. Writing in the moment, White had an eye for discerning the essential character of men such as John F Kennedy and Richard Nixon who sought the country’s highest office, even as the media ecosystem of his day made such discernment more difficult to achieve. 8. Sleepwalking Through History: America in the Reagan Years by Haynes Johnson (1991) Johnson captures the zeitgeist of the 1980s by juxtaposing the countervailing forces of American optimism – or the desperate need of many Americans to again believe in their scandal-wracked government – against the greed, corruption, militarism and debt that threatened to unmask the soothing myths of American exceptionalism. At the centre of Johnson’s story is a self-made man, an actor by training and temperament who through force of will, theatrics – and a good dose of luck – led the country through domestic and external perils whose ramifications are still being felt today. 9. Dreams from My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance by Barack Obama (1995) Of Obama’s autobiographical writings, this one provides the best understanding of his origins and burgeoning sense of self. His early and more frank ruminations on race are present here, and the book is not encumbered by the exigencies of political campaigning. At once a memoir, travelogue and deeply introspective meditation, it is a fluent self-study of his efforts to reconcile himself with his eclectic lineage and to discover his place and purpose in the world. 10. Game Change: Obama and the Clintons, McCain and Palin, and the Race of a Lifetime by John Heilemann and Mark Halperin (2010) The essential volume on the 2008 presidential primaries and general election. Heilemann and Halperin had generous access to many of the historical players – including Barack Obama, John McCain, Hillary Clinton and Sarah Palin – and their staffs. It is a fast-paced, even breathless read, and anyone who paid even casual attention at the time to the historic events chronicled here will recognise its richly drawn characters, plotlines and twists of fate. The Black President: Hope and Fury in the Age of Obama by Claude A Clegg III is published by Johns Hopkins University Press. To help the Guardian and Observer, order your copy from the Guardian bookshop. Delivery charges may apply.Depending on who you talk to, professional golf has either never had it so good or is on the brink of being torn apart by Saudi Arabians bearing gifts. The proposed Saudi-backed Super Golf League would bestow millions on those willing to break from established tours. It is the talk of the range at Yas Links as the European Tour – now DP World Tour – season gets under way and where Rory McIlroy, Collin Morikawa and Viktor Hovland head a stellar field. McIlroy has long since made clear his disdain for all things Saudi. His commitment instead is to this and the PGA Tour. On the eve of his restart, the Northern Irishman made the case for golf in existing form. “Honestly, I don’t think it [the European Tour] has ever been in a healthier position,” McIlroy said. “I think the alliance with the PGA Tour is massive. “Think of the young players that are coming through. The fact that the first American ever won the Race to Dubai last year in Collin Morikawa and you have these young players coming through from either side of the pond that want to play over here and travel. “Look, the one disappointment for every European golf fan was the Ryder Cup last year. But I think it’s never been healthier. The tournaments are getting bigger. Sponsorship dollars are coming in to support events. Players are wanting to come back and play. I think it’s in a really good spot.” McIlroy’s point is backed up by $8m (£5.8m) prize purses both at this tournament and next week’s Dubai Desert Classic. Whistling Straits and a Ryder Cup thumping at the hands of the United States reduced McIlroy to tears of frustration. Detailed European assessment of what precisely went wrong in Wisconsin means the naming of a captaincy successor to Pádraig Harrington appears some way off. Luke Donald and Henrik Stenson lead that particular race. McIlroy rebounded impressively from team trauma with a win in Las Vegas before 2021 closed. He has resumed his alliance with his childhood coach, Michael Bannon, but insists his biggest challenge comes “between the ears”. “Over the years I’ve learned when you get to this level there’s so many different ways to swing a golf club and everyone is trying to be somewhat perfect. You just have to know what you do well and try to repeat that. “It’s about creating a repeatable swing. It doesn’t have to be absolutely by the book and perfect but the more optimal you can be between the ears, that’s where you’re going to pick up shots and that’s the difference between winning and losing tournaments. That’s something that I continually, like everyone, just have to try to work on and become better at. “I definitely feel like I turned a corner after the Ryder Cup. I think anyone that was paying attention saw I played better those few events I played after the Ryder Cup and it’s just trying to continue on what I’ve been working on since then. Trying to eliminate the big miss off the tee, those destructive shots you make doubles from, rein that in a little bit and getting more effective with the scoring clubs.” Tyrrell Hatton, the defending champion, admitted his attitude let him down during much of 2021. “I was doing no training, wasn’t that motivated to practise either,” said the Englishman. “It’s not always plain sailing. So I flew out to Orlando on New Year’s Eve and tried a two-week boot camp of training and practise. I found the motivation to go and do it.”Morrisons has announced that it will slash sick pay for unvaccinated workers, claiming it is removing the allowance in order to encourage unvaccinated workers to get the jab and boost vaccination rates. Unvaccinated staff employed by the grocery giant will no longer be entitled to more than the legal minimum of £96.35 a week in statutory sick pay if they are instructed to self-isolate by test and trace but test negative for Covid. Morrisons joins a growing list of corporations – including Next, Ikea, Ocado and Wessex Water – in claiming that cutting sick pay will increase vaccine uptake. Rather than buying into this misguided sense of unity, I’m left with a growing sense of unease about the implications of weaponising a public health goal to reduce sick payments for low-wage staff. Condemning staff to survive on less than £100 a week won’t teach anyone a lesson about the importance of the vaccine. Instead, it risks plunging workers into financial hardship, with some reluctant to declare they have been forced to self-isolate for fear of losing out on vital cash. If we have learned anything from the pandemic, it’s that the lack of a robust safety net for workers has already exacerbated Covid transmission. Further cutting pay is no solution. It’s common knowledge that statutory sick pay is not enough for any worker to live on, and these companies know this. Even Matt Hancock, the former health secretary, said that he couldn’t live on £96.35 a week. As nothing has been done to make this amount liveable amid the worst health crisis in a generation, millions of the UK’s lowest-paid workers have been reliant on that amount if they have to self-isolate over the course of the pandemic, if they are entitled to it at all. From a public health perspective, it’s nothing short of a disaster. The Trades Union Congress called the decision to strip statutory sick pay from workers an “own goal”, one that will drive up transmission rates because workers cannot survive on sick pay rates and may continue to work rather than take inadequate pay. Government polling during the January 2021 lockdown found that only 17% of people with symptoms were getting tested, while 15% continued going to work despite needing to self-isolate, with signs pointing to the low levels of sick pay driving staff back to work early. It’s also an insulting way to thank supermarket staff who have borne the brunt of the virus while many of us had the luxury of working from home. Tasked with working through successive lockdowns amid soaring transmission rates, workers were encouraged to remain on the shop floor with limited protections from the virus. Despite rhetoric lionising “key workers” throughout the pandemic, supermarket staff dealt with record levels of abuse from customers – who were encouraged, but not required, to wear masks in shops. While the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers campaigned to install further protections for workers from abuse, no additional legal protections were put in place, leading the British Medical Journal to conclude shop workers were five times more likely to contract coronavirus than the average person. Now that companies wish to recoup their profits as they deal with spiralling absences caused by the Omicron variant, the health and wellbeing of workers has been curiously pushed up the agenda. While these companies claim they are on a public-health crusade to boost vaccine uptake among their workforce, the idea that they are doing it with workers’ benefit in mind is a hard sell. A decision to cut sick pay ultimately saves companies money. It’s something Morrisons chief executive David Potts recognised when he first announced the statutory sick pay policy in a call with investors in September as part of a group of measures to limit “biblical costs” imposed by the pandemic. It’s also a fact recognised by retail giant Next, which agreed that while vaccine uptake is an “emotive topic”, it clarified that its decision was made to “balance staff and shareholder needs” as the resurgence of the Omicron variant has left shops paying out sick pay packages above and beyond any figures we have seen in our lifetime. It’s clear that the anti-vaccination movement has thrived in a culture of distrust. Organisations reversing their obligations because they disagree with a worker’s decision – no matter how legitimate – will deepen this divide, and risk making martyrs out of workers who refuse to get the vaccine as the clampdown begins. Getting vaccination rates up may be a worthy goal, but using price discipline on low-wage workers is a sinister and regressive way to go about it. Jasmine Andersson writes on equalities and is a reporter at The Ferret, a Scottish investigative news co-operativeFrom efforts to map Odysseus’s journey to Borges’s commentary on map-making in On Exactitude in Science (where the only sufficient map is in fact as large as the territory it depicts), fictions and maps have long maintained a complicated, entwined relationship. While the right map can uniquely resonate with a literary text, this resonance exists amid an undeniable tension: a concern that the map might demystify or oversimplify a story, at worst imposing a single, reductive viewpoint on something that should be open and unbounded. Exploring this tension, while also charting the ways that the relationship between maps and literature has changed through eras and genres, the Huntington’s new exhibit Mapping Fiction brings together literary maps from hundreds of years of literary history. Drawing from the Huntington’s archives of rare literary texts, the exhibition goes back to the early days of modern literature with texts like The Pilgrim’s Progress and Journey to the Center of the Earth (not Jules Verne’s version but rather a 1741 book written by Norwegian writer Ludvig Holberg), continuing up to the contemporary era with mappings of Octavia Butler’s life and works and artist David Lilburn’s 2006 mapping of James Joyce’s Ulysses. “This exhibition explores the question of what is augmented or diminished by reading a narrative with a map,” said exhibition curator Karla Nielsen to the Guardian. “Are the text and the map competing or complementary? Do the maps interfere with the world being built, or do they help?” Mapping Fiction grew out of Nielsen’s desire to celebrate the centennial of James Joyce’s Ulysses, which was first published in full in 1922 by Sylvia Beach in Paris. As Nielsen explained, over the years the novel has had its own complicated relationship with efforts to map both its physical topography and its imaginative realms. One flashpoint occurred in 1934, when, after years of pirated editions and court battles over the text’s supposed obscenity, Random House at last brought out the first legal American edition of Ulysses. Knowing the reputation of this notably difficult novel, Random House wanted to include in its edition explanatory materials that would map out the novel, making it an easier lift for its first readers. Joyce adamantly resisted, leading to a tense standoff. Eventually they compromised, with Random House releasing a poster that included a map of Dublin, explanations as to how to enjoy Ulysses, and reassurances that the novel made sense. Aware of that history, Nielsen saw an “opportunity to contextualize that moment and the ways Ulysses has been put into book form and mapped”, and thus the seed of Mapping Fiction was planted. Although the exhibition centers around Joyce’s masterpiece, it includes works of various literary genres dating back as far back as the 16th century, as well as various works of art and ephemera, all based on the question of how maps interact with the literary texts that have inspired them. “I wanted to think about how, as the technology changed, the way maps could be put into books changed,” said Nielsen. “For instance, it was in the 19th century that publishers began to think about what you could do with a book cover, if you could put a map on it. As time passed, people began being able to insert maps into multiple places in a book. These sorts of questions are concerned with the materiality of narrative and literature, how the book as a form has managed to organize narrative spatially.” While Joyce was firmly anti-map, other authors shown in Mapping Fiction, including fellow high modernist apostle William Faulkner, had a different perspective. When Random House published Faulkner’s Absalom, Absalom! shortly after Joyce’s Ulysses, the publisher worried that the novel would be too hard to follow and asked Faulkner for a map of Yoknapatawpha county and a genealogy of his characters. The gregarious southerner was more than happy to oblige. He also later made a map of Yoknapatawpha county that charted out his various novels for Viking Press’s edition of The Portable Faulkner, charmingly referring to himself in the map of the county as its “sole owner and proprietor”. Mapping Fiction also features books whose authors downright demanded that maps be included. When Robert Lewis Stevenson’s publisher attempted to bring out his 1886 novel Kidnapped without the author’s map, Stevenson was outraged. “Without the map, Kidnapped didn’t function the way Stevenson wanted it to,” Nielsen said. “He really wanted readers to be able to understand how this kidnapped character was being moved around. Having that topographic awareness as a reader gives you a level of control over the story that the protagonist doesn’t have.” Nielsen’s exhibition offers an intriguing opportunity to meditate on how maps and novels can either function in harmony or get in one another’s way. Both can be seen as ways to organize narratives and make interpretations of reality, and each has its own particular way of achieving these goals. They are at their best when each uses its particular way of seeing to augment the other’s capacity to build worlds and examine our common milieu. In this careful balance, knowing what details to include and which to leave out is crucial. “That’s something about how fictional narrative works,” said Nielsen. “It’s partial. You may not get minute explanations of characters, but that doesn’t mean you don’t experience the character as full. Maps are similar in that they don’t include everything. Both have to answer similar formal questions, like how much detail to include.” Visitors to Mapping Fiction can see for themselves how authors and their publishers have managed these questions within the constraints of form and the technological possibilities of the time. The exhibition provides insight on how, as different novelistic styles, genres and methods of production have risen to prominence, they have enabled their own particular way of creating fictional terrain. These fictional worlds have, in turn, shaped our perceptions of the places we inhabit. “Our realities are world-building projects,” said Nielsen. “We make the world out of our perceptions and the categories we build. In the 18th century, for instance, maps and novels were fulfilling a curiosity about the bigger world of things and other people’s movements. In the 19th, many readers experienced westward expansion through Mark Twain’s chronicles of his life story. Emerging understandings of these places were enabled through imaginative narrative.” It’s a process that continues to this day. Mapping Fiction includes two maps that visitors can try out for themselves: one of the Huntington’s Chinese garden, which puts into space many important moments from Chinese history, and one of Octavia Butler’s Pasadena, which is a short drive from the Huntington. It also features contemporary works like Karen Tei Yamashita’s 1997 novel Tropic of Orange, which Nielsen says gives a “blimp’s-eye view of Los Angeles.” “I think it’s important to put out contemporary books too,” said Nielsen, “so people can come in and say, ‘oh wow, I have that book!’” Mapping Fiction is on display at The Huntington’s West Hall until 2 MayKenneth Branagh’s Belfast clearly owes a debt to Alfonso Cuarón’s Roma. Both films are named after places. They’re both autobiographical. They’re both filmed in black and white for maximum awards season impact. And yet the films differ in one key area. Cuarón, for the most part, filled his film with authentic-looking non-actors. Branagh, meanwhile, filled his with Jamie Dornan. Which is no slight on Dornan. In recent years he’s proved himself to be one of our most charismatic and magnetic actors. Put a camera on Jamie Dornan and audiences won’t look away. Except in Belfast, he’s playing the down-at-heel dad of a family barely able to stay afloat. At one point he is almost sunk by a £500 tax bill. Which would be all too believable, save for the fact that Jamie Dornan looks like Jamie Dornan. If Belfast was set in any recognisable universe, then one of Dornan’s neighbours would have said, “Have you ever thought about becoming a model?”, or “I saw you singing Everlasting Love to professional standards in the club the other night, you could try doing that for a living”, or “You know what would get you out of this pickle? Playing a literal sex god in the movie adaptations of a wildly successful erotic novel series?” And he would have said yes and, because he is Jamie Dornan, all his debts would have been paid off by lunchtime. But this is the world we live in. Belfast is far from alone in casting actors who are far too attractive for their roles. Cinema is absolutely littered with characters who read like schlubs despite being intimidatingly gorgeous. You’ll find examples of this everywhere. The 2013 remake of Carrie cast Chloë Grace Moretz – who uniformly looks like the most popular girl at school – as its lead; a mistake from which it could never recover. Part of the reason why they never made an Amazing Spider-Man 3 was because the classically handsome 27-year-old Andrew Garfield was wholly unbelievable as retiring high school student Peter Parker. And casting Samantha Barks as ragged, impoverished Éponine in Les Misérables was just silly. Look at that bone structure. Get out there and do some catalogue work, Éponine! You’re in Paris! The reigning queen of this is probably Kate Winslet, who has made something of a cottage industry of pretending that she isn’t as beautiful as she obviously is. In Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind, Jim Carrey’s character takes great pains to explain to Winslet’s character that she’s pretty; a fact that would be easily proved in real life thanks to the invention of mirrors. She was hailed as “brave” for not wearing a lot of makeup in Mare of Easttown, even though Kate Winslet without makeup still looks an awful lot like Kate Winslet. Most egregiously, Winslet’s character in Little Children is heartbroken when Patrick Wilson tells her not to worry about her looks because “beauty is overrated”, even though he is literally talking to a woman whose face advertises L’Oréal for a living. That said, if you want to be inundated with beautiful people struggling to pass themselves off as normal, watch a romcom. Watch Notting Hill, in which it is considered ridiculous that a movie star like Julia Roberts could be attracted to a shambling uggo like, um, peak-era Hugh Grant. Or better yet, watch Maid in Manhattan, in which against all better judgment Ralph Fiennes sees the inner beauty of Jennifer Lopez, a woman so wildly attractive that as a secondary career she had to release a string of singles designed to convince everyone that although she looked like a millionaire pin-up from Planet Sex, she was actually a human being. But my favourite version of this happens in films that require a Cinderella-style transformation; where a beautiful actor has to try to ugly up a little before they can emerge triumphant as their fully formed movie star selves at the end. These used to be 10 a penny – Audrey Hepburn made Sabrina, My Fair Lady and Funny Face, all of which feature rough “normal woman turns into Audrey Hepburn” storylines – but one relatively recent example deserves to be held aloft as the best of them all. Nobody remembers the 2011 movie Limitless, because it was very stupid and life is short, but it contains the all-time greatest ugly-to-movie-star transformation. As the film opens we meet Bradley Cooper. He is (because he is Bradley Cooper) wildly handsome. Handsome enough, in fact, to land supermodel-beautiful Abbie Cornish as a long-term girlfriend. But he has a slightly ratty ponytail. “My excuse for looking like this? I’m a writer,” he bitterly remarks of himself at one point. But then a friend gives him a pill that allows him to reach the absolute pinnacle of human potential. The first thing he does with all this newfound knowledge is get a haircut. Money well spent.Airlines including British Airways, Emirates and Air India have cancelled or changed US-bound flights owing to concerns about the deployment of 5G mobile phone technology near airports. The US aviation watchdog has said 5G signals could interfere with radio altimeters, which measure how high a plane is in the sky and are a crucial piece of equipment for pilots, particularly when landing in bad weather. The Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) began updating its guidance on which airports and aircraft models would be affected on Tuesday. Airlines say the Boeing 777 is initially in the spotlight. AT&amp;T and Verizon, the two wireless carriers behind the 5G plans, said they would pause the rollout near key airports, which had been due to take place on Wednesday. British Airways said on Wednesday it had cancelled a “handful” of flights to destinations including New York, San Francisco and Boston. It said: “Safety is always our priority and although we had to cancel a handful of services, we’ve done everything we can to minimise inconvenience for our customers. We’ve changed the aircraft operating some of our flights and rebooked those on cancelled services on to alternatives.” Dubai-based Emirates, the world’s largest operator of 777s, said it would halt flights to Boston, Chicago, Dallas-Fort Worth, Houston, Miami, Newark, New Jersey, Orlando, Florida, San Francisco and Seattle over the issue. It said it would continue flights to Los Angeles, New York and Washington. In its announcement, Emirates said the cancellations were due to “operational concerns associated with the planned deployment of 5G mobile network services in the US at certain airports”. Japan’s two major airlines, All Nippon Airways (ANA) and Japan Airlines, said they would curtail Boeing 777 flights. ANA said it was cancelling or changing the aircraft used on some US flights. Air India announced it would cancel flights to Chicago, Newark, New York and San Francisco “due to deployment of the 5G communications” equipment. It said it would try to use other aircraft on US routes. Germany’s Lufthansa said it had cancelled a flight from Frankfurt to Miami and was switching aircraft used on some US services from the Boeing 747-8 to the 747-400. Its subsidiary Austrian Airlines said it would switch from a 777 to a 767 on its Newark service. Korean Air said it had switched away from 777s and 747-8s on six US passenger and cargo flights. Taiwan’s China Airlines said it would reschedule some flights, and Hong Kong’s Cathay Pacific Airways said it would deploy different aircraft types if needed. The airlines said they were acting in response to a notice from Boeing that 5G signals could interfere with the radio altimeter on the 777, leading to restrictions.The Tory MP Christian Wakeford has defected to Labour, piling more pressure on Boris Johnson as growing numbers within his own party call on the prime minister to resign. Just minutes before prime minister’s questions, Wakeford – elected as the MP for Bury South in 2019 – crossed the floor to sit with Keir Starmer’s party, declaring in a letter to Johnson resigning the Conservative whip that he was “incapable of offering the leadership and government this country deserves”. The move will prove a huge embarrassment for Johnson, who is fighting to avoid enough of his own backbenchers submitting letters calling for a no-confidence vote. Fifty-four are needed to trigger a ballot. Many of those who have written a letter are members of the 2019 intake, like Wakeford. He submitted a letter last week. In a letter to Johnson released on Wednesday afternoon, Wakeford said he believed “the policies of the Conservative government that you lead are doing nothing to help the people of my constituency and indeed are only making the struggles they face on a daily basis worse”. Raising concerns about the “cost of living crisis” and how the country should emerge from the Covid pandemic, Wakeford said the UK needed “a government that upholds the highest standards of integrity and probity in public life”. He added: “Sadly, both you and the Conservative party as a whole have shown themselves incapable of offering the leadership and government this country deserves.” Wakeford said he was in “no doubt” his constituents would be best served “by my joining a party that genuinely has their interests at heart”, and admitted he had “wrestled with my conscience for many months”. But he said the decision was “about much more than your leadership and the disgraceful way you have conducted yourself in recent weeks” during the investigation into alleged rule-breaking parties held in Downing Street and across government. Wakeford said Starmer had “shown that integrity in the way he has led his party on issues that matter to me, not least the vital challenge of combatting antisemitism” and added: “Changes that can only be delivered by a Labour government with Keir Starmer.” To raucous cheers in the Commons chamber, Starmer “warmly welcomed” Wakeford to the opposition benches – gesturing to the MP who was sat directly behind him. “Like so many people up and down the country, he has concluded that the prime minister and the Conservative party have shown themselves incapable of offering the leadership and government this country deserved.” Johnson attempted to appear bullish in front of his own MPs, telling them: “The Conservative party won Bury South for the first time in generations under this prime minister, with an agenda of uniting and levelling up and delivering for the people of BS, and we will win again in BS at the next election under this prime minister.”A lawyer acting for Britney Spears has threatened legal action against her sister Jamie Lynn, and accused their father of financial misconduct, including the hiring of a private security firm to keep Britney and people close to her under surveillance. A letter written by Britney’s lawyer Mathew Rosengart instructs Jamie Lynn to “cease and desist from referencing Britney derogatorily during your promotional campaign” for her new memoir. “If you fail to do so or defame her, Britney will be forced to consider and take all appropriate legal action.” The letter states that Jamie Lynn’s memoir contains “misleading or outrageous claims”, and that Britney believed Jamie Lynn had “exploited her for monetary gain”. Britney made the latter allegation previously in a recent Instagram post, saying: “She wants to sell a book at my expense.” Jamie Lynn responded to that earlier statement, claiming: “My book is not about her. I can’t help that I was born a Spears too, and that some of my experiences involve my sister.” She has not responded to the letter, which continues: “Publicly airing false or fantastical grievances is wrong, especially when designed to sell books. It is also potentially unlawful and defamatory.” The letter continues the spat between the sisters, which began after Jamie Lynn was interviewed on Good Morning America and said Britney’s behaviour had historically been “erratic, paranoid and spiralling”. In the book, Jamie Lynn describes an alleged incident at home with Britney during her childhood: “Britney said to me, ‘Baby I’m scared.’ And she took a large knife from the kitchen, pulled me along to my room and locked us both inside. She put the knife in the bedside table drawer and simply repeated, ‘I’m scared.’ ” Regarding this passage, Britney wrote on Twitter: “Jamie Lynn … you’ve stooped to a whole new level of low. I’ve never been around you ever with a knife.” Jamie Lynn discussed the incident further in a podcast interview, saying: “I never felt like she was going to harm me or anything – it just felt weird.” A later Twitter post saw Britney soften her stance, telling Jamie Lynn “just know I love you”, but also accused her of a lack of loyalty and help during the conservatorship that controlled many aspects of Britney’s life, which was terminated in November. Britney has also newly accused Spears’s father Jamie of financial impropriety during his management of the conservatorship. Jamie Spears has attempted to have legal bills generated by the conservatorship hearings paid by Britney. In response, Rosengart made a court filing that states: “The allegations of misconduct against him are specific, credible and serious, ranging from abuse to conflicts of interest, financial mismanagement and corruption of the conservatorship to implicating state and federal criminal law.” The alleged incidents cited in the filing, reported by the New York Times, include the hiring of security firm Black Box for a total of $6m to monitor Britney’s phone and her mother’s, download notes from her therapy sessions despite being forbidden from seeing them, and track the movements of people associated with her via GPS. Elsewhere in the court filing, Jamie Spears is also accused of selling Britney’s childhood home to himself, of charging high expenses for the maintenance of her property – including sending funds to a company owned by Jamie Lynn’s husband – and of approving unusually large legal fees involving dozens of law firms. The allegations made in the court documents reflect findings by an investigator used by Britney’s legal team to examine Jamie Spears’s management of her affairs. Her investigation included an interview with a former Black Box employee. Jamie Spears has not responded to the allegations. The Guardian has contacted his lawyer for comment. In a previous response to allegations of surveillance, his lawyer told the New York Times: “All of his actions were well within the parameters of the authority conferred upon him by the court. His actions were done with the knowledge and consent of Britney, her court-appointed attorney, and/or the court.” Jamie Spears’s request regarding legal fees is expected to be addressed in a court hearing on Wednesday in Los Angeles.Las Vegas is a comfortable place to land for pop stars. It’s where you go to bask in the validation of a job well done, to rest on a solid legacy at a point where the future may have become less certain and any tentative steps into it may harm that legacy. It seemed, for a while, a safe harbour for Britney Spears after her troubles (until she said she was made to perform against her will); Lady Gaga and Katy Perry also set up shop in the desert after their imperial phases faded. Adele, whose three-month Caesars Palace residency begins this weekend, has no need for this lucrative safety net – her latest, 30, was the biggest album of 2021 with just six weeks on sale. She’s playing there for practical reasons: she hates touring and wants to be close to her son at home in Los Angeles. But there is also something quietly subversive about her presence, right now, in a place synonymous with light entertainment and celebrating adult milestones. Once known for supplying comfort and artistic consistency (even complacency, perhaps), Adele made one of last year’s most confrontational albums. Prior to 30, I had listened to Adele’s earlier records out of professional duty, decided they weren’t for me, and moved on; she is my age but felt completely alien from our times. Her third album, 25, made me quite uneasy – here was a young mum, apparently in a solid relationship, revisiting juvenile heartbreak again. Hearing her reanimate that corpse felt to me like another young female artist getting trapped in purgatory – anxiety, whether hers or the label’s, that the public would never let her escape the sadness that made her name. When news broke that she was divorcing, there was an unseemly glee at the album people assumed she would write – a kintsugi masterpiece, flooding her brokenness with that golden voice. Adele may have made some predictable music in the past, but she seldom moves that way in her own life. For the first time, her music followed suit. The album 30 is neither full of recriminations for her ex-husband nor regret; instead Adele is steadfast that she had to leave her marriage because she was unhappy, and she was certain that her commitment to personal happiness would ultimately benefit the whole family – though finding fulfilment isn’t as straightforward as simple emancipation. The album follows a linear journey through her anguish at the pain and confusion it causes their son (My Little Love), and the depression and despair that accompanies her newfound solitude (Cry Your Heart Out). But her self-worth accrues with the album’s run time – and her belief in self-sufficiency. “All you do is complain about decisions you make,” she sings on Woman Like Me. “How can I help lift you if you refuse to activate the life that you truly want?” She’s singing to a lazy new lover who hasn’t met her expectations, but it also feels like a subtle challenge to Adele’s audience to reconsider how they see her – not as a reliable remedy during their own periods of heartache, but as a woman who took a risk to redefine happiness on her terms and forge a healthier relationship to herself – as well as to truly consider their own lives and potential for change. Critics have often justified Adele’s era-defining success by her relatability, but the daring woman on 30 is a provocation; the pop equivalent of Glennon Doyle, the self-help guru whose work made Adele feel “as if I just flew into my body for the very first time”. 30 hit me in a way I would never have expected. Adele’s album titles – 19, 21, 25, 30 – map a direct journey through adulthood with all its attendant milestones. And as New Yorker critic Carrie Battan wrote, her “contemporary take on soul, blues and gospel has been appreciated as a monument to tradition”. 30 derails that linear path of growth and defies tradition in both senses. It is her most idiosyncratic album, still respectfully in touch with those influences, but more playful with them: the wryly processed Motown girl group harmonies on Cry Your Heart Out; the use of voice notes on My Little Love that she has said nod to Tyler, the Creator and Skepta; the boozy looseness of I Drink Wine. She finds greater power in the subtleties of vocal expressiveness than she did in sheer volume – the coy head-in-the-clouds flirtatiousness of All Night Parking, the embarrassed neediness of Can I Get It – though she makes her unparalleled vocal power into a weapon on To Be Loved, making the listener feel the weight of her decision: “Let it be known that I tried,” she bellows, strafing her vocal chords. You wonder whether her quest for greater self-knowledge and fulfilment opened up this potential for experimentation, to venture beyond the bounds of her once-fixed musical identity as she did her roles as a wife and mother. The expansive pleasures of this album also stake a claim for the vitality of adult contemporary music, a once-powerful genre diminished by age-conscious segregation of radio formatting and the commercial assumption that parents and pop fans over the age of 35 have Bublé-steeped mush for brains. The realities of adult life and pop are seen to be incompatible: as I previously wrote about Robyn, the music industry is built on selling the kind of self-belief that only truly comes with age, yet few artists, particularly women, get to mature on their own terms. Even Adele – the century’s biggest commercial success – had to field these concerns. In an interview with Zane Lowe, she recalled a meeting where someone at her label highlighted the importance of making sure 14-year-olds knew who she was. “I’m like, but they’ve all got mums!” Adele said. “If everyone’s making music for the TikTok, who’s making music for my generation, for my peers? I’ll do that job gladly. I’d rather cater to people that are on my level in terms of the time we’ve spent on Earth.” She rejected the idea that 12-year-olds should even listen to 30. “It’s too deep! Thirty- and 40-year-olds are all committing to themselves and doing therapy. That’s my vibe. That’s what I was doing.” Maybe, then, Vegas is the perfect place for Adele to debut this album to the public. In front of the nearly weds and newly divorced merrymakers, here is someone who gambled on her future and won herself back.The office was a strange and alienating terrain for me when I arrived in it at 23. I had dropped out of university years before, expecting something to happen to me that would focus my future and simultaneously bestow a great windfall. It hadn’t. But I was sick of being poor and I had a boyfriend I wanted to play house with. When a temporary admin contract at a medical institution in Dublin came up, I jumped at it. Immediately, I felt overwhelmed, and self-conscious about my stupid little outfits – pastiches of what professional women wear, which I had cobbled together from Topshop sale racks and charity shops. I was prickly, wary of saying the wrong thing, unable to relax. Everything changed when my friend, whom I’ll call John, joined the company. He wasn’t a close pal, but we were part of the same social scene in what I still considered to be my “real life”. At first, I was concerned that having him around would expose me and my hokey performance of “office employee”. In fact, it did the opposite. Lunchtimes, which I had previously spent eating yoghurt alone at my desk, became something I looked forward to. We developed a routine, visiting the nearby “fancy burger place” as a Friday treat (where I would order a sad, bread-free beef bowl, meals in my early 20s being largely characterised by a lump of protein eaten smugly while mumbling about carbs). Once, on our break, we went to the pub and ordered frozen margaritas, which turned out to be flamboyant comical things, whipped into excessive domes. We were so pleased with ourselves that I asked a stranger to take a photo. We went on a work hen do together, where everyone wore nurses’ hats and waved grotesquely realistic penis toys. After we left the work crowd, we got a rickshaw down Grafton Street, speechless and wheezing hysterically. I don’t mean to suggest that John splintered us off from the wider office: he was instantly, effortlessly liked by everyone, and working there never seemed to cause him the anxiety it did me. Rather, it was through John that I found office solace. He was an abundantly creative person – playing in several of the best Dublin bands, wearing an appealing lopsided smile and a denim jacket I coveted – but he did not seem affronted by the fact that he also had to work in a job unrelated to his creativity. It changed my perspective: I’d barely produced anything creative at all, but had arrogantly and pre-emptively felt afraid that I never would if I was working in an uninspiring job. I’ve since written a novel, which was published last year. I’m still terrible at being in offices, still worried I’m going to be “found out”. But, in all the years since, I’ve never felt cooler or more part of a gang than when taking advantage of built-up flexitime to clock out at 4.30pm on a Friday and leave with John, denim jackets on, to go to discuss the events of the week. He not only made the office into something that didn’t terrify me, but made me happy and hopeful, too. I’m yet to meet anyone else capable of such sorcery.Most of April Ashley’s 86 years were the hard going of a pioneer’s life, with repeated rejection and scandal-blighted reverses. But she never regretted the day in 1960 when she risked her life to become her true self through gender realignment surgery, among the earliest to undertake such a thing. The operation cost her prolonged pain, besides a difficult-to-raise £2,500, but in old age she said that every morning there was “still a bit of joy left” at the memory of the transformation. As to tough times: “Chins up … be as brave as you can.” Her beauty, instinctual style and understanding of the artifice of glamour pre-dated the surgery. After it, she briefly had chances as a model, projecting a 1950s soignee manner animated by a new naughtiness; she had an aristo voice and native scouse wit, too. David Bailey, Brian Duffy and Terences Donovan and O’Neill photographed her, even in lingerie; she didn’t hide who she was and how she had become so, and they didn’t care, as Ashley delivered a great picture. She updated her image through life – kook, 60s socialite, private-life professional, and in her late years, carefully edited duchess. Few have ever carried off with grace the gown and squishy headgear of an academic honour, but she did. As a young adult the released joie de vivre of her changed self made her a welcome good-time girl at any party, and she crossed class and social boundaries as an early celebrity funded by largesse – champagne sent to her table, gifts of clothes and jewels, rides in private jets to swinging places. All were a huge expansion of life. She had been born in Liverpool and christened George, one of the six children of Frederick Jamieson, a Royal Navy cook, and his wife, Ada (nee Brown). Father was often away at sea and drunk on leave; when Ashley visited his deathbed long afterwards – the first time he had seen her as a woman – he told her “Darling, I always knew” and accepted her. There was not much reconciling with Ada, who had walloped George daily, nor with the siblings who mocked the delicate-featured boy whose voice did not break and whose body grew more physically feminine with adolescence. He prayed nightly to awake as a girl. At 16, George joined the merchant navy. After attempting suicide on shore leave in Los Angeles, he voluntarily entered a mental hospital in Ormskirk in Lancashire, where he pleaded with doctors to be made more masculine, was treated with hormones and electric shock therapy, and eventually fled to London. When he first dressed as a woman there, he knew he would become one, although not yet how. On a Paris holiday he fell in with performers who helped him to become a dancer under the name of Tony April, at Le Carrousel nightclub, famous for its transgender cabaret. Its fabulous headliner, Coccinelle, recommended him to the Casablanca clinic of the pioneering surgeon Georges Burou, who took seven hours over a gender realignment operation and greeted the new April Ashley with “Bonjour, Mademoiselle” when she awoke. Returning to Britain and registered officially as a woman, Ashley was a natural at modelling, and also took a bit part in the film The Road to Hong Kong, starring Bob Hope and Bing Crosby. But in 1961 a friend sold Ashley’s secret to the Sunday People for a fiver, and her name was dropped from the movie’s credits when it came out the following year. Her agency cancelled all bookings and told her she wouldn’t work in the UK again, and indeed when she applied for jobs the response was usually: “We don’t want people like you.” Ashley eventually found hostess work in nightclubs on the Costa del Sol in Spain, including at the Jacaranda in Marbella, owned by her suitor Arthur Corbett, due to become the next Lord Rowallan, whose compulsion to cross-dressing was ending his first marriage in divorce. They wed in Gibraltar in 1963, but Ashley ran off a fortnight later with the heir to the Duque del Infantado. In 1966 she demanded maintenance: Corbett counterfiled to have the marriage annulled on the grounds that Ashley was not a woman. The trial lasted three weeks, proceedings took three years, and in 1970 the judge ruled that Ashley “was at all times a male” and there could be no marriage between two men, a precedent that lasted for more than 30 years. Ashley subsequently had a breakdown, but recovered enough to open, with a friend, Desmond Morgan, a Knightsbridge restaurant, April and Desmond’s, where she greeted, and drank with, celebrity customers. That frenetic life likely provoked a heart attack that sent Ashley into exile in Hay-on-Wye in 1975, where attempts to get off the dole through catering and waitressing work foundered when some of her fellow employees discovered her past and made her feel a freak. In 1986 she followed a new husband, Jeffrey West, to San Diego in California; the marriage ended in 1990, but she stayed on there, spending some time working for Greenpeace before finding a job in a craft gallery. Her Californian co-workers didn’t ask who she was; her story anyway was becoming less exotic. Ashley yearned to return to the UK, and in 2005 successfully appealed to the deputy prime minister, John Prescott, once a fellow renter in a London boarding house, to grant her a birth certificate recognising her as female; by then the UK had introduced the Gender Recognition Act 2004. For lack of national insurance paid, her pension was meagre and she lived in straitened circumstances to the end – despite some fees, firmly demanded, from public appearances. Liverpool made her a citizen of honour in 2015, and an exhibition, Portrait of a Lady, ran for 12 months in the same year at the Museum of Liverpool before transferring to London. Her appearance when collecting her MBE for services to transgender equality at Buckingham Palace in 2012 could not have been more regal. Ashley’s second tell-all memoir, The First Lady, came out in 2006, but it turned out that large sections of it had been taken directly from her first autobiography, April Ashley’s Odyssey, written in 1982 with Duncan Fallowell. When the publisher of the first book spotted the lifts, the second one had to be withdrawn. So she never got the hoped-for biopic, although she did coach the actor Eddie Redmayne in sexy voice timbre and deportment for the film The Danish Girl (2015). • April Ashley, transgender pioneer, born 29 April 1935; died 27 December 2021The final nail-biting episode of the sixth series of Line of Duty was watched by 12.8 million people last May, the biggest audience for a television drama for 20 years. Now more than 5 million people have watched a four-minute clip of AC-12’s feared officers interrogating the man at the heart of a real-life scandal gripping the nation: Boris Johnson. The spoof video was posted on Twitter by its creators, the satirical artists Led By Donkeys, on Tuesday and was swiftly retweeted by the Line of Duty writer Jed Mercurio with the words “brilliant work”. Using clips from the television series cut with excerpts of Johnson’s statements on so-called “partygate”, it purports to show the prime minister being questioned by AC-12 investigators Ted Hastings, Steve Arnott and Kate Fleming as part of Operation BYOB. “The facts are plain for everyone to see,” Hastings, played by Adrian Dunbar in the TV drama, tells Johnson. During lockdown “people were making incredible sacrifices,” adds Fleming. “But not you, oh no. You partied,” Hastings continues. “We’re satisfied that you knowingly and intentionally flouted the rules because you believe you’re above the law. Well, fella, you’ve got another thing coming, believe you me.” “There are rules,” says Hastings. “The rules that bind us as a society and as a people.” “Fairness,” says Fleming. “Decency,” says Arnott. “Integrity,” says Hastings – over an image of Captain Tom Moore, who raised £33m for the NHS in the first lockdown before dying of Covid-19 at the age of 100. Ben Stewart, one of the Led By Donkeys collective, told the Guardian: “When the police aren’t doing their job, who do you call for? You call for AC-12.” Making the video had been cathartic, he added. “The impunity that has allowed Johnson to operate in the way that he has for years is finally being challenged. And we wanted to make a visual cultural representation of that by getting him in a room with AC-12.” The video appears to include new material voiced by Line of Duty stars Dunbar, Vicky McClure (Fleming) and Martin Compston (Arnott). But asked whether they or Mercurio had assisted with making the video, Stewart said: “I can neither confirm nor deny that.” When the group had finished the video, he said, “we thought we’ve nailed it, but it’s really difficult to tell until you put it out there. But it’s flying.” Led By Donkeys worked with Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice to create a memorial wall of pink hearts opposite parliament. “We spent a lot of time down there with bereaved families, painting hearts with them. And so we’ve come to see the party scandal, to a certain extent, through their eyes. There are people who sat in a car outside a hospital, unable to hold their loved ones’ hands as they slipped away from Covid, but they just wanted to be close to them. “Johnson regarded the sacrifices that people were making in such a cavalier way and people are deeply hurt. I think it’s important that there is a price to pay for making these rules and breaking these rules, because people will live for the rest of their lives with [the impact] of abiding by the rules. This matters to people on a deep and visceral level.”Alexander Zverev needed no reminding of the last time he played John Millman at a grand slam. “Five and a half hours, five sets – he’s a very difficult player to beat,” he said before his second-round match against the Australian. That match was the third round at Roland Garros in 2020, when the then 89th-ranked Millman rallied from two sets down and pushed him to five stanzas in a thriller that frustrated Zverev to the point of smashing his racket on to the ground. A lot has happened since then. That same year Zverev made his first first slam final at the US Open. In 2021 he climbed back up to world No 3, won Olympic gold and then the ATP Finals, beating the only two players ranked higher in Novak Djokovic and Daniil Medvedev. With Djokovic gone from his side of the draw and Medvedev safely on the other, the 2022 Australian Open could yet be the German’s tournament. Getting there will very much depend on the level of consistency for which the 24-year-old is known but somewhat lacked in his opening match at Melbourne Park. On Wednesday night it faltered again only to return just in time to avoid another marathon with the popular local up the other end and finish the match 6-4, 6-4, 6-0. “My tactic today was to hit the ball as hard as possible,” Zverev said in a post-match interview with the Australian wheelchair tennis champion, Dylan Alcott. “That was my mindset going into the match, but hopefully I can hit it even harder next match and harder the next match after that.” Alcott, who himself won the Paralympic men’s singles gold in Tokyo 2020 on his way to a golden slam, asked Zverev where he keeps his medal and received an unexpected response. “That’s actually a good question because my brother took it for a media appearance,” Zverev said. “He didn’t give it back to me yet. I don’t know where it is for the past five months. Hopefully he hasn’t sold it on eBay or something.” Millman, for his part, gave a thoroughly decent account of himself until the third set, the world No 89 matching his counterpart eight years his junior in an exhibition of impeccable groundstrokes. During the second set he won three consecutive service games to love and forced Zverev to serve himself out of a hole on more than one occasion with support of a vocal but overall pleasant home crowd at Rod Laver Arena. “I could really feel that you guys have been locked down for two years,” Zverev said. “I’m prepared that everybody will hate me after the match. It’s quite accurate and that’s my mindset. I’ll get a lot of boos and hopefully everybody will cheer against me. I’m kidding.” For all Millman’s hustling, though, Zverev simply had the edge, the tactical nous to force a long rally to a head and an at-times uncanny capacity to shave the tiniest outside sliver of the baseline. To offset his 38 unforced errors – a far higher tally than Millman’s 16 – he hit 37 winners to nine and served 14 aces to zero, and will face Moldovan qualifier Radu Albot on Friday with a keen eye to tougher tests awaiting on the other side.Are you in a relationship where one of you is 10 or more years older than the other? We would like to hear about your experiences of being in an age gap relationship. Is your age gap a feature of your relationship dynamic, or have you long since moved past such concerns? Was it tricky to get friends and family on board with the relationship? What advice would you have for couples with a similar age gap? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.As the energy crisis deepens, the UK government is frantically searching for ways to provide relief to households facing sharp increases in gas and electricity bills. In the latest development, Downing Street is said to be considering paying energy supply companies when wholesale energy prices are high in the hope that they do not pass on rising costs to consumers. When wholesale prices fall below a certain threshold, the energy companies would give money back to the government. In effect, this amounts to an emergency bailout that guarantees the income of private energy companies when wholesale prices rise. The energy companies, perhaps unsurprisingly, support the plan and financial journalists have described it as a “radical intervention”. But subsidising energy companies is not radical in any meaningful sense of the term. In fact, the proposed initiative is firmly aligned with the status quo, in which private companies reap massive profits through the good times, and have their losses absorbed by the state through the bad. Though the details of the latest government plan are scant, there are already plenty of reasons to be sceptical about its effectiveness in tackling the energy crisis. The first is that it comes far too late to save many of the smaller companies in the sector. Over the past year roughly half of the energy suppliers in the UK, nearly 30 in total, have already gone bust. The majority of these failed companies were swallowed up by one of the five firms that own the “big six” energy suppliers. One of the main impacts of the crisis has therefore been to further consolidate the power of the big six in an already heavily concentrated energy sector. And at present there is little reason to believe that the dominant players are in need of government support. The financial impact of the energy crisis on suppliers will only be confirmed in the months ahead once they begin to release their financial reports for the fourth quarter of 2021. But early indications are that some of the largest companies in the sector fared very well during the initial onset of the energy crisis. For example, in its latest financial statement, SSE plc enjoyed truly eye-watering operating profit margins (operating profits-to-revenues) of 55% from April to September 2021, a period during which wholesale price hikes were already rattling energy markets. The big six don’t need to be subsidised through a price stabilisation mechanism, nor do they deserve it. A recent briefing from Common Wealth thinktank lays this out in considerable detail. The returns that the big six offer to shareholders through dividends and stock buybacks far outstrip their returns to the public finances through tax payments. Since 2010, the big six have spent more than £40bn on shareholder payouts, nearly double the amount they paid in income taxes. And the major shareholders of the big six, it should be noted, principally comprise foreign governments, as well as asset management firms and investment banks that mainly service the asset-rich, not the lower-income households most strained by the energy crisis. Rather than offering subsidies to the big six, the UK government should instead focus on taxing them and using the money to address the cost of living crisis. If properly designed, a windfall tax targeting the large energy suppliers and the large North Sea gas producers offers an effective and just way of curbing the most regressive effects of the energy crisis. Unlike this temporary price stabilisation mechanism, the energy giants are dead set against the windfall tax. But it is a policy that enjoys widespread support and has historical precedent, the last windfall tax being implemented by the Tory government to raise £2bn in 2011. At the same time, a windfall tax needs to be coupled with a more ambitious strategy of bringing the energy suppliers back into public ownership. Since privatisation of the UK energy system began in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the government has been forced to constantly intervene to address a seemingly endless parade of market failures. Instead of merely intervening to prop up a dysfunctional and unstable market, the government now needs to rapidly de-marketise the energy system to bring it some much-needed stability. Without a publicly owned energy system safeguarded from the whims and pressures of the market, it is difficult to see how the UK government can secure clean and affordable energy for all. Sandy Hager is a senior lecturer in International Political Economy at City, University of London. This piece was written with Joseph Baines, a senior lecturer in International Political Economy at King’s College LondonAs the sunlight slowly began to fade on Wednesday in Melbourne Park, two of the top women’s players were holding court on the two most prominent stages across the grounds. On Rod Laver Arena, the night session was all but filled to its capped attendance as the crowd watched Naomi Osaka continue her comeback with a 6-0, 6-4 win over Madison Brengle of the United States. But next door, only a smattering of fans had hung around for the end of the day session on Margaret Court Arena to watch as Barbora Krejcikova, the fourth seed, picked apart Wang Xiyu of China 6-2, 6-3 to move on to the third round. Despite the best efforts of Wang, a talented 20-year-old with a wicked left-handed serve, many of Krejcikova’s array of talents were on show. Her hooked topspin forehand, one of the standout shots in the women’s game, commanded most exchanges and she continually spread the ball to every part of the court with sharp angles. Meanwhile, she demonstrated her comprehensive toolbox of shots through her volleys and slice backhand. While she may not receive the attention reserved for more prominent players on the tour, Krejcikova is now quietly one of the stories of women’s tennis. She was outside the top 120 when she won her first grand slam main draw match at the 2020 Australian Open as a qualifier. Until that point, she had spent her career humbly trying to break the top 100. That Krejcikova became the French Open singles champion within 18 months was a stunning feat in itself, but one of the great revelations of the past eight months has been how she has backed up those two glorious weeks in Paris. Krejcikova compiled a 29-4 record across the spring and summer, winning three titles, and her form has continued into the new year. Last week she started the new season by reaching the final at the Sydney International in a highly competitive field. Despite being the fourth seed, there are frequent reminders of her low profile. She is still sporting the same Head clothing she wore in her French Open triumph and her inexperience with certain duties that top players must undertake is clear. As Krejcikova walked towards the exit after her match, an official on the side waved frantically at her to remain on the court – she is still not used to giving an interview after each match. Over the past months Krejcikova’s results have made it clear she intends to remain at the top and considering her sustained doubles success – she remains one half of the No 1 doubles team alongside Katerina Siniakova – she was arguably the overall player of the season last year. In Melbourne she is one of the favourites and she continues to deal with her new reality with typical composure. “There is always pressure, there has always been pressure, there is always going to be pressure,” Krejcikova said recently. “The most important thing is just to really go and enjoy, and that’s what I’m planning to do. That’s something I’m focusing on.” As Krejcikova progressed without incident, Osaka faced her first obstacle of the tournament. After breezing through the first set against Brengle, the second became a much tighter affair and Osaka lost serve to trail 3-4. As she returned to her chair following the error-strewn game, Osaka gestured as if she was going to strike a ball in fury or throw her racket. But that lapse was momentary. Osaka refocused immediately and she punctuated each of her following forehand winners with fist pumps and positive gestures. In a sight that has played out many times in big tournaments over the past few years, Osaka reeled off three straight games to win. “In that moment of course I was really disappointed with myself, but I also think these are the type of matches that I need to play in grand slams to get broken and to figure out a way to fight back in really crucial times,” she said. As Osaka moved towards the third round, at least one notable person was watching. Andy Murray was impressed enough by Osaka’s first-set display to ask his fans on Twitter: “Anyone hit the ball cleaner from the baseline than @naomiosaka?” After one argued that all men’s players do so, he assured them that this was not the case. “Definitely means a lot,” said Osaka on Murray’s support. “For me it was a really cool moment. It’s a little bit shocking, because when you’re playing you never really think about the TV broadcasting it and other people are watching. So, yeah, definitely really surreal. I hit with him once like three years ago, and it was like a memory that’s really dear to me. It was really cool just to have someone like him talking about my game.” Osaka, the defending champion, will next face 20-year-old Amanda Anisimova, a former teenage prodigy in the midst of a resurgence. It is a difficult third-round match but one that comes with a particular reward. Should she win, a blockbuster contest against Ash Barty, the top seed, is likely to follow.The Dutch government is facing criticism after it emerged that a Rembrandt masterpiece is to be bought by the state from the Rothschild family through a tax haven in the South Pacific. A debate in the country’s senate heard that the €175m (£145m) purchase of The Standard Bearer would be from a trust located in the Cook Islands whose holding company is located in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, also a tax haven. The painting, a three-quarter-length self-portrait that was a precursor for the Dutch renaissance’s most famous work, The Night Watch, was loaned to the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam in 2019 for its Rembrandt-Velázquez exhibition. “The reason we all know this is that this has all been revealed in the so-called Panama Papers and is all publicly available to find out,” said Henk Otten, an independent MP who was previously a member of the rightwing Forum for Democracy. “How does this transaction relate to the policy of the Dutch government to combat tax avoidance, is our question to the state secretary. SMEs and freelancers who are a day late with their VAT return will immediately receive a hefty fine. Why is the state involved in such constructions?” Senators have also raised concerns that the government could not be sure of the authenticity of the work or its ownership given the opaque nature of the purchase. The culture minister, Gunay Uslu, said before a vote in favour of the purchase that the appropriate due diligence had been done. She said: “It is my understanding that it has already been legally established that the person we are buying it from is the right person.” Of the total price of The Standard Bearer, or De Vaandeldrager, €150m is being provided by the government. The Rembrandt Association and the Rijksmuseum will pay the remaining €25m. There has also been criticism of the timing of the purchase given the tough times faced by the Dutch arts and culture sector during the Covid pandemic. The minister conceded she felt “uncomfortable” that the sale had come during the pandemic but said it was a once-in-a-generation opportunity to take the painting out of private hands. Once the sale is completed within the next four weeks, The Standard Bearer will tour museums in all parts of the country. Uslu said: “There is no other work from his baroque period in the Netherlands Collection; it is also the prelude to The Night Watch, and Rembrandt distinguishes himself here for the first time as a rebellious artist. Moreover, The Standard Bearer is inextricably linked to the history of the Netherlands.”Standup resembles biblical preaching, according to Australian writer Anthony Noack, a case he tries to make by performing the Book of Ecclesiastes in club-comedy style. I remain unpersuaded. The Preacher, performed to no audiences and delivered digitally as part of the Living Record festival, begins intriguingly, as Noack – in character as Dave Davidson – lures us in with lame jokes and suggestions of a life going off the rails. But that persona becomes tedious then evaporates altogether, and the show is revealed as a more or less faithful – and seemingly interminable – Bible recital. And lo, I was transported traumatically to my few childhood experiences of churchgoing, which launched me into a life of enthusiastic atheism. While the matter of Noack’s show, and Ecclesiastes itself, is substantial – it’s about wisdom versus foolishness, and the meaning (and futility) of life – in performance it’s just a litany of fortune-cookie pronouncements. “What has been will be again,” “to everything there is a season”, and so on, without any coherent train of thought, far less any discernible jokes to cling to. If there are meaningful parallels between standup and biblical philosophising, the point would be better made by a freer approach, one that took Ecclesiastes’ arguments, re-contextualised them and re-purposed them as comedy. But Noack cleaves tightly to the original, fulfilling his obligations to humour by grinning a lot, speaking in a jaunty-philosophical tone and adding “what’s the deal?” at the end of every homily. Far from demonstrating any standup/preaching affinity, text and delivery pull in precisely opposite directions. The result is still identifiable as preaching, more’s the pity, but not remotely so as comedy. The Preacher is available to stream via the Living Record festivalA woman acting as a “guerrilla journalist” when she filmed inside a hospital in an attempt to prove her belief that lockdown measures were disproportionate has been convicted of a public order offence. Debbie Hicks, 47, a former teacher and psychologist, filmed twice at the Gloucestershire Royal hospital in Gloucester in December 2020 and told staff who challenged her she could do what she wanted as she paid her taxes. Hicks, from Stroud, argued that she was exercising her right to freedom of expression and trying to expose what she believed was a false government narrative that hospitals were full of patients with Covid. But finding her guilty of using threatening words or behaviour likely to cause harassment, the district judge Nicholas Wattam said staff had the right to work without being molested. Richard Posner, prosecuting, told Cheltenham magistrates court that Hicks, who had no previous convictions, went to the hospital on 27 December 2020 because she felt restrictions were over the top. Live-streaming her visit, she could be heard saying: “It is absolutely dead, it’s a ghost town, I’ve never seen it so quiet. Where are all the people dying from the second wave? “This is the proof we’ve needed in Gloucestershire, we’ve been locked down into tier 3 for this? An empty hospital, this is a disgrace. All our people in our country desperately waiting for treatment … This is making me so angry walking around here. Look at the truth.” On the second visit the following day, she was challenged by two staff. Posner said: “Ms Hicks’ response was confrontational, derogatory and aggressive.” Katie Williams, an occupational therapist who challenged Hicks, said she had been working under extreme pressure for almost a year and had found the incident distressing. Sophie Brown, a senior physiotherapist, said when she asked Hicks not to film, Hicks replied that she paid her taxes “so I can do what I want”. Hicks’ lawyer Merry Van Woodenberg told the court that Hicks was acting as a guerrilla journalist and she had a right to freedom of expression under article 10 of the European convention on human rights. The barrister said her client had lost her chance of employment because of her political views and told the court her fees had been paid by others who had similar concerns to Hicks. But finding her guilty, the judge said: “Miss Williams and Miss Brown had the misfortune to encounter Mrs Hicks in their place of work. They do not deserve to be molested by Mrs Hicks when at work and should be protected by the law.” Hicks told the court she was unemployed and struggling with debt. She was fined £120 and told to pay prosecution costs of £775 and a victim surcharge – which is used to fund services for victims – of £34, a total of £929. • This article’s headline was amended on 20 January 2022 to remove an inference that Hicks’s fine was directly related to her filming.The Tory grandee David Davis told Boris Johnson: “In the name of God, go,” during an often chaotic prime minister’s questions overshadowed by intense doubt about Johnson’s future. After a fierce set of exchanges between Johnson and Keir Starmer, Davis rose to tell Johnson that he had spent weeks defending him from “angry constituents”, but that repeated reports about lockdown-breaching parties were too much. The former Brexit secretary said: “I expect my leaders to shoulder the responsibility for the actions they take. Yesterday he did the opposite of that. So I will remind him of a quotation which may be familiar to his ear, Leopold Amery to Neville Chamberlain: ‘You have sat too long here for any good you have been doing. In the name of God, go.’” Asked by the Guardian afterwards what had motivated him to make an intervention, Davis said the interview given by the prime minister to Sky News on Tuesday was “not what I expect from a leader”. “Up until now I had been supporting him … but it’s not leadership,” he said. “Yesterday’s interview was an attempt to escape responsibility, not to shoulder it. And that is a test of leadership.” It is understood junior colleagues had been pressing Davis to make a statement publicly calling for the prime minister to go, saying the situation needed a “big figure” to intervene. Earlier in prime minister’s questions, Starmer castigated Johnson for what he called “absurd and frankly unbelievable” explanations over Downing Street parties. Despite speculation that the threshold of formal letters from Tory MPs seeking a confidence vote could be reached later on Wednesday, and the defection of the Bury South MP, Christian Wakeford, from the Tories to Labour just before PMQs, Johnson put up a bullish defence of his record. One cabinet minister claimed Wakeford’s defection was “unifying” and would “draw a line under the whole thing”. In response to Davis’s intervention, they shrugged. But another cabinet minister said they recognised that the prime minister’s position was “precarious”. Starmer took every opportunity to condemn and even mock the prime minister, with the Labour leader at one point noting the noisy government benches, asking if “the chief whip told them to bring their own boos”, a reference to the invitation sent to No 10 staff in May 2020. “Every week the prime minister offers absurd and frankly unbelievable defences to the Downing Street parties, and each week it unravels,” Starmer told the Commons. “First he said there were no parties, then the video landed, blowing that defence out of the water. Next he said he was sickened and furious when he found out about the parties – until it turned out that he was at the Downing Street garden party. “Then last week he said he didn’t realise he was at a party and, surprise surprise, no one believed him. So this week he’s got a new defence – nobody warned me that it was against the rules. Since the prime minister wrote the rules, why on earth does he think this new defence is going to work for him?” In response to this and further questions, Johnson told Starmer he would have to wait for the outcome of a report on the parties by the senior civil servant Sue Gray, saying at one point: “I have said what I have said about the events in No 10.” But Starmer kept pushing over Johnson’s explanation for why he attended an event in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020. “It requires the prime minister to expect us to believe that whilst every other person who was invited on 20 May was told it was a social occasion, he alone was told it was a work meeting,” the Labour leader said. “It also requires the prime minister to ask us to accept that as he waded through the empty bottles and platters of sandwiches, he didn’t realise it was a party. Does the prime minister realise how ridiculous that sounds?” Starmer ended by saying Johnson was “trying to save just one job – his own”. Johnson replied by talking up his record over Covid and vaccinations, saying this was “thanks to the work of staff up and down Whitehall, across government, throughout the NHS.” He added: “And I am intensely proud of what this government has done.”So, that concludes the third day, and it’s been a day without shocks, with Zverev, Osaka, Barty and, finally, Monfils all through to complete the set. “Good vibes, good crowd, good Gaël,” says a very cool and relaxed Monfils. “Serving great, good powerful shots, a couple of trick shots, all good. I had a tough time and I feel great, strong. Always ready, born ready.” A return of service - with love - from Naomi Osaka to Andy Murray. Bublik serves out the next game at speed, and so Monfils must serve out the next game to win. Monfils works Bublik round the court to level at 15-15. Then Bublik shanks the ball for 30-15, then the ball takes an age to come down for a crashing winner. Two match points it is, and the first is gobbled up. That’s it, a win in one hour and 29 minutes. There’s life in Bublik yet, and Monfils skids to net a drop volley to hand over break point. That’s saved in style as the Frenchman clatters a winner home. Then Bublik goes long to allow Monfils to save two breaks and he’s a game away from the next round. 5-3 in the third set. Monfils claims a break point with a clattering backhand and then Bublik chucks in an underarm serve out of desperation. It fails and it’s 4-3 to Monfils, and victory is in sight. Some acrobatics, and the tennis version of the rabona can’t save Monfils on 30-15, and Bublik blasts back to 30-30, only for a loose shot to hand Monfils game point and 3-3. Monfils and Bublik seem to have drawn closer to each other, with the Kazakhstani saving break point to take a 3-2 lead in the third set. Bublik looks to have given up the ghost, he’s giggling after hitting the net from a very winnable position. He then screams into the ether after missing another one. Still, it goes to deuce. Monfils needs not to get distracted by such antics, and Bublik holds. That leaves just Gael Monfils and Alexander Bublik on court, and Monfils looks well on course, having won the first two sets against Bublik 6-1 6-0. Bublik, with some relief, has just won the first game of the third set. Alexander Zverev speaks to multiple Paralympian gold medallist Dylan Alcott. I feel good, I won, I could really feel like you guys have been on lockdown for two years, amazing atmosphere. Hopefully it will get louder for the next few matches. I am prepared that everyone will hate me after the match, hopefully I get a lot of boos (crowd boos and then cheers). I have said that since Covid started that sports needs the people and the atmosphere. Spectators bring the emotions, and it’s excellent we are going back to normal. My tactic today was to hit the ball as slow as possible but if you are saying I am hitting it harder i am happy with that. If I am hitting it hrader against Rafa then I am happy. A highly impressive win, and Zverev, if he can sort his serving, can go far in this tournament. The first point is an ace, but a failed drop shot takes it to 15-15, with Millman still motoring around the court. Then there’s a slight delay and the hint of a yip from Zverev with a double fault as he goes for it on his second serve. He rights himself, and gives himself a single match point, that a crushing serve takes. He’s dropped just eight games to reach the last 32. He’s on course to meet Nadal in the last eight. Zverev takes just over a minute to win the next game, and he’s 4-0 up. He takes a bit longer for his next break, a triple break, no less, and it’s 5-0. Millman shows he is not yet beaten with a lovely save of the first break. No such luck on the second and Zverev will serve for the match. Monfils doing Monfils things. He won the first set against Bublik 6-1. Oh dear, feels like it’s slipping away for Millman and Zverev, for all those wobbles on his serve, looks strong, his winner to go to 15-40 and two break points up un-returnable. But there’s a dog in this fight yet, and Zverev overhits to cough up one of those points. The second sees no such mistake, he’s 3-0 and cruising to victory. Even longer way back for Millman now, as he is broken in the first game of the third set. And then gets given a chasing by Zverev’s serve, and the lead is 2-0 up. The home fans are getting louder but their man is fading fast. Zverev takes the second set 6-4. Millman holds his serve to go to 4-5 to great acclaim, and makes Zverev serve out for the set. The first serve is an unerring ace, the second point is taken by another. Millman’s fine, low return of service takes it to 30-15. But then it goes to two set points, claimed at the first time of asking by a serve, and then a brutal forehand to follow up Millman’s return. Long way back for the Australian. Gael Monfils, the French 17th seed, has rushed into a 3-0 lead on Alexander Bublik, the Russian-Kazakhstani player, though has been sent tumbling on the court, though seemed to be unshaken by hitting the deck. Millman holds his serve and sets about getting on to Zverev, who has to pull out the bombs to clatter into a 30-15 lead. Then Millman over-eggs a passing shot before another double fault creeps in as Zverev goes for broke on second serve. There are some cheers when he misses his next one, and then a slow serve hits the net. That’s the second game in a row he’s double-double faulted. But then some serve and volley, and a deft drop shot takes him into an advantage, and then Millman fluffs a backhand. 5-3 to the German, who is wobbly but has the juice to get out of trouble. Zverev, at 3-2 up, has a few collywobbles with his serve, and two double faults present Millman with two break points. Then his serve gets him back out of trouble, crashing the ball for two aces that hand him advantage, that’s seven aces. And he wins the game with a thunderous ace that Millman can only reach with the edge of his racquet. 4-2, the danger closed off for now. Maria Sakkari, Greece’s fifth-seed, is safely through, beating Chinese qualifier Qinwen Zheng 6-1 6-4. Can’t disagree with the great man here, can you? Zverev’s power takes him to an early break of Millman’s serve for 2-1, and a hold now would see him take significant grip on this match. He surges to 40-0 up, only for a looped backhand fade to stop him serving out. Then a double fault, nerves jangling? Nope, a crashing serve forces a Millman error and it’s 3-1. Millman is not done, and holds his first service game. But then so does Zverev, as the home fans, getting raucous at this late hour, give it some noise. 1-1 in the second set. Zverev takes the first set 6-4, some powerful serving getting the job done, even though Millman continues to buzz around the court with purpose. Some Andy Murray quotes from his press call ahead of tomorrow’s match with Taro Daniel. Obviously, in some of the matches that I have played I wouldn’t expect, even if I was playing at my peak, necessarily to win in straight sets. A match like (Basilashvili) against someone who is in the 20s in the world, it’s always going to be difficult. But obviously it would be nice to have some quicker ones. That’s where I have had this discussion with my team and we were talking about trying to shorten matches and ways to play quicker points. It’s difficult to get the balance because if, right now, I’m playing 20 in the world level tennis then, if I’m playing anyone that’s in the top 50, those matches are going to be very, very competitive and difficult to win. If you start trying to play a different style of tennis and try to shorten points and everything, and you maybe make a few more mistakes or maybe don’t break serve as much, that also can prolong matches, as well. Playing my game style but playing it at a higher level, I think will give me the best chance of shortening matches. When I look back at a lot of my matches in 2015, 2016, I was quite efficient and clinical, when I had opportunities and when I was ahead of guys, I’d finish them off quickly. Right now, because I’m not quite playing at that level, the matches are maybe a little bit tighter. So, hopefully, if I can continue to improve my level, I’ll be able to shorten some of the matches. 5-3 up for Zverev means Millman must serve to stay in the first set, and he does so with a modicum of comfort, though his winner, down the line from somewhere upstate, is fortunate, to say the least. Karen Khachanov, the very big-serving Russian, will face Rafa Nadal, after the 28th seed beat Benjamin Bonzi 6-4 6-0 7-5.Nadal has won all seven meetings with the 2018 Paris Masters winner. The referee has been on the blower to complain about a random electric-sounding drone. “Turn it off,” he says. Meanwhile, Zverev and Millman are trading blows, and Millman faces down break points and deuce on his serve. Then Zverev is complaining about the random drone, and Millman holds on to his serve. It’s 4-3. Zverev cruises to 30-0, with some expert serving, and then Millman misses a winner, just out to take it to 40-0. Hawkeye shows it on the margins but out, and Zverev goes to 4-2 up. A reminder on line calls at the Australian, per an ESPN piece from last year. The tournament is relying solely on Hawk-Eye Live -- a complex vision system where computer-linked cameras are used to track the trajectory of a ball to determine whether it was in or out, as well as catching foot faults. There’s no one to argue with -- voices of some of Australia’s frontline medical workers are being used for the “out” and “fault” calls, which can be heard within venues and on the broadcast -- so players can no longer challenge calls. They can still request to view Hawk-Eye evidence of a call. So that “out” call from a female voice in an heavy Australian accent is a nurse or medic? Excellent - ripper - and apologies if you, the reader, knew all this. Millman looks to be enjoying himself, though this has already been a bruising match. Zverev wails in anguish as he misses a potential winner, and then another as he scoops the ball out of play and it’s 3-2. Again, service is a continuing problem for both of them, though Zverev delivers a first ace to go 40-30 up. Then a low-slung effort sees Millman crash into the net. 3-1. There was a slight delay in that game when a spectator was asked to return the ball he had taken as a souvenir. Neither player is comfortable on their serve, or more pertinently, both returning well. Zverev goes two break points up, and off a lucky net cord, Millman nets and it’s 2-1 to the German. Feels like these two are settling in for the long haul. Millman gets some purchase on the Zverev serve, getting to 30-30 by hitting it early and then an early break point. The home crowd are on his side, and when Zverev’s first serve is missed the forehand return is excellent. 1-1. Let’s go Aussie indeed. Zverev opens his account, on the Millman serve to go 1-0 up, starting with a lovely backhand lob to win the first point. The third point is an exceptionally long rally of 28 shots before Millman, tiredly, nets. Then Zverev blams a winner to take two break points, and clatters a backhand to break. Isn’t he, pretty in pink? Zverev’s trainers are rather lovely, and look to these colour-blind eyes to be a shade of puce. He and Millman pose for photos with the German Olympic champion towering over the home hero. Sacha Zverev is next on court in the Rod Laver, to take on the dangerous John Millman, who beat Feliciano Lopez in the first round. Millman is kept waiting for Zverev to show up. The German got fined for his late show for the first round but eventually appears, laden with drinks. Naomi Osaka speaks to Jim Courier. I returned pretty well, that’s not my usual stat but I have been working on it in the off-season. I’m a bit of a perfectionist so I am not trying to compare myself to my past, I am trying to take it one day at a time. I feel like the goal is for me is to have fun and I want to thank my team as we are accomplishing that. Brengle does 0-30 down, and then on her second serve, Osaka works her way to a forehand winner to take three match points. The first is claimed as Brengle chases the ball down and misses. Tumaini Carayol saw Rafa Nadal’s win earlier today. The Osaka serve recovers itself, and it’s back to 5-4 soon enough, and a break now will take her into the third round. Osaka comes back out smoking, and then breaks back straight away for 4-4 with Brengle, a stooped volley at the net getting the job done. Brengle is making such a better fist of the second set, going 3-0 up on the Osaka serve at 3-3, and to break point. Osaka, suddenly, looks a tad panicked and the errors are mounting up. The serve and the double-handed backhand deal her out of trouble, but then comes another error that sees her hit the net cord. Frustration is growing, and the serve is flagging; a double fault to hand over another break point, and then she misses a smash. It’s 4-3 to Brengle and suddenly she has her chance to take this set. Game on. Hubert Hurkacz, the men’s tenth seed, is out, losing to French veteran Adrian Mannarino in three sets. Fourth women’s seed Barbora Krejcikova is meanwhile through into the third round with a 6-2 6-3 win over unseeded Wang Xiyu. Someone famous is watching this one. Brengle really has improved in this set, and it’s soon 2-2, and there’s a wobble on the Osaka serve, only for her power to deal her out of trouble as the match goes to 3-2. Big smiles from Madison Brengle as she wins a game on her serve, there will be no double bagel. That’s the warmest applause of the evening. There’s been a marked improvement in her from the start of this set. On the Osaka serve, she wallops a lovely winner, and then smashes her way to two break points. Well well. Osaka saves the first with an ace, and then the second. “C’mon,” she says. But another break point comes on the Osaka serve, one swatted away with a forehand followup to a powerful serve. Then comes another “c’mon” with a killer forehand and then an ace. Mini crisis averted. Osaka is taken to deuce and then makes a mess of a smash to win, hitting the ball off off the net cord, and there’s smiles, too. She’s enjoying herself. And she serves out from 0-30 down to win. Some Emma Radacanu quotes after her win on Tuesday, with tributes paid to Greatest Living Scotsman Sir Andy Murray. When I was in the third set I actually thought, ‘Andy was up a set then he got pushed to five but he fought back so hard and took the decider’, so, when I went to three, I was also thinking, ‘Actually, I can fight back and win, fight like he did’. I was definitely inspired by him. I’ve watched so many of Andy’s matches, all his finals here in Australia, but his match against Agut was some of the best fighting I’ve ever seen,” she said. “It’s great to have a role model like him leading British tennis. Osaka takes the first set 6-0, and it’s looking rather ominous for Brengle. The defending champion hits 12 winners to get to set point before a smash goes wrong and it goes back to deuce. Brengle gives a glimpse of her ability to make an opponent work but succumbs to a whipped service return and then another error. Job done, and the next set looks like it will be very similar. And with barely a keystroke, it’s 4-0 to Osaka. She’s playing excellent, brutal tennis. Getting to 5-0 takes a little more time but it’s served out with an ace, after just 14 minutes. She’s on course to get this done in 40 minutes. Osaka really is making short work of Brengle, who seems to have few answers and is 3-0 down after eight minutes of the first set. Osaka races to an early break of Brengle, a crashing forehand return taking the game. This could be a short assignment. So then, the defending champion serves first, with some stats courtesy of the BBC. She’s won 23 of her past 24 matches at Australian Open, and lost just once in the Australian Open second round, back in 2017, and has a 56-15 record across all Grand Slams. With all that in mind, it’s little surprise that she wins the first game at a canter. G’day, as Naomi Osaka and Madison Brengle take to the court, let’s run through our stories from today. The sound of the Weeknd is blarng loudly, in front of a limited crowd Local (local as in Australian - he’s not from Melbourne, rather Sydney) talent Aleksandar Vukic, fresh from his opening round win over 30th seed Lloyd Harris, is deep in the second set in his match against Radu Albot. Vukic is looking to hit back after losing the opening set 6-4, and has just gone 6-5 ahead in the second. And with that it’s time to hand you over to John Brewin, who will guide you through the start of the evening session. Cheerio. A big result over on Kia Arena as Belinda Bencic, the Swiss 22nd seed, is bounced out of the Open by American Amanda Anisimova 6-2, 7-5. Anisimova is in great form, but will face a huge test in a couple of days when she meets the winner of the upcoming clash between Naomi Osaka and Madison Brengle. That match is coming right up, about 20 minutes away from starting as the first match of the night session on Rod Laver Arena. Miomir Kecmanović, the man who was meant to play Djokovic at the top of the men’s draw before his fellow Serb was deported, is making hay in his countryman’s absence. Kecmanović advanced to the third round earlier, with a straight-set win over Tommy Paul, and will play 25th seeded Lorenzo Sonego next. In reaching the third round, Kecmanović has ensured he will get a bumper pay day of at least $221,000. For the record, reaching the main draw gets a $103,000 reward, the second round $154,000. Progress to the fourth round nets a player $328,000, the quarters $538,500 and semis $895,000. After that it gets wild with the runner up receiving $1.575m and the winner a staggering $2.875m. Sebastian Korda and Corentin Moutet have just brought an end to an absolute humdinger over on Court 8, four hours and 47 minutes after they started earlier today. Korda of the US, son of Czech former player Petr, emerges triumphant after five sets, 3-6, 6-4, 6-7(2), 7-5, 7-6 (10-6). Next up for him is 19th seed Pablo Carreno Busta. Some food for thought here from Victoria Azarenka following her earlier win over Jil Teichmann. The former world No 1 and twice Australian Open champion is also now a WTA Tour players’ council member and was asked about the fallout from the saga of he whose name we must not mention. She said there would be legal issues around any proposal for vaccine mandates to be imposed on players for them to compete on the professional women’s circuit. “I believe in science. I believe in getting vaccinated. That’s what I did for myself,” Azarenka said. “As an entity, as an association of WTA, that is travelling globally, we still have to respect countries, different countries, different mandates, different legalities of the country. Some countries will not allow mandates. I think to impose something legally on the WTA Tour can be a challenge. I think that’s something that we are facing.” Azarenka said the Novak Djokovic saga could have been prevented with much clearer rules in place. “I don’t believe there was anybody who looked good in any case. That became a bit of a circus,” she said. “I think there should be a really hard look on this situation moving forward. I think as soon as there is a grey area in the rules, that gives a bit too much questions, and situations like this happen. On certain things I think a black-and-white approach is necessary.” Another result: seventh seed Matteo Berrettini overcame a second-set wobble to progress with a 6-1, 4-6, 6-4, 6-1 win over American Stefan Kozlov. The Italian will next play exciting youngster Carlos Alcaraz, who comfortably beat Dusan Lajovic 6-2, 6-1, 7-5. In doing so the 18-year-old has become the youngest man to reach the third round at the Australian Open since a certain Bernard Tomic back in 2011. Thursday’s schedule has landed - here’s how the show courts are lining up: Rod Laver Arena Alize Cornet (France) v 3-Garbine Muguruza (Spain) Wang Xinyu (China) v 2-Aryna Sabalenka (Belarus) Not before 2:30pm ADET/3:30am GMT Kamil Majchrzak (Poland) v 32-Alex de Minaur (Australia) Not before 7pm AEDT/8am GMT Nick Kyrgios (Australia) v 2-Daniil Medvedev (Russia) 14-Simona Halep (Romania) v Beatriz Haddad Maia (Brazil) Margaret Court Arena 6-Anett Kontaveit (Estonia) v Clara Tauson (Denmark) Hailey Baptiste (United States) v Maddison Inglis (Australia) Sebastian Baez (Argentina) v 4-Stefanos Tsitsipas (Greece) Not before 7pm AEDT/8am GMT Danka Kovinic (Montenegro) v 17-Emma Raducanu (Britain) Steve Johnson (United States) v 11-Jannik Sinner (Italy) John Cain Arena 7-Iga Swiatek (Poland) v Rebecca Peterson (Sweden) Not before 1pm AEDT/2am GMT Frances Tiafoe (United States) v 20-Taylor Fritz (United States) Zhang Shuai (China) v 12-Elena Rybakina (Kazakhstan) Not before 5:30pm AEDT/6:30am GMT Andy Murray (Britain) v Taro Daniel (Japan) Thanks Emma, hello again. Time for a recap of the biggest stories of the day so far? No worries for world No 1 Ash Barty in clinical sub-one hour win Rafael Nadal takes time but continues unbeaten start In-form Madison Keys staves off a late comeback attempt Victoria Azarenka and Paula Badosa first players into third round I’m now going to hand you back to Mike Hytner, who will be with you until 7pm local, 8am GMT. Adieu. Kokkinakis/Kyrgios have just served their way to first-round victory against Bolt/McCabe, finishing the match 6-4, 6-2 on Court 3. A few siuuus but nothing like at Kyrgios’s singles match last night. This will feel good for Kokkinakis, who suffered a disappointing first-round singles exit to Hanfmann on Monday straight off the back of winning the Adelaide International. On Margaret Court, Shapovalov and Kwon are still slogging it out in what might be called the tie-break tussle – the score is currently 7-6, 6-7, 6-7, 4-3 in favour of Shapovalov. But there’s plenty happening on Court 3, where Kyrgios and Kokkinakis are leading Bolt and McCabe 6-4, 3-2 in front of a keen crowd. That’s it on centre court until the evening session, when Japanese reigning champion Naomi Osaka will do battle with American Madison Brengle before Australian John Millman takes on German world No 3 Alexander Zverev. Jim Courier is tying to suggest something about Nada’s biceps. Specifically, that they are large. “What do you do to keep yourself at this level? What are the secrets to your fitness?” Courier asks. “I play some golf,” Nadal says. Courier presses him further about his injury issues and whether he has needed to spend more time in the gym than on the tennis court of late. “Sometimes, I can do more one thing, sometimes the other,” Nadal says. “Unfortunately, I have been going through a lot of issues in my tennis career, so I need to be very flexible and adapt myself to what’s coming. And sometimes I am able to have some good practices on court, sometimes I am not able to do it that often so I have to work more on the gym ... but always holding the positive spirit.” Nadal has this to say about the qualifier who gave such a good account of himself: “I played against him, if I am not wrong, the first round of Roland Garros a couple of years ago. I know he’s dangerous. The result against Thanasi [Kokkinakis] in the first round here says that he was playing great, and coming from the qualis he was used to the courts. “And he’s a player with big shots, good serve and with very high potential. I think today his level of tennis was much higher than what his ranking says, without a doubt. So I wish him all the very best. He’s a great guy.” It’s 15-15 and another 17 shots will be taken before Nadal takes a 30-15 lead. That was a pleasing rally. The Spaniard bounces the ball at the baseline, readying to serve under the sun. It’s an ace – his first of the match (and likely his last at this point). He has two match points but loses the first after catching the ball late on his frame. Hanfmann plays the second as if it’s his last, throwing the kitchen sink at his opponent and using his feet to get back into position time and again, until he catches his opponent out. Deuce. Nadal forces the error. Match point. He does it this time, and it’s all over red rover. Well, magenta in Nadal’s case. Third set: Nadal* 6-2, 6-3, 5-4 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) The nerves must be peaking because Hanfmann is making needless errors. Can he come back from 0-30? He answers this question with an ace. He can’t repeat it though and Nadal has two match points to play with. A clever serve-volley rally gets rid of the first, and another very similar point brings him level at deuce. Another ace brings up the advantage and then he forces Nadal to return into the net. Hanfmann lives to fight another day. My remark about needless errors has aged well. Third set: Nadal 6-2, 6-3, 5-3 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) What a belter of a shot by Hanfmann! Nadal thinks he’s skewered him with a crosscourt forehand but the German takes that acute angle, matches it and then raises him one with a stretching backhand to kill. Nadal follows it with an unforced error and all of a sudden it’s 0-30. Could Hanfmann secure his first break? Apparently not. Nadal is soon back level at 30-30, and follows a powerful service point with another to bring him to 40-30. A baseline winner rounds out the game and his fourth consecutive point, which means Hanfmann is now serving to stay in this tournament. Third set: Nadal* 6-2, 6-3, 4-3 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) Obviously, though, keeping his body right will be the top priority given the major disruptions to his playing and training with that foot injury and a bout of Covid-19. Hanfmann holds to love. Third set: Nadal 6-2, 6-3, 4-2 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Nadal, if and when he wraps this up, will no doubt want to review this match before the third round on Friday. There have been moments of brilliance, but this also has not been a complete performance First Third set: Nadal* 6-2, 6-3, 3-2 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) No sooner have I written that and Hanfmann has raced to 40-0. Minor glitch in his unanswered run when Nadal returns a winner down the line, then normal practice resumes with a Hanfmann ace for a comfortable hold. Third set: Nadal 6-2, 6-3, 3-1 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Hanfmann is hanging in there. He’s won 13 points this set to Nadal’s 16. But the latter is utilising that ferocious backhand and he now has a comfortable cushion to close this out. Third set: Nadal* 6-2, 6-3, 2-1 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) An early break! This could be the determinate factor in whether this is the deciding set. Hanfmann fights back from 0-40 but is struck down at 30-40. He slices forehand, slices backhand, keeps Rafa running. But Nadal is doing the same. They made 22 shots, and it ends with a low, hard, well-placed backhand and a return shot that lands out. Third set: Nadal 6-2, 6-3, 1-1 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Nadal holds with more effort than he would have liked. Third set: Nadal* 6-2, 6-3, 0-1 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) Nadal is back on the court, in a fresh kit, which is identical to the white-shorts-and-magenta-shirt combo he started in. He almost immediately racks up two break points before losing his ground to a deuce-and-advantage stoush. Eventually Hanfmann rips a crosscourt backhand that gives him an advantage he does not waste. As Nadal is off changing his outfit Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis are readying for an all-Australian doubles opener against James McCabe and Alex Bolt. They’ll be on Court 3, where Latvian Jelena Ostapenko is trying to close out the third set against American Alison Riske. Kyrgios won’t be feeling too tired after last night’s singles opener, which he breezed through in straight sets against British qualifier Liam Broady. Second set: Nadal 6-2, 6-3 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Not many first serves are going in but second serves to out to be enough. A meek Hanfmann return gives Nadal three set points. He overcooks the first past the baseline, then loses the next to a superb Hanfmann inside-out backhand. 40-30. A longer rally ensues and Nadal catches the far line with a drop shot that Hanfmann scoops up and out. Set. Second set: Nadal 6-2, 5-3 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Hanfmann doesn’t really need Nadal to put him under pressure. He is managing that all by himself. He’s resumed his centre-of-the-baseline service position now and throws away the first point. But he recovers with an aesthetically pleasing backhand winner and then an ace. 30-15. Another unforced error. 30-30. He sends down another of those aggressive top-spin shots but leaves himself open down his right. Surprise surprise, that’s where Nadal deposits his down-the-line forehand winner. Another of those and Nadal has broken. The first of this set, and at a convenient time too because now he is serving for the set. Second set: Nadal 6-2, 4-3 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Nadal puts the pressure straight back on his opponent with another quickfire hold, losing only one point through a double-fault. Second set: Nadal* 6-2, 3-3 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) In second-round matches at the Australian Open – and there have been 16 of them – Nadal has never dropped a set. This does not bode well for Hanfmann, who is serving with the wind behind his back now. He’s serving way out wide. Is he playing doubles? A few errors are creeping into his game now and he’ll have to watch that, but he does hold here. Nadal has had break point in every one of Hanfmann’s services games this set but not managed to convert one yet. He fails again here in a game that twice goes to deuce. Second set: Nadal 6-2, 3-2 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) This game is far more routine for the world No 5, who hits cleanly and brutally and needs very few shots over three points to hold serve. Get it done, move on. Second set: Nadal* 6-2, 2-2 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) Hanfmann has the wind against him and one can only imagine how that must feel, having to put extra muscle into every shot delivered back to him with interest. Still he is serving well and, down the advantage, pounces on Nadal’s return. Runs right around it to take it on his forehand and gives the Spaniard no chance. The advantage is soon his after a quite spectacular winner down the line. Rafa was clearly not thinking he would land that. He holds. Second set: Nadal 6-2, 2-1 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Nadal holds. Not without a deuce-flavoured bump along the way, but his leg-generated power is something to behold. This is a match of groundstrokes and tactics, not a big-serving encounter. Only one ace thus far (Hanfmann). Nadal has the upper hand but they are not as unevenly matched as the German qualifier’s resume might suggest. Second set: Nadal* 6-2, 1-1 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) Back on centre court, Hanfmann is down a break point and the pair are trading baseline blows in what is turning into an extraordinarily long rally. Hanfmann finally makes his move and Nadal thinks this lob is going out. He must do because he’s not chasing it and he probably could. It sails over his head in practically slow motion before landing in. Danger averted. He takes the advantage, in this time he approaches the net, all six foot four of him, volleys back at Rafa and then ensures the next one is out of reach. Over on Margaret Court Arena, Denis Shapovalov is leading Kwon Soon-woo 7-6(8-6), 3-2 and at John Cain Arena Matteo ‘The Hammer’ Berrettini is warming up against Stefan Kozlov. First set: Nadal 6-2 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Hanfmann, serving to stay in the set, has his head just about above water but is sinking. Nadal has him at 30-40, then deuce, and then another break and set point. At which point Rafa sends down one of those discombobulating backhands that closes out the set. First set: Nadal 5-2 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Nadal is not setting the world alight in his own service game though, struggling to get a handle on rallies and finds himself down a break point at 30-40. Hanfmann is helped by the net on one shot but that same net becomes his undoing on the next, as he mismanages Nadal’s slice. Another unforced error later and Nadal is sending down a winner to hold serve. Here’s a wee Barty recap: First set: Nadal* 4-2 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) Nadal has a habit of breaking serve when he wins the opening point of his opponent’s service game. Tends to turn the screw a little more. It comes to pass. A crosscourt backhand draws Hanfmann to his right and forward. As he bands and stretches he can’t quite get enough purchase on his shot and it plays right into the hands of Nadal, who deposits a backhand down Hanfmann’s left-hand line to make it 15-40. Another forehand winner later and he wins the game. First set: Nadal 3-2 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Bravo! What a rally. What a shot. The pair trade blows before Nadal gets under the ball and whips a precise forehand so low it almost kisses the net and drops into the far service square out of reach. This might have set the tone for the game but Hanfmann clearly has a game plan, and is sticking to it, using his backhand to set up his points, running the Spaniard around the baseline, forcing him to pop up a sitter and coming forward for to put it away. He has the advantage and break point now, too, though it’s short-lived as Nadal saves his own skin and then, himself on the advantage, dispatches an ungettable pile-driver into the back corner. First set: Nadal* 2-2 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) Hello! Well Hanfmann is speeding out to 4o-0 but he can’t quite finish the job because Rafa has other ideas. The German, now at 40-30, is forced to get on the defence and force his opponent into an error. Which he does. First set: Nadal 2-1 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Nadal is pushed here, he’s 15-30 down when Hanfmann passes up a golden chance to force break point, hitting the net with an open court to aim at on the volley. The German is made to rue that miss, and Nadal doesn’t err again. The Spanish sixth seed holds, and we’re still on serve. And with that I’ll hand over to Emma Kemp, who is at Melbourne Park, to take you through the next while. First set: *Nadal 1-1 Hanfmann (*denotes next server) So, what has Hanfmann, a big server, got with the ball in hand? Nice work on the opening point, as he gets Nadal running around the baseline before wrongfooting him. We then see an example of the damage his serve can do, a booming unreturnable effort, but he allows Nadal back into the game at deuce. Hanfmann is able to hold though, with Nadal’s attempted drop shot on game point for the German coming up just short. One apiece. First set: Nadal 1-0 Hanfmann* (*denotes next server) Nadal, in his startling purple shirt with white trim, has few issues in the opener. He reaches at the net to play a hyper-extended volley mid-way through this game, eliciting applause from the stands, and otherwise looks comfortable as he opens up a one-game lead. Nadal and Hanfmann are ready to get going. Nadal is bouncing around the baseline, as is his way, before he settles into his service stance. The Spaniard will serve first. Rafael Nadal is next up on Rod Laver Arena, against the German qualifier Yannick Hanfmann. Don’t go anywhere. Earlier, 15th seed Elina Svitolina advanced after Harmony Tan had to leave the court in a wheelchair due to a knee injury sustained when trailing 6-3, 5-7, 5-1. Another Italian, Camila Giorgi, lies in wait for Barty after the 30th seed’s earlier straight win over Tereza Martincova. “She’s an incredible ballstriker one of the most athletic girls out here. Not afraid to stand on the baseline and put you under time pressure from the first strike. I will have to are have my running shoes on get the backhand slice out and bring in variation and see how it goes.” And with that, the world No 1 departs. Of course it’s the Australian Open’s inaugural First Nations Day today, and Barty is asked about her connection to Indigenous tennis icon Evonne Goolagong Cawley. “She’s an incredible human being. I’m extremely lucky to call her a friend and know she’s only a phonecall away. The universe is not far away. We have special anniversaries. We’re connected through our heritage. She’s an incredible woman and paved a path and been able to guide so many of the Indigenous youth coming up in the last however many years throughout her work off the court. I love her to death.” Here’s the royal “we”, so often used by Barty in acknowledgement and appreciation of her team. “We are exactly where we are. I felt like we had a good preparation in Adelaide. We played well, played throughout tough matches. Craig Tyzzer is the master. He’s good in the business and spoilt to have him in my team. Grateful he has the tactical knowledge communication and the way we talk to each other is incredible. He’s going to love he’s on the big screen. I feel like our whole team works extremely well together. We’re enjoying our tennis and being able to produce some pretty good stuff.” Casey Delacqua is speaking on court with Barty. She’s asked about the crowd first up. “Yeah, it was absolutely incredible. She said to me at the net it was a lot of fun out here and enjoyed the experience. You guys have got so much to do with that. Thank you from both of us and genuinely we loved it out here.” Barty’s forehand is in full effect to draw level at 15-15, and then again to bring up two match points soon after. She completes victory in 52 minutes - that’s just 106 minutes she has spent on court in total across her opening two matches! Second set: Barty 6-1, 5-1 Bronzetti* (*denotes next server) Barty throws down a couple of aces but slips up on game point with a loose forehand that lands out. A third ace - her eighth of the day - helps get her back on track, and she’s now just a game away from a place in the third round. Second set: *Barty 6-1, 4-1 Bronzetti (*denotes next server) Bronzetti can count herself unlucky with a net cord that doesn’t help her midway through her service game, and Barty is so ruthless, she takes full advantage. Another break, another game for Barty, and another step closer to victory. They’ve been playing for just 45 minutes. Second set: Barty 6-1, 3-1 Bronzetti* (*denotes next server) A place in the third round mustn’t be too far away for Barty. Another comfortable service game for the Queenslander, who is in complete control here. Second set: *Barty 6-1, 2-1 Bronzetti (*denotes next server) Ah, Bronzetti is broken again, to love, a double fault sealing her fate as the relentless pressure put on her by Barty tells. Unfortunate that the Italian was unable to build on that encouraging opening service game of the second set. Second set: Barty 6-1, 1-1 Bronzetti* (*denotes next server) The TV shows a super slo-mo replay of a Barty overhead and really it’s a thing of beauty. Such poise but also power. Magnificent. The Australian holds again. Second set: *Barty 6-1, 0-1 Bronzetti (*denotes next server) Thanks for that Emma, our woman on the ground at Melbourne Park for the next two weeks or so, of course. Bronzetti shows what she’s capable of again now, forcing Barty back on her heels before finishing off with a powerful forehand winner to open up a 30-0 lead. That’s the pick of the points as the Italian gets on the board at the earliest possible opportunity. It’s all very civilised here at Melbourne Park, certainly in comparison to yesterday, when the boisterous crowds had a field day. Those with ground passes are milling about and watching Barty’s match on the big screen. It is noticeably hotter than the past couple of days, and the wind has picked up a bit. Both of these elements must be being felt on centre court, though Barty of course appears far less troubled than her opponent. First set: Barty 6-1 Bronzetti* (*denotes next server) Barty makes a move towards the net to finish off a with a forehand volley to get up and running as she serves for the set. She follows that up with a delightful drop shot that Bronzetti can only return into the net before bringing up three set points. A double fault blots her copybook slightly but that only delays the inevitable by a moment. Barty races to the opening set in just 26 minutes. First set: *Barty 5-1 Bronzetti (*denotes next server) Again, Bronzetti doesn’t reach a Barty forehand, but she displays a marked improvement from thereon in, playing a couple of nicely constructed points before getting on board with an ace! First set: Barty 5-0 Bronzetti* (*denotes next server) Barty sends down another ace on her way to a five-game lead, sealing the game with a whipped forehand winner that Bronzetti has absolutely no answer to. Pretty one-side stuff out there at the moment. First set: *Barty 4-0 Bronzetti (*denotes next server) Barty’s looking unassailable - she moves to 40-0 baring breaking sweat as Bronzetti struggles to keep pace. The Italian is broken again, and this first set is now appearing to be a formality. First set: Barty 3-0 Bronzetti* (*denotes next server) Barty consolidates that break, but again she’s taken to deuce. And she very nearly faces a break point as Bronzetti does extremely well during a 19-shot rally, before she eventually succumbs, unable to keep a deep return from Barty in. The crowd is sparse in the Rod Laver Arena stands, and noise from them has been limited so far. All very genteel. We’re yet to hear any incidences of the latest fad spreading across Melbourne Park, the only benefit of which may be that it silences the tedious “Aussie, oi” shout. First set: *Barty 2-0 Bronzetti (*denotes next server) Very comfortable for Barty so far, as the world’s top-ranked player opens up her forehand to take a 30-0 lead before going on to break following a Bronzetti double fault. First set: Barty 1-0 Bronzetti* (*denotes next server) Barty is coming off the back of an entirely comfortable 6-0, 6-1 win over Lesia Tsurenko in the opening round but she doesn’t have it all her own way in the opening game here as the pair acquaint themselves. Bronzetti forces a deuce, but Barty emerges unscathed and seals her first service game with the first ace of the day. Barty will serve first. Here we go. Play. Here comes Barty, out into the sunshine bathing Rod Laver Arena. We’ll be under way in her second round match against the qualifier Lucia Bronzetti, currently ranked exactly 142 places behind the world No 1. Bronzetti finds herself in the second round of the Australian Open after a three-set victory of Russia’s Varvara Gracheva in the opening round on Monday. The 23-year-old from Rimini, who is yet to win a title on the WTA Tour, clearly faces a huge test today. Weather update: because who doesn’t enjoy at weather updates, especially when it’s as lovely as it is in Melbourne today? It’s a warm day with the mercury expected to a top of 28C. Play started about an hour and half ago, with two singles matches are already done and dusted - Vika Azarenka has advanced with a straight forward 6-1, 6-2 win over Jil Teichmann, while no 8 seed Paula Badosa was equally efficient in her 6-0, 6-3 victory over Martina Trevisan on Rod Laver Arena, to reach the Australian Open third round for the first time. Welcome all and sundry to day three of grand slam tennis action at Melbourne Park. Another busy day ahead as the second round gets under way, with plenty to look forward to. We’ll get further looks at the women’s No 1 Ash Barty and grand slam record-chaser Rafa Nadal, with the former up next on Rod Laver Arena and the latter immediately afterwards. The evening session is highlighted by Naomi Osaka, who appears to have rediscovered her love of the game, before a potential ripsnorter between men’s No 3 Alex Zverev and Australian John Millman. In amongst all that, the likes of big names Denis Shapovalov, Barbora Krejcikova, Maria Sakkari and Matteo Berrettini are also all on court throughout the day. Feel free to get in touch with an email or tweet @mike_hytner. Otherwise, let’s get stuck straight in.From state surveillance of communists, to all women finally winning the vote, and a peek inside the No 43 Soho nightclub, a new exhibition on the roaring 20s aims to highlight a decade not just of postwar decadence but of huge discontent and social upheaval. Anchored on the recent release of the 1921 census, the free exhibition The 1920s: Beyond the Roar, which opens at the National Archives in Kew this week, covers international peace treaties, textile samples and lonely hearts adverts, alongside a reconstruction of the No 43, run by the “Nightclub Queen”, Kate Meyrick. Visitors are led through a series of encounters, past a newsstand, a polling station, into a 1920s living room and finally to the No 43, with the story of the decade told through documents, posters, film footage, and audio of Meyrick, who was five times imprisoned for breaking strict licensing laws. Among highlights is an MI5 blacklist entry on Shapurji Saklatvala, one of the first MPs of Indian heritage and one of the first communists to enter the House of Commons. “He is a really interesting character because he is very vocal during his time as an MP. He made a speech during the General Strike, and got arrested for the speech he made,” said the exhibition’s co-curator Katie Fox. “He was interested in Irish independence, in decolonisation, and lots of the issues that are really prominent within the decade. He was a communist, and like a lot of communists at the time he was watched very carefully by the state, and the file we have on display is a security service file on him.” The 1920s saw huge political change, with four general elections held. “Whilst we think of the decade as the roaring 20s, actually it was a decade of discontent, high unemployment and protest. There were lots of people agitating for change,” said Fox. Posters, placards and film footage tell the story of strikes and protests. All women finally got the vote on the same terms as men. The polling station exhibit displays a copy of the 1928 act, next to an elector registration form for the so-called “flapper elections” of 1929. A copy of the postwar 1925 Locarno Pact is displayed next to a lonely hearts publication, where men and women had to describe themselves and who they were looking for in 75 words. It was also a decade where the authorities tried to impose strict morality. A poster for the 1923 film Maisie’s Marriage tells the story of how censors forced producers to rename it because they feared the original title, Married Love, based on the book by Dr Marie Stopes, was propaganda for birth control. “The book came out in 1918, and it was very popular and discussed birth control openly, which was a taboo subject at the time. It also touched on female pleasure,” said the co-curator Dr Laura Robson-Mainwaring. Capturing the style and atmosphere of the No 43 nightclub, which was based in Soho, is another highlight. Nightclubs were a new social spaces where men and women could mix. There was new music and new fashions. “The reason we are able to explore this at the National Archives is because within the collection we have police raid records, particularly relating to a number of clubs owned by Kate Meyrick, the ‘Nightclub Queen’ at the time,” said Hannah Fleming, an interpretation manager. “Kate was sentenced to five terms of imprisonment for breaking licensing laws. And we have pages and pages and pages of police records including the very first raid.” During that raid, police questioned Meyrick, asking: “Do you have a licence for selling intoxicating liquor.” “She smiled and said: ‘I’m not selling, I’m giving it away’. But that didn’t wash and she was repeatedly raided,” said Fleming. The 1920s: Beyond the Roar runs from 21 January 2022 to 11 June 2022 at the National Archives, Kew, Richmond, London. Full details of the free exhibition and associated events can be found at www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20speopleMary can no longer see: her eyes are covered by a blindfold, blood is dripping from her sockets on to her cheeks. With this chilling image the movie begins; but only at the end do we learn how Mary has been blinded – and what she saw. Though by this point, there are cracks in the icy mood of this austere, slow-paced horror. It is set in 1840s rural New York where the story unfolds in flashback, claustrophobically confined to a single house. Young Mary (Stefanie Scott) has been caught in flagrante with the family’s maid Eleanor (Isabelle Fuhrman) and her God-fearing parents inflict “correctional” punishment on the girls: forcing them to kneel painfully on rice for hours. This all feels a bit familiar: fire-and-brimstone preaching; evil done in the name of our Lord; puritanical starched collars and severe hair partings. But first-time director Edoardo Vitaletti really stokes up the menace. Cinematographer David Kruta lights faces by candle; there are images here with the richness of portraits, characters’ eyes glistening with malignant fervour. The family plan is to separate Mary and Eleanor, sending the maid away. But the girls are defiant. Mary plots revenge, lips twisted into a malicious smile. But this relationship at the heart of the movie fails to convince. These two girls are supposed to be fired up on me-and-you-against-the-world teenage love, but the chemistry is a bit underwhelming. And I must say, my tolerance for seeing women and girls abused on screen is at an all-time low. Stealing the film is Judith Roberts as Mary’s grandmother, named in the credits as the Matriarch, and possibly the source of actual ungodly acts. A terrific horror-movie villain, she is an evil Miss Havisham, with a coquettish smile and beady evil eyes. The trouble with the film is that beneath the surface lurks … well, perhaps not quite enough to keep the momentum going. • The Last Thing Mary Saw is available on 20 January on Shudder.Omar* worked for a UK-funded cultural programme, working on human rights and cultural projects. He lost his work when the Taliban arrived, and has applied to move to Britain. He has five daughters and is particularly concerned about their welfare. After the capture of Kabul by the Taliban, our lives changed completely because of my work for a British organisation. Although the Taliban said in a statement that they had declared an amnesty for government workers, they have not kept that promise. They are seeking revenge against those who worked with foreign institutions. I’ve heard reports of people being arrested at night and taken to unknown places. Two months ago, I heard that the Taliban were looking for me and they came asking for me at my previous house. After that, l hid. Whenever I feel [there is] a new threat, if I get an unexplained phone call, or a warning, we’re forced to move from one place to another. Sometimes we rent somewhere new, sometimes I move to the house of close relatives. In the past three months we’ve moved many times. My main concern is for my family and my daughters. We live like prisoners. My daughters need fresh air and sunshine, especially my youngest daughter, who’s eight; she cries a lot and wants to go out. She has bad nightmares and no longer sleeps properly. During the day, she is asking me and her mother the same questions over and again: “Why can’t we go out? Why do we have to keep moving?” It is very difficult to answer these questions. Women’s rights have been completely violated. My eldest daughter was studying to become a dentist, but she is no longer going to university and is stuck at home. She’s very depressed, feeling hopeless about her future. She says the Taliban have killed all her dreams. Two years ago, a member of the Taliban proposed to her, but she refused. I’m worried that refusal will have repercussions for her now; I fear they want to force her to get married. All my daughters are trying to keep up their studies at home, trying to learn English better through online programmes, but everyone feels depressed and tired of life. When you go out in Kabul you can see how our ordinary way of life has completely changed. A few moments ago, I went out to get bread and met people who were telling each other that today a young girl was beaten in the market for revealing her legs. People’s economic situation has completely disintegrated. People are out on the street selling their property and household items to make money to buy food. You see fear in the people’s eyes. We are managing with food because the UK-funded project I was working with sent money to cover our salary for six months. We’re still using the small amount of money left over for daily necessities, but other families are worried about their children suffering from malnutrition. Even though I think my life is in danger, I don’t worry so much about myself. For better or worse, I’ve lived a good part of my life. But as a father, I think more about the future of my family. It is very painful for me that my daughters are still very young and having to go through this. I can’t imagine what else they will have to endure. Even talking about it makes my voice catch in my throat. We are alive and yet we do not really live. *The name has been changed for this article.Over the last decade the way in which children are taught to read in primary schools in England has fundamentally changed. The teaching of reading is now dominated by phonics, or more accurately “synthetic phonics”, where the focus is on teaching children the connection between phonemes (sounds) and letters. This teaching of the alphabetic code has always been part of learning to read, but our new research suggests it now dominates, to the exclusion of a more balanced approach involving reading whole texts and understanding the meaning of words. For example, children are given a statutory test when they are five or six called the “phonics screening check”, where they are given pseudo-words, or nonsense words, like “sut”, “blem” and “meck” to read. They do not need to know what these mean, but are judged to have “read” them correctly if they say the appropriate sounds. Yet this is decoding, not reading for understanding. Moreover, the inconsistencies in English spelling mean that children cannot only rely on phonics to read: common words like “the” and “she” have to be taught as exceptions. Our new research (written with Prof Dominic Wyse) found that the majority of teachers of children aged three to six were using a “phonics first and foremost” approach. In our survey of more than 2,000 teachers, teachers said that English as a lesson had been replaced by phonics, and that they were under pressure to “live and breathe phonics” to make sure their students did well in the phonics test. The problem is that the evidence does not back up this push towards phonics. Our review of systematic reviews (that combine evidence from multiple studies) and of robust longitudinal experimental trials, published in 55 research papers, concluded that contextualised teaching of reading is the most effective way for children to learn. This involves combining phonics with reading whole texts, and focusing on understanding words and sentences. There is no substantial research base that supports the dominance of synthetic phonics. Internationally, England is an outlier in using this policy approach to teaching reading, and data from international assessment tests suggest that teaching reading in England may have been less successful since the adoption of the synthetic phonics approach. So how did we get to a point where thousands of children are being taught to read in a way which has no basis in proper evidence? The “reading wars” have a long history, but the shifts in England’s policy in the 2010s marked a new era of phonics dominance in England. This grew out of the recommendation in 2006 by Jim Rose that phonics be taught “discretely” as a separate skill, and the inclusion of phonics within the primary national strategy. However, a huge boost was given to phonics by the introduction of the phonics screening check in 2012, as it brought the particular skill of decoding into the system of judging and comparing schools. Dedicated phonics lessons and a focus on nonsense words have been found in classrooms ever since. The government has recently ratcheted this up further by asking inspectors to check that teachers in reception classes “teach children to read systematically by using synthetic phonics and books that match the children’s phonic knowledge”. The Department for Education has revised the list of “approved” phonics schemes, so schools have had to buy new schemes and sets of “decodable” books. The debate about the teaching of reading relates to a wider problem of education policy that proclaims to be evidence-based but instead relies on limited evidence selected on the whims of ministers. In an open letter with over 250 signatories, we are calling on the government to act on the evidence, and take on a more balanced approach. Teaching phonics has a place – because who would disagree that children need to learn about letters and sounds – – but by focusing on it to the exclusion of other skills, we are failing our children. Alice Bradbury is a professor of sociology of education, University College LondonPeter Robinson, the former Liverpool club secretary who played an instrumental role in the club’s rise under Bill Shankly and beyond, has died aged 86. “PBR”, as he was affectionately known at Anfield, was regarded as one of the finest administrators in the game over a 35-year career at Liverpool. His decision-making, innovations, transfer dealings and relationships with several managers helped transform the club into a dominant force in England and Europe. Robinson joined Liverpool in 1965 after jobs at Stockport County, Crewe, Brighton and Scunthorpe. By the time he retired in 2000, having taken on the chief executive role in 1992, the club had amassed 29 major trophies on his watch, including four European Cups and 12 league championships. Alongside the chairman John Smith, Robinson modernised Liverpool internally and oversaw the redevelopment of Anfield and the construction of a new academy at Kirkby, which has since extended to become the first team’s training ground. More importantly, his highly successful working relationship with Shankly helped elevate Liverpool to a glittering era sustained under Bob Paisley, Joe Fagan and Kenny Dalglish. Robinson was involved in all of their appointments and behind many of the most important transfers in Liverpool’s history, and his tenure also covered the managerial careers of Graeme Souness, Roy Evans and Gérard Houllier. Houllier was considering offers from Celtic and Sheffield Wednesday when Robinson called on the pretext of congratulating him on the new role, and invited him to Liverpool instead. Several former Liverpool players paid tribute to Robinson on Wednesday. Jamie Carragher tweeted: “One of the most important figures in LFC success over many years. RIP PBR.” Dietmar Hamann, who played for the club from 1999-2006, tweeted: “Sad news indeed, a special man left us. LFC wouldn’t be where they are now if it wasn’t for him. He’ll be badly missed.” Jan Molby wrote: “LFC won 29 major trophies whilst Peter was pulling the strings upstairs. RIP Peter Robinson YNWA.” Liverpool said in a statement: “We are deeply saddened by the passing of former club secretary and chief executive Peter Robinson. The thoughts of everyone at Liverpool FC are with his family and friends at this difficult time.”Name: Bono. Age: 61. Appearance: Contrite. Bono’s contrite? What for? That time he got caught up in the Paradise Papers tax-avoidance leaks? No, not that. For fostering the impression that Africa would wither and die without help from rich white celebrities? No, not that. For that time a U2 album was downloaded on to everyone’s phones without them asking for it. No, not that, either. Then what? Bono is sorry about U2. What, in general? Pretty much. In a recent podcast interview, Bono stated that he hated the band’s name, and most of their songs, and also the way his voice sounds. Well, that all seems fairly comprehensive. It does, doesn’t it? On the podcast, he even repeated something that Robert Palmer told his bandmate Adam Clayton in the 1980s: “God, would you ever tell your singer to just take down the keys a little bit? He’d do himself a favour and he’d do us all a favour who have to listen to him.” What has brought this apparent self-hatred on? I’m glad you asked. I have two working theories. The first is that this is part of a deliberate tonal about-face, similar to the one he performed when he introduced irony into U2’s vocabulary with Achtung Baby, as a way to distance himself from the ultra-earnest mindset of their earlier work. So, self-deprecation is part of his new image. Maybe. You could suggest that, now U2 are less relevant than in previous years, he is adopting a James Blunt-style self-awareness to remain in the public eye. Interesting. What’s your second theory? That he’s finally listened to a U2 album. That’s not very nice. Perhaps there’s a third reason, actually. What’s that? Well, on the podcast Bono suggested that embarrassment isn’t always a bad thing. He said: “I do think U2 pushes out the boat on embarrassment quite a lot and maybe that’s the place to be, as an artist – you know, right at the edge of your level of embarrassment.” Interesting. Isn’t it? He seems to be suggesting that part of the artistic mindset involves making yourself totally vulnerable to criticism by taking giant leaps of faith wherever possible. So, U2 wouldn’t be U2 if Bono didn’t push himself further than he was comfortable with? That’s right. If U2 had played it safe all these years, hedging their bets against the court of popular opinion, they almost certainly wouldn’t have become one of the biggest bands in history. And they’d never have put their albums on everyone’s phone without asking. Right. I sort of wish they’d played it safe now. Yeah, me too. Do say: “With Or Without You.” Don’t say: “Without you, please.”In 2014, Microsoft bought Minecraft’s developer Mojang for what seemed, at the time, an eye-popping figure: $2.5bn (£1.8bn). It was the first in a series of bullish video-game studio acquisitions by the tech giant, whose games division has been led by executive Phil Spencer, a long-time advocate for video games within Microsoft and the wider business world, for the past eight years. More studios followed, for undisclosed amounts: beloved Californian comedy-game artists Double Fine, UK studio Ninja Theory, RPG specialists Obsidian Entertainment. It seemed that under Spencer’s leadership, Microsoft was cementing its commitment to the Xbox console and the video-games business by investing in what makes games great: the people who make them. Then came 2020’s deal to acquire Zenimax (and with it Bethesda), for a properly astonishing $7.5bn. This was different. This wasn’t the Xbox division acquiring studios to make games for its consoles. This was an entire publisher, with several different studios and a whole portfolio of popular game series. At this point Microsoft’s spending started to look like a monopoly move – a bid to sew up the market by closing off hugely popular games behind Microsoft’s own consoles and services. When it was confirmed that Bethesda’s forthcoming games, including this year’s space role-playing epic Starfield and the next fantasy Elder Scrolls game, would be exclusive to Xbox and Microsoft Game Pass, I started to wonder whether Microsoft’s stated aim to make video games more widely available to everyone was lining up with its actions in the market. But Zenimax is nothing compared with this week’s news that Microsoft is buying Activision Blizzard, for nearly $70bn. This latest acquisition – the biggest in video-game history by some margin, more than 17 times what Disney paid for Marvel – shows beyond doubt that Microsoft is extremely committed to dominating the video-game market, now and in the future. Its main competitor Sony has an exceptional stable of talented developers making games for its PlayStation 5 console – the latest of which, Insomniac Games, was bought in 2019 for “just” $299m. Though Microsoft hasn’t released exact sales numbers for its more recent Xbox consoles, it is widely thought that the PlayStation has outsold them by a significant margin. But without Call of Duty, just one of many giant games properties that Microsoft now owns, PlayStation is left even more reliant on its own studios to create games that people want to play. If all of Activision Blizzard’s games soon become Xbox and PC exclusive, as Bethesda’s now are, it will transform the console market, creating even more of a monopolistic environment. Right now, with Nintendo, there are only three big players in games consoles. Do we really want that to become two, or one? What would that mean for games, and the people who make and play them? It’s possible that studios will be largely left alone to create what they want, and that the creative diversity of games won’t be affected too badly. But one company then creams off a large percentage of all the profits. This is enough by itself to cause a huge stir in gaming, but it’s also only a narrow slice of what this deal means. When it goes through, Microsoft will also own King, creators of Candy Crush and several more of the most popular mobile games in the world. It will own World of Warcraft, one of the oldest and most beloved virtual worlds. It puts one company in charge of an enormous slice of people’s leisure time and money, the world over. Going by Phil Spencer’s past comments, Sony and PlayStation aren’t the only competition Microsoft is thinking about – it’s all games, all the virtual places where people spend their time and money, from Fortnite to Roblox. This is why the word “metaverse” is being thrown around by executives. It’s about more than Xbox v PlayStation. What Microsoft wants is to be where everyone goes to play games, of all kinds. Through its Game Pass service it has laid the foundations for it to become the Netflix of gaming, the hub for all content. But where Netflix has moneyed competitors in Disney, Apple and Amazon, no other company in gaming can compete with Microsoft. Even Nintendo, the longest running and best-resourced company in gaming, does not have $70bn to throw around. (Its entire war chest amounts to $9bn.) What’s happening here is akin to what happens when oil billionaires rock up to the Premier League, buy a team, and pack it with the best players. It is not a level playing field. Tech companies have, historically, never been able to buy their way to success in the video-game industry. Amazon has failed. Google has failed. Apple has only ever dipped a pinky into the waters. Microsoft itself has made several huge mistakes on this front in the past, buying up developers such as Lionhead only to shutter them later. The fact is that games are not tech products; they are not phones, which get incrementally better each year, or software, or services. They are entertainment; they are art. Technology is what enables games, what creates them, but it is not what they are. Microsoft sees games as content. It seems not so much interested in creating games – or selling consoles – as owning where and how we play them.Police have published the names and faces of 12 of the most wanted British criminal suspects thought to be hiding in Spain, in an effort to track them down. A joint campaign involving Spanish and UK police forces was launched on Wednesday in Madrid with a picture gallery of men wanted in connection with crimes including murder, drug trafficking and arms smuggling. The list of alleged fugitives thought to be hiding in mainland Spain or the Spanish islands includes two men accused of killing members of rival criminal gangs. According to the National Crime Agency list, Nana Oppong, 41, is wanted by Essex police in connection with the drive-by killing of Robert Powell, 50, who was shot eight times with a pistol in June 2020. Callum Halpin, 27, is wanted by Greater Manchester police over the 2018 killing of Luke Graham, 31, in a gang turf war. The list also includes Jack Mayle, 30, from Croydon, who allegedly sold the class A drug MDMA via a phoneline in south London called the Flavour Quest. When he fled the UK, according to the NCA, his tattoos included a diamond under his left eye and the word Croydon on his left forearm. The National Crime Agency’s director general of operations, Steve Rodhouse, who attended the launch alongside the Spanish security minister, Rafael Pérez Ruiz, insisted that Spain was not a “safe haven” for criminals. He said: “The last thing the fugitives’ associates will want is the combined determination and capabilities of the UK and Spanish law enforcement focusing on them.” Rodhouse said many of the wanted men on the list would have tried to blend in with British communities in Spain. In an appeal to expats for information, he said: “Loyalties change over time and we urge anyone with information about these men to help us find them.” The list also includes two suspected drug dealers from Cardiff who used the secret phone network EncroChat before it was taken down in an international operation. Asim Naveed, 29, described as muscular and 6ft 2in, is accused of being the leader of a drug smuggling gang that brought 46kg of cocaine, worth nearly £8m, into Wales between February and June 2020. His alleged customer Calvin Parris, 32, who has gold upper teeth, is accused of selling cocaine in the Welsh capital. Another suspect is James “Jamie” Stevenson, 56, who is wanted by the National Crime Agency and Police Scotland after the seizure of about 1 tonne of cocaine at the Port of Dover in September 2020, and 28m “street Valium” tablets in a raid on a suspected pill factory in Kent in June that year. Stevenson, who is stocky and described as having a scar on the left side of his face, is also wanted in connection with two suspected arson attacks in Lanarkshire and Forth Valley in May 2020. Pérez Ruiz said: “The campaign allows us to reinforce and strengthen police collaboration between Spain and the United Kingdom with the aim of creating a hostile environment which impedes criminal organisations from setting up in Spain and criminals from settling in our cities.” Anyone with information can call Crimestoppers anonymously in the UK on 0800 555 111 or from Spain on 900 926 111, or online at crimestoppers-uk.org/fugitives.Yiry Ulshin surveyed a scene of ruin. Before him were the remains of what was once a school. Desks were covered in debris. A photo of the class of 2011 lay in the wreckage. There were abandoned crayons and year 3 books in Ukrainian and Russian. Beyond a bullet-scarred wall was a view of pine trees and sea. “My heart is hurting. Why did Russia do this?” Ulshin, a Ukrainian army commander, asked. The abandoned primary school is situated in Shyrokyne, in eastern Ukraine, on the frontline between the Ukrainian army and pro-Russian forces. The village was once a resort. Tourists would stay in its guesthouses, walk along the sandy beach and paddle in the picturesque Sea of Azov. Now it is a ghostly wreck. In 2014 Russia annexed Crimea, down the coast, and kickstarted a violent conflict in the Donbas region. The following year Ukrainian militias clawed back some of the province’s seaside strip including Shyrokyne, 14 miles east of the port city of Mariupol. “My friend was killed in fighting here,” Ulshin said. Today the village’s holiday complex resembles a phantasmagoric film set. An alley of pulverised flats leads on to a glass-strewn summer terrace. There is a rusted child’s bicycle, a washing machine and a savagely twisted bonnet from a GAZ-53 truck. The ground is pitted with shell holes. Swimming is not advised: the beach is mined. A seagull floated above it. The separatists did not retreat far, ensconcing themselves just beyond the hillside village of Vodyane, a mile away and visible from the net-covered former sanatorium that serves as the soldiers’ frontline base. Washing was hanging on a line; logs were piled up for fuel. “Two days ago they fired a rocket at one of our cars, out on patrol,” Ulshin said. “It missed.” Was anywhere in the village safe? “No,” Ulshin said. “Death happens when you don’t expect it. The Russians [separatists] work very professionally. A sniper shot me in 2018. I lost so much blood, people thought I wasn’t going to make it. But here I am. Ten of my men have been wounded.” Since autumn, Russia has assembled a potential invasion force of 100,000 soldiers on Ukraine’s borders. The latest signals are ominous. The Kremlin says military exercises will take place next month in Belarus, 90 miles north of the capital, Kyiv. According to the Ukrainian government, Russian forces are covertly stationed in rebel mini-fiefdoms in the cities of Donetsk – adjacent to Mariupol – and Luhansk. So far, Putin has kept the world guessing as to what he plans to do. The EU and US have condemned Russian aggression and threatened sanctions. This week the UK flew defensive anti-tank weapons to Kyiv. The Biden administration is reportedly considering military help. On Wednesday the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, visited Kyiv. None of this is likely to stop a Russian incursion should Putin order one. “Look at history. All conflicts have an active phase and a less active one,” Ulshin said. The Kremlin would not seize the whole of Ukraine, an enormous and bloody undertaking, he thought; instead it would pursue hybrid war, with the goal of toppling Ukraine’s Nato-aspiring government and replacing it. Ukraine’s soldiers are motivated, professional and ready to defend their homes. But it is obvious they are badly outgunned. Ulshin said he had received some help from Lithuania in the shape of four lightweight bulletproof plates. In the near distance shots rang out, followed by a percussive boom from an auto-grenade launcher. Ukraine lost much of its navy in 2014, when Russian special forces seized Crimea. Moscow eventually returned the Donbas, an ageing Soviet warship that now sits in Mariupol’s port alongside two small armoured artillery boats, the Ludny and Kremenchuk. This meagre collection is no match for Russia’s mighty Black Sea fleet. “It’s old but reliable,” Cptn Oleksandr Hrigorevskiy said, pointing to the Donbas’s bow machine gun. Stamped on the side was a date, 1954. The Russians trashed the ship’s communication system before handing it back, he said, and many of his former officer colleagues defected. The boat subsequently caught fire. It is now used as a command and repair ship. The deck offers a sweeping view of the Azov Sea bathed in a raspberry light. At 9am each day sailors raise and salute the Ukrainian flag. At night the Russian port of Yeysk twinkles in the distance. The Azov and Black seas are a key commercial route for Russia, linked to a network of rivers and canals. According to Hrigorevskiy, the Kremlin has annexed the Azov Sea by stealth. Under a 2003 agreement, Russia and Ukraine are supposed to share access. But Moscow now controls Crimea’s Kerch Strait, the only way in and out. In 2018 it started impounding Ukrainian civilian vessels, dealing a death blow to Mariupol as a cargo port. Of late, Moscow has declared large chunks of the internal sea off limits to Ukrainian boats, citing the need to carry out “naval exercises”. When the Donbas set off towards Kerch in December, sailing in international waters, Putin’s FSB spy agency accused Kyiv of an act of aggression. “We watched a report on Russian TV. They play psychological games,” Hrigorevskiy said. Mariupol stands in the way of any potential Russian advance from the east. In 2014, Kremlin-backed separatists controlled the city for two months. Since then pro-Kyiv volunteers have moved to the area. Anatoliy Lozar helped to liberate Mariupol, and subsequently married a local woman. He said Russian sentiment was still strong, especially among older residents. “Television plays a big role,” he said. “You can get Russian state channels for free. You have to pay for Ukrainian ones.” Lozar said most people in Mariupol vote for the opposition party of Viktor Medvedchuk, a pro-Moscow oligarch accused of treason and now under house arrest. Over at Mariupol’s aerodrome, soldiers acknowledged that Moscow was likely to bomb the runway and other strategic military targets, should it attack. “Yes, we can’t defend physical infrastructure. But we’ve learned to spread our forces out, to minimise losses,” Taras Eleyko said. He added: “Putin is a card-sharp. He would need 600,000 troops to occupy Ukraine. He doesn’t have that.” Eleyko was part of a travelling amateur theatre troupe from western Ukraine. The group had arrived at the military airport to entertain troops with a traditional mystery play known as a vertep. This one featured familiar characters such as an angel and devil, as well a crown-wearing Putin – plus Joe Biden, who carried a stars and stripes flag. The show took place in what was once the departure lounge, beneath a colourful communist-era mosaic. Someone had pasted Ukraine’s blue and yellow flag over the old hammer and sickle. The play ended with Death – actually Olena Chebeliuk, a historian from Lviv – chasing “Putin” off to hell. She wore a skeleton costume and carried a white scythe. ‘We’re afraid Russia will invade and capture Ukraine. Our army is not very ready to fight,” Chebeliuk said, speaking in fluent English. “We don’t really have Stingers or patriot missiles. We only have old Soviet rockets, many of them not in a good state. If there is a big war, I fear in the first weeks we will have many casualties.” Chebeliuk predicted that a Russian offensive would set off a partisan war. “A lot of us are ready to fight. We will resist in every city, in every village. Ukrainians hate Putin, especially in the west of our country. I hope Putin is just pretending with his threats, to get something from the west and Biden.” Whenever Ukrainian rulers began acting like dictators the people rose up against them, she said, citing the 2014 “revolution of dignity” in Kyiv against the then president, Viktor Yanukovych. Chebeliuk rejected Putin’s recent claims that Ukraine and Russia were “one people”. “Russians have lived for 20 years in a dictatorship. They are happy,” she said. “We don’t like dictators here. Putin is a bit of a dreamer. He wants to be the most powerful man in the world. If he tries to make a dictatorship in Ukraine he will fail.”GSK’s chief scientific officer is jumping ship, dealing a blow to the drugmaker as it seeks to rebuild its pipeline of new medicines and gears up for a corporate split in the summer. Hal Barron, the highly regarded US scientist and veteran of Roche and Genentech, was one of the GSK chief executive Emma Walmsley’s key hires a few months after she took the helm in April 2017. His departure, after four years in the job, comes at a critical time as GSK is under pressure from the activist investor Elliott Management, a New York hedge fund, to improve its operational and share price performance. Barron, 60, will join the biotech Altos Labs, based in the San Francisco bay area, which reportedly counts the Amazon founder Jeff Bezos among its backers. Barron will stay on GSK’s board as a non-executive director, providing advice on research and development. He will be replaced as GSK’s chief scientific officer by Tony Wood on 1 August. The Panmure Gordon analyst David Cox said: “Dr Hal Barron arrived with great fanfare a few years ago and is highly regarded in the industry. The fact that GSK is in the process of spinning off its consumer health business means there is a lot of pressure on R&amp;D (and M&amp;A) to come up with new innovative products for what will be the ‘new GSK’ post-split. They need to get R&amp;D right and do not have the best track record in recent times.” The drugmaker insists that despite Unilever’s £50bn approach, its plans are on track for a summer stock market flotation of the consumer health venture it has with Pfizer. GSK has resisted pressure from Elliott to sell off the business and said it had rejected three bids from the Marmite and Dove maker because they “fundamentally undervalued” the business and its prospects. As the head of R&amp;D, which is vital to a drugmaker, Barron is the highest-paid executive at GSK. He received a total package of $11.2m (£8.2m) in 2020, while Walmsley was paid £7m, the company’s most recent annual report shows. One of his biggest ideas has been to leverage the immune system to attack multiple diseases, and using genetic data to identify new drugs. Walmsley brought him in to shake up the company’s $6bn research division and tackle a culture that she described as “too slow and rather bureaucratic” in July 2018. A year earlier, she had already set out plans to tighten the drug portfolio and focus on “winners” – potential blockbuster medicines with annual revenues of more than $1bn. However, last summer Elliott still attacked GSK’s culture as “overly bureaucratic”. Graham Parry and Sachin Jain, analysts at Bank of America, said: “Wood has a solid background in discovery, especially in small molecules at Pfizer and more recently in broader discovery/development at GSK. However, he is less well known to investors and, despite his broader role at GSK, we expect investors to initially view him through the lens of his medicinal chemistry background and look for evidence of breadth beyond this when he takes the reins.” Walmsley described Wood, who joined GSK from Pfizer in early 2017, as an “outstanding scientist who is highly respected inside and outside GSK” and who had been a “key partner to Hal in delivering our R&amp;D approach”. She said Barron’s appointment to Altos Labs was a “unique opportunity” for him but added that GSK would continue to benefit from his expertise on the board and in support of R&amp;D. Altos Labs, created last year, has been hiring scientists from around the world to spearhead its efforts to explore the biology of cellular rejuvenation programming with the goal of reversing disease.The French actor Gaspard Ulliel has died at the age of 37 after a skiing accident. The star of A Very Long Engagement and Hannibal Rising was hospitalised after the accident in the Alps. Ulliel was transported via helicopter on Tuesday to Grenoble but did not survive his injuries, according to the actor’s family and agent. Local broadcaster France Bleu reported that Ulliel collided with another skier at a crossing point, suffering head trauma. It said the other skier was not hospitalized. An investigation is currently under way. After some television work, Ulliel had a small role in 2001’s Brotherhood of the Wolf, alongside Vincent Cassel and Monica Bellucci. Acclaimed work in French films Summer Things and Strayed then led to the romantic lead in Jean-Pierre Jeunet’s A Very Long Engagement, opposite Audrey Tautou. The performance saw him win a Cesar for most promising actor. Ulliel was then cast as young Hannibal Lecter in prequel Hannibal Rising, and as Yves Saint Laurent in biopic Laurent which scored him a Cesar nomination for best actor. He later won the award for Xavier Dolan’s It’s Only the End of the World, which premiered at the Cannes film festival. “Gaspard belonged to this new generation of actors who were making tomorrow’s French cinema,” festival director Thierry Fremaux said to Variety. “He was equally brilliant and talented. He gave a lot and we’ll always remember him.” Dolan paid tribute on Instagram, writing that it was “painful” to be facing the news. “It is your whole being that has transformed my life, a being that I loved deeply, and that I will always love,” the film-maker wrote. “I can’t say anything else, I’m exhausted, stunned by your departure.” Ulliel was also known for being the face of the fragrance Bleu de Chanel. He will next be seen as Midnight Man in the Marvel show Moon Knight with Oscar Isaac and Ethan Hawke, the trailer for which was released this week. “We are deeply saddened to learn of the tragic passing of our friend and colleague Gaspard Ulliel,” a Disney spokesperson told Variety. “Our thoughts are with his family and friends during this time.” Jean Castex, the French prime minister, paid tribute on Twitter, writing that Ulliel “grew up with cinema and cinema grew with him”. The French culture minister Roselyne Bachelot has also spoken on television. “Such a brilliant actor who was reaped by the sickle of death at the peak of his career,” she said. “For almost 20 years, he was present in our lives with magnificent performances.” He is survived by model-singer girlfriend Gaëlle Piétri and a son.Our main story today: UK inflation has risen to a near-30-year high of 5.4%, driven higher by rising prices for food, furniture, clothes and housing costs. This deepens the country’s cost of living crisis, and heaps pressure on the Bank of England to raise interest rates at its next meeting in February, following December’s surprise hike. Sterling rose 0.8% against the dollar to $1.3837 after the data, and was also supported by the surge in UK bond yields. The two-year gilt yield rose to its highest level since March 2018. Crude oil prices are up for a fourth day and hit seven-year highs, after a fire on a pipeline from Iraq to Turkey briefly halted oil flows, raising fears about supply. Brent crude touched $89.05 a barrel, its highest level since October 2014 while US light crude climbed as high as $87.08, also the highest since then. The explosion that set off the fire on the pipeline in the southeastern Turkish province of Kahramanmaras was caused by a falling power pylon, not an attack, a senior security source told Reuters. European stock markets are trading between 0.2% (Italy) and 1% (France) higher. On Wall Street, US stock indices were boosted by upbeat results from a spate of companies such the consumer giant Procter &amp; Gamble and the banks Bank of America and Morgan Stanley, which wrapped up the bank earnings season. Our other stories are: The Bank of England governor also said that rising inflation could hit demand and push up unemployment, ultimately bringing down price growth. This is a hard thing to say... but if you get pressure on cost of living, pressure on real earnings, that will tend to restrain demand in the economy... and that could lead to an output gap opening up, and it could eventually of course lead to higher unemployment and that would bring inflation down. I don’t want to suggest that... were we to consider it necessary, we don’t have to take any action in terms of the Bank of England’s action on interest rates. We would obviously judge that ourselves. But there is another channel there which would weaken demand in the economy. Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey has told MPs on the parliamentary Treasury committee that the central bank’s regional agents are picking up some signs of pay rises picking up because of rising inflation. They tell me, at the moment, they are beginning to see some evidence of this. However, official data for November showed that pay increases were not keeping up with inflation at that time, as we reported yesterday. Bailey also said that the Bank’s policymakers can and will do everything they can to control inflation. Inflation in Canada has also picked up, rising to 4.8% in December from 4.7% in November. Over here, Clea Skopeliti, a freelance reporter, has spoken to people about how they are coping with rocketing food prices and energy bills. There are some heart-breaking accounts. Primary school teacher Kate Locke from Reading, a single parent with a teenage son, is really struggling and says she is “not getting through the month”. They use hot-water bottles in the evening to avoid putting on the heating (despite freezing temperatures). The main stock markets in Europe are all pushing higher and crude oil prices are 0.6% (Brent crude) to 0.7% (US light crude) ahead. UK’s FTSE 100 index up 38 points, or 0.5%, at 7,601 Germany’s Dax up 0.6% at 15,869 France’s CAC up 0.8% at 7,192 Italy’s FTSE MiB up 0.1% at 27,521 Prime minister Boris Johnson plans to fight on, according to his press secretary. Asked if Johnson would fight any no-confidence motion brought against him by his Conservative lawmakers, the press secretary told reporters: Yes... Our focus is very clear in terms of delivering the ambitious agenda that we have set out and [were] elect on on in 2019 and we want to continue to work together as Conservatives to deliver this. The press secretary said Johnson wants to fight the next general election. One of his Tory MPs, Christian Wakeford, has defected to Labour. The Tory grandee David Davis told Johnson: “In the name of God, go,” during an often chaotic prime minister’s questions overshadowed by intense doubt about Johnson’s future. After a fierce set of exchanges between Johnson and Labour leader Keir Starmer, Davis rose to tell Johnson that he had spent weeks defending him from “angry constituents”, but that repeated reports about lockdown-breaching parties were too much. You can read more on our politics live blog. KPMG has been fined £3m for failures during its audit of the Bargain Booze owner Conviviality and severely reprimanded in the latest blow to its reputation, reports Jasper Jolly. The accounting regulator, the Financial Reporting Council (FRC), found “a serious lack of competence” in KPMG’s 2017 audit of the company, which collapsed within nine months of the accounts being signed off. The initial fine was £4.3m, but this was reduced because the firm admitted the failings. The KPMG partner in charge of the audit, Nicola Quayle, was also fined £110,000 and given a severe reprimand. Quayle, who previously led KPMG’s Manchester office and sat on its UK board, will pay £80,850, after receiving a discount for admitting the failures. Britain’s financial watchdog plans to clamp down on the marketing of crypto assets (such as Bitcoin) and other high-risk investments, amid a boom in crypto ads and endorsement from celebrities. The changes would strengthen risk warnings on ads and ban incentives to invest, such as new joiner or refer-a-friend bonuses, the Financial Conduct Authority said. We are concerned that too many consumers are just ‘clicking through’ and accessing high-risk investments without understanding the risks involved. My colleague Rob Davies reported last week that cryptocurrency firms bombarded Londoners with a record number of adverts on public transport during 2021, fuelling calls for a ban to prevent people being lured into risky investments. Sony’s market value plunged by $20bn in its biggest share price slump since the global financial crisis of 2008, after rival Microsoft announced a record-breaking deal to buy Call of Duty publisher Activision Blizzard and take the console wars into the metaverse, writes our media business correspondent Mark Sweney. Shares in the Japanese conglomerate closed down 13% on Wednesday as investors reacted to the possibility that Microsoft’s $70bn bid for Activision Blizzard, the largest deal it has ever struck and biggest ever in the gaming and tech sectors, could result in global hit games titles being pulled from its Playstation games console and subscription service and offered exclusively on its rival Xbox and subscription service. The news of the blockbuster deal sparked a wave of investor interest in further consolidation with shares in FIFA football franchise publisher Electronic Arts and Take-Two Interactive, maker of games including Grand Theft Auto, rising. French publisher Ubisoft, which makes Assassins Creed, rose almost 12% while in Japan Capcom and Square Enix rose by 3.5%. “Sony’s response will be one to watch, of course,” said Clay Griffin, analyst at MoffettNathanson. “But we question its ability to go toe-to-toe with Microsoft financially. We doubt Sony could digest something of the scale of Electronic Arts or Take Two.” Microsoft’s $69bn deal to buy the games publisher Activision Blizzard, which makes mega franchises Call of Duty, World of Warcraft and Candy Crush, has wiped $20bn off rival Sony’s market value. Bloomberg News writes: The blockbuster acquisition escalates Microsoft’s spending spree to secure intellectual property assets for its Xbox Game Pass service, wiping $20 billion off Sony’s valuation in a day. The push to attract paying subscribers with an overwhelming portfolio of games challenges Sony’s traditional console business model that relies on high-profile exclusive titles and hardware sales. Games and network services account for about 30% of Sony revenue. Lidl’s 900th store in Britain will open its doors for the first time tomorrow. Located near Liverpool city centre, it is one of six stores opening in January, which will together create almost 250 new jobs. The German discount chain is also opening two shops in London as well as outlets in Shipley, Merry Hill and Newcastle. Lidl has opened 50 new stores in the last 12 months and its targeting 1,100 in the UK by the end of 2025. It is investing £1.3bn in its store expansion in 2021 and 2022. Back to the main news of the day, the jump in UK inflation to a near-30-year high of 5.4%. Here is some analysis from our economics editor Larry Elliott: Inflation was supposed to be yesterday’s problem. This time last year, the government’s preferred measure of the annual increase in the cost of living was running at less than 1%. Now it stands at 5.4% – the highest in almost 30 years – and it has not peaked yet. With the lagged impact of the supply-chain bottlenecks of last autumn feeding through into prices in the shops and a likely 50% jump in domestic energy bills to come, inflation will certainly exceed 6% in April and may be closer to 7%. Clearly, the data released by the Office for National Statistics will concern the Bank of England, which is mandated to hit the government’s 2% inflation target and has continually underestimated price pressure over the past year. The Bank’s monetary policy committee will next meet in early February – and with the cost of food, household goods, eating out, staying in hotels and clothing and footwear all pushing inflation higher last month – the chances of an increase in borrowing costs from 0.25% to 0.5% have increased. In a big blow to Britain’s second-biggest drugmaker GSK, its highly regarded chief scientific officer Hal Barron is jumping ship, to lead an anti-ageing Silicon Valley start-up in August. Barron, who was one of GSK chief executive Emma Walmsley’s key hires in late 2017, will be replaced by Tony Wood as GSK’s CSO on 1 August. Barron will join the biotech Altos Labs, based in the San Francisco bay area, which is reportedly backed by billionaires including Amazon founder Jeff Bezos. The 60-year-old veteran of Genentech and Roche will stay on GSK’s board, however. Walmsley said: We are delighted to appoint Tony as our next CSO. He is an outstanding scientist who is highly respected inside and outside GSK. Tony has been a key partner to Hal in delivering our R&amp;D approach, and with his experience and expertise across science, data and new technologies, he is perfectly placed to build on Hal’s outstanding progress and to deliver value from our pipeline. Hal’s appointment to Altos Labs is a unique opportunity for him and we are pleased that GSK will continue to benefit from his expertise at the Board and in support of R&amp;D. Barron said: Tony will be an outstanding Chief Scientific Officer for GSK. I have worked closely with him for several years. I know him as a person and scientist of the highest quality. In the last four years we have significantly improved the quality and strength of the pipeline and our overall R&amp;D productivity, delivering 13 major product approvals and more than doubling the number of assets in Phase III/registration to 23. GSK now has a pipeline of 21 vaccines and 42 medicines. GSK is in the middle of splitting itself apart, with a London stock market flotation for its consumer health venture planned for the summer. At the weekend, it said it had rejected three takeover bids from the consumer giant Unilever for the business, the latest worth £50bn. The drugmaker has been under pressure from the activist investor Elliott Management to explore a sale of consumer health. Here is our latest story on the saga. Mark Harris, chief executive of mortgage broker SPF Private Clients, said: There is further speculation that the Bank of England will raise interest rates by 0.5% at its February meeting in order to counter rising inflation, and it remains to be seen what impact this will have on buyer confidence. Despite the global pandemic, the housing market was able to thrive last year and there are still those who have not yet made their purchase. Squeezed affordability would be an issue, preventing first-time buyers in particular from getting on the ladder, but the Bank will be mindful that as we come out of a pandemic, a succession of significant rate increases could be extremely damaging to the wider economy. Low mortgage rates have been one of the contributing factors to the housing boom and although some lenders are tweaking mortgage rates upwards on the back of higher money market rates, pricing remains competitive. Phillip Stevens, director of the Richmond estate agency Antony Roberts, thinks that the December rate hike from the Bank of England has not dented buyers’ confidence so far: It was business as usual in November as prices rose again following October’s dip which came about following the end of the stamp duty holiday. There is plenty of evidence that buyer demand remains strong, especially for houses, and with relatively little stock available it is a house seller’s market. The interest rate rise does not appear to have dented buyers’ confidence thus far, nor their ability to purchase property, but with inflation at a 30-year high that could change as it may well be the first hike of many. Those wanting to make their move will be keen to do so sooner rather than later but whether they can will depend on what stock launches onto the market this spring. In other inflation news, UK house prices rose 10% in November from a year earlier, according to the Office for National Statistics. This compares with an annual rate of 9.8% in October. House price inflation peaked at 13.5% in June, the highest in more than 15 ears, shortly before the government began to phase out a tax break on purchases. The pub chain JD Wetherspoon has criticised the government’s “hypocrisy” for holding parties at 10 Downing Street while restrictions forced pub sales to crash, reports my colleague Jasper Jolly. Wetherspoon also said the latest plan B restrictions brought in at the start of the Omicron wave of infections in December had depressed sales over the crucial festive period in the hospitality sector for a second year running. The pub chain, run by chairman and founder Tim Martin, directed its ire at the government over “partygate”. Wetherspoon said “there would have been a number of advantages for the nation” if pubs had been open on 20 May 2020, the date on which the embattled prime minister attended a “bring your own booze” party in the garden of No 10. The British luxury brand Burberry has put out a strong trading update. Our retail correspondent Sarah Butler reports: Burberry is forecasting that full-year profits will grow 35% compared to last year, as strong sales of its luxury clothing and bags in Asia and the US drive its trading rebound from the pandemic. The British luxury brand said that full price sales were up 26% compared to pre-pandemic levels in the three months to 25 December, compared to 10% growth in the previous quarter, as it sold more full-price items including Burberry trainers, raincoats and bags. The company said it now expected to increase full year profits by 35% year-on-year to about £500m, up from City analysts’ previous expectation of just over £470m. Burberry credited the strong profits growth to designer Ricardo Tisci’s products attracting younger shoppers. UK stock markets have shrugged off the jump in inflation. The FTSE 100 and FTSE 250 indices have barely budged on the news. Russ Mould, investment director at the stockbroker AJ Bell, said: Ongoing weakness among tech-related stocks was offset by strength in housebuilders, retail and oil producers in the FTSE 100. Brent Crude continues to charge ahead with a 0.4% gain to $87.84 per barrel, stoking speculation that it could soon return to $100 per barrel amid supply constraints and robust demand. Global oil supply will soon overtake demand as some producers are set to pump crude at or above record highs, the International Energy Agency predicted in its monthly report. It also said that the rapid spread of the Omicron Covid-19 variant was having a limited impact on countries’ demand for oil. This time around, the surge is having a more muted impact on oil use. The steady rise in supply could see a significant surplus materialise in the first quarter of 2022 and going forward. The US, Canada and Brazil are expected to pump at all-time highs this year while Saudi Arabia and Russia could also break their output records. The energy watchdog also lifted its oil demand estimate for 2022 by 200,000 barrels per day. It warned that with commercial oil and fuel stocks in OECD countries at their lowest levels in seven years, any reductions in supply could inject volatility into the oil market. Crude oil prices are pushing higher this morning, with Brent crude, the global benchmark, up 59 cents at $88.10 a barrel while US light crude is 85 cents higher at $86.23 a barrel. On the stock markets, the FTSE 100 index and Germany’s Dax are barely changed. France’s CAC is 0.4% ahead while Italy’s FTSE MiB has fallen 0.7%. Investec analyst Sandra Horsfield has looked at the impact of the supply chain crisis and soaring energy prices on inflation. Undoubtedly some of the strength in goods prices will have reflected ongoing supply chain disruptions. There are some signs that these could be topping out at the moment, but at elevated levels. Over the course of this year, we would expect some clearer easing, helping to contain inflation again. But for now that remains elusive. Indeed, it is almost a given that inflation will rise further come April, when the next change in Ofgem’s utility price cap will take place. Calculations by our utilities analyst that mathematically take into account how wholesale market prices have evolved, suggest a rise in the dual-fuel utility cap of 49% would be warranted. We estimate that would result in a boost to the inflation rate of 1.5%pts relative to keeping the cap unchanged. In practice, however, it seems politically inconceivable that a rise in utility prices of this magnitude will be sanctioned. We expect the government to take a range of mitigating measures to limit the increase in the CPI inflation rate, and additionally to provide extra help for low-income households that stand to be particularly affected. The exact mechanism and size of the offset are, as yet unclear. The pressure is building for another rate rise from the Bank of England in February, as several economists have said this morning. Melanie Baker, senior economist at the fund manager Royal London Asset Management said: Many of the sources of rising inflation could still be described as transitory, but with inflation surprising on the upside by so much, with core inflation higher and at such a high level, worries about inflation expectations are also likely to build. UK inflation is expected to rise sharply with another jump in energy bills expected in April when Ofgem reset the energy price cap. In the meantime, prospects of higher interest rates, high rates of inflation and pay growth that is not keeping pace means the financial situation of many households will be worsening. The chances of a strong year for real consumer spending are dimming further. The Unison union, which represents public sector workers, has also weighed in. Its general secretary Christina McAnea said: The soaring cost of living means growing anxiety for low-income families. Employees able to switch jobs will be intensifying their new-year searches for better-paid work. This is terrible news for our public services. Health and care services, already thousands of workers short, are likely to be the biggest losers. Staff are likely to jump ship for more lucrative, less stressful work, where there’s also no requirement to be Covid jabbed. The figures make a mockery of the 1.75% pay offer for school and council staff. The government must boost the money available so wages there can keep up with rocketing prices too. The TUC, which is made up of 48 member unions, is calling on the government to come up with a plan to tackle the UK’s cost of living crisis. TUC general Secretary Frances O’Grady said: Families are facing a double hit from high inflation and slowing wage growth. They need more help from government. The chancellor must come forward with a plan to tackle the cost-of-living crisis. Working people need stronger rights to bargain for fair pay increases. And families need more help with rising bills through universal credit. Prem Sikka, emeritus professor of accounting, tweets: The chancellor Rishi Sunak’s response to higher inflation is: I understand the pressures people are facing with the cost of living, and we will continue to listen to people’s concerns as we have done throughout the pandemic. We’re providing support worth around £12bn this financial year and next to help families with the cost of living. We’re cutting the Universal Credit taper to make sure work pays, freezing alcohol and fuel duties to keep costs down, and providing targeted support to help households with their energy bills. Paul Dales, chief UK economist at Capital Economics, noted: After rising from 5.1% in November to 5.4% in December, CPI inflation is now further above the Bank of England’s target than at any point since the UK first adopted an inflation target in October 1992. What’s more, our forecast is that CPI inflation will shoot up to just above 7.0% in April. 0.2 percentage points (ppts) of the 0.3ppt rise in overall inflation came from the rise in food price inflation from 2.4% to a nine-year high of 4.5%. The previous gains in agricultural commodity prices suggest that prices on the supermarket shelves will soon rise further, perhaps pushing up food price inflation to 5.0%. Furniture/household equipment inflation also added 0.1ppt. Strong demand driven by all the prior Covid-19 lockdowns and problems sourcing products from Asia resulted in price inflation rising from 6.1% to 7.3%, which is the highest rate since this series began in 1989. Hotels inflation added another 0.1ppt as a smaller fall in prices this December than last December resulted in inflation rising from 8.3% to 15.5%. That’s the highest rate since this series began in 1997. Admittedly, some of the rise in hotels inflation is probably artificial as prices were imputed during last December’s lockdown. But make no mistake, the bulk of the rise in overall inflation is real. Core inflation (which excludes food, energy, alcohol and tobacco) rose from 4.0% to 4.2%. That’s the highest rate since July 1992. Dales thinks inflation will stay above 4% for all of this year and will remain above the 2% target until April 2023. That’s why we think the Bank will raise interest rates faster than most expect this year, from 0.25% to 1.25%, with the next hike to 0.50% coming on 3rd February. Hannah Audino, economist at PwC UK, said high inflation is one of the biggest risks to the UK economic recovery this year. Intensifying cost of living pressures, combined with relatively positive GDP and labour market data this month, make it more likely that the Bank of England will consider another modest rise in interest rates in their next MPC meeting in February. However, given it takes around 12-18 months for the full impact of an increase in rates to be realised in the economy, inflation is expected to continue to rise in the short-term. This will provide no respite to households being squeezed by rising prices and falling real wages. Further challenges lay ahead in the next quarter, as the rise in the energy price cap and the reversal of VAT cuts in hospitality and tourism create the perfect storm for higher consumer prices. High inflation is one of the biggest risks to the UK’s economic recovery this year. Sarah Coles, senior personal finance analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, has taken a closer look at the things that have gone up in price. Food and non-alcoholic drink prices made a much bigger contribution to inflation than we’re used to – with prices rising 5.4%. Within our trolleys there were some eye-watering rises, including margarine up 27.3% in a year, oils and fats 13.1%, sauces 11.6%, lamb 8.5%, low fat milk 8.2% and crisps 9%. When these essentials rise in price, it makes it far more difficult for us to cut costs. Once we’ve traded down brands or to a discounter, it’s a far more dramatic change to have to stop buying milk and margarine to cut costs. Clothes prices bucked the usual December trend and actually got more expensive during the month. We typically see them drop between November and December in the pre-Christmas sales, as shops try to clear the shelves of partywear. However, this year prices rose, as stores tried to capitalise on the return of Christmas parties and celebrations. Clothes prices are up 4.5% in a year, and children’s clothes are up 5.5%. Then there are a host of things that we don’t buy regularly, but if we need to buy them, we’re in for a nasty shock. Second-hand cars are up 28.6% in a year. Demand has been outstripping supply, leading to some eye-watering rises. Someone who bought a second-hand car a year ago is likely to find it’s worth more now than when they bought it. Home improvements, including maintenance and new furniture continued to rocket in price too. as a result of a home improvement boom from more people spending more time at home, and ongoing supply problems. Materials for home maintenance are now 13.9% more expensive than a year ago, while home furnishings are up 12.5%. Here’s more reaction to the jump in UK inflation. Debapratim De, senior economist at Deloitte, said: Inflation hit its highest level in 30 years in December. But unlike in the early 1990s, this inflationary streak is largely driven by surging commodities and goods prices - a consequence of pandemic-related shifts in demand and supply. Prices for services are rising at a much slower pace, indicating relatively weaker domestic price pressures. This rapid rise in the cost of living seems more likely to squeeze real earnings and consumer spending power than trigger a wage-price spiral. Here is our full story on inflation. Britain’s cost of living crisis worsened in December after inflation jumped to 5.4% – its highest level in almost 30 years – driven by the higher cost of clothes, food and footwear, writes Phillip Inman on the economics desk. Heaping further pressure on Bank of England policymakers to push up interest rates when they meet next month, the prices of furniture and eating out also increased as shortages of staff and hold-ups at UK ports forced up the cost of imports. The Bank of England expects the consumer prices index (CPI) to rise to 6% by April while some analysts have forecast it could hit 7% unless the government decides to pump billions of pounds into the energy sector to cap spiralling heating costs. James Smith, developed markets economist at ING, is predicting that inflation will peak at 6.5% in April when household energy bills are set to rise by 50%, and end the year at 4% before falling next year. Inflation has surprised higher (again) and that’s only likely to increase the temptation for Bank of England policymakers to hike rates for a second consecutive meeting this February. But with inflation rates set to plunge in 2023, and the prospects of a severe wage-price spiral looking less likely, subsequent moves are likely to be more gradual. We’re now getting closer to the inflation peak, which we expect to be roughly 6.5% in April. That’s when the next increase in the household energy cap is due, and the latest futures prices suggest we’re looking at a 50% increase, followed perhaps by another (much smaller) increase in October. That means the electricity costs alone will be adding over 2 percentage points to the headline inflation rate for most of 2022. But part of the reason why the peak is set to come in April and not later, is that many of the items affected by supply chain issues will see inflation rates slow. While the disruption appears far from over, many of the goods affected – including furniture and used cars – started experiencing sharp prices from last spring. It’s unlikely that pace will be replicated at the same time this year, reducing pressure on the annual comparison. Given that headline CPI is likely to plunge in 2023, pretty much regardless of what happens to energy and used car prices over coming months, there are questions as to how worried the Bank should really be about the current levels of inflation. That’s why we think wage growth will assume higher priority in deciding how far to increase Bank rate this year. Separate figures out yesterday showed that pay rises have failed to keep up with inflation. Pay for workers in Britain has fallen in real terms for the first time in more than a year, despite signs that employers shrugged off concerns over the Omicron coronavirus variant to continue hiring in December. Average wages, after taking account of inflation, dropped in November for the first time since July 2020 amid growing concerns over the hit to living standards this year from high inflation and surging energy bills. Rob Holdsworth from the Resolution Foundation, a respected think tank, tweeted yesterday: Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, has brought forward his forecast for the next interest rate hike to February, from March, following the inflation figures. Inflation rates for four key components likely will rise further over the coming months, culminating in the headline rate probably peaking slightly above 6% in April. First, clothing inflation, which increased to 4.2% in December, from 3.5% in November, likely will rise further as the anniversary of the Q1 2021 lockdown is reached. Second, December’s 8.7% rate of core output price inflation—the highest since at least 1996, when consistent records begin—points to scope for core goods inflation to step up from December’s 5.2% rate. Third, the surge in wholesale energy prices suggests that Ofgem will increase its default tariff price cap by around 43% in April, resulting in a 1pp leap in the contribution of electricity and natural gas prices to the headline rate. And fourth, services inflation will rise further in April, when the rate of VAT paid by hospitality and tourism business will return to 20%, from 12.5% currently. Nonetheless, we continue to expect CPI inflation to fall back swiftly after April and ultimately to undershoot the 2% target in 2023. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Inflation in the UK has jumped to the highest annual rate in 30 years. The consumer prices index rose to 5.4% in the year to December, up from 5.1% in November, according to the Office for National Statistics. Economists had forecast an uptick to 5.2%. The last time inflation was higher was in March 1992, when it was 7.1%. Price rises in food and non-alcoholic beverages, furniture and household goods, clothing and housing and household services, due to surging gas and electricity prices, pushed up inflation. In food, bread and cereals, meat, and vegetables such as potatoes went up in price. Inflation is now way above the Bank of England’s 2% target. The central bank has forecast a rise to 6% this spring, and is expected to raise interest rates again after a surprise hike in December. Energy bills are likely to soar further in April when the regulator lifts the energy price cap. Including housing costs, the consumer prices index rose 4.8%, up from 4.6% in November. Petrol prices were unchanged from November, the highest recorded average price at 148.8p per litre, compared with 114.1p a year earlier. In Germany, inflation rose to 5.3% in December from 5.2% in November, according to official figures, in line with expectations. Over 2021 as a whole, consumer picks rose by 3.1% compared with 2020. Asian stocks fell, with Japan’s Nikkei tumbling 2.8% and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng and the Shanghai composite indices both down 0.4%. China’s cyberspace regulator has drafted new guidelines that will require the country’s internet companies to obtain its approval before undertaking any investments or fundraisings, Reuters reported, citing sources. The proposed rules from the Cyberspace Administration of China will apply to any platform company with more than 100m users, or with more than 10bn yuan in revenue, they said. The Agenda World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 9am GMT: IEA Oil market report 1.30pm GMT: US housing starts for December 1.30pm GMT: Canada inflation for December (forecast: 4.8%) 2.15pm GMT: Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey testifies to Treasury committee$20bn (£14.7bn) has been wiped off the value of Sony after its rival Microsoft announced a record-breaking deal to buy the Call of Duty publisher Activision Blizzard and take the console wars into the metaverse. Shares in the Japanese conglomerate closed down 13% on Wednesday, their biggest fall since the global financial crisis in 2008, as investors reacted to the possibility that the $70bn bid for Activision Blizzard could result in hit games being pulled from the Sony PlayStation console and subscription service and offered exclusively on the rival Microsoft Xbox. The blockbuster deal is not only the largest Microsoft has struck but also the biggest ever in the gaming and tech sectors. It sparked a wave of investor interest in further consolidation, with shares in Electronic Arts, the maker of the Fifa football series, and Take-Two Interactive, the maker of Grand Theft Auto, rising. The shares of other video games companies also rose. France’s Ubisoft, which makes Assassin’s Creed, was up almost 12%, while Japan’s Capcom and Square Enix each rose 3.5%. “Sony’s response [to the deal] will be one to watch, of course,” said Clay Griffin, an analyst at the research firm MoffettNathanson. “But we question its ability to go toe to toe with Microsoft financially. We doubt Sony could digest something of the scale of Electronic Arts or Take-Two.” Sony has led Microsoft in the sale of consoles and exclusive games, such as Spider-Man and God of War, which have bolstered revenue from its PlayStation Plus subscription service. On Tuesday Microsoft said it aimed to offer as many of Activision Blizzard’s hit titles, which also include World of Warcraft, on its Xbox Game Pass and PC Pass subscription services. Analysts were divided over whether Microsoft would look to take the flagship game Call of Duty exclusive, as it would mean a huge financial hit by not licensing it globally. As much as 65% of Activision Blizzard’s games console revenue comes from Sony’s PS5. Microsoft has said more broadly that the deal will “provide the building blocks for the metaverse”. Griffin said: “The vision Microsoft laid out yesterday was not of ‘winning’ the console wars versus Sony, necessarily. That’s part of it, of course. But more than that, it was about broadening … access to [premium] video games beyond the constraining barriers of expensive hardware.” The deal, which could still be countered by a rival bid, will result in Microsoft becoming the world’s third biggest gaming company by revenue behind China’s Tencent and Sony. A rival bid is considered to be unlikely given the scale of the offer. The deal dwarfs Microsoft’s $7.5bn takeover of Zenimax, the owner of Bethesda, the maker of the Elder Scrolls game, in 2020. Its previous biggest acquisition was the$26bn buyout of LinkedIn in 2016.This image, part of a series called Imaginary Trip, was taken in an abandoned train outside Kinshasa station in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I was looking for a site to evoke an imaginary voyage to convey the idea of memory, the passage of time and the reappropriation of old places. A lot of young men hang around this area, which is a poor neighbourhood, and they squat in the trains during the day while doing various jobs such as helping people at the station. Sometimes they have something to do, other times nothing. The two people in this photograph are both me. I took several digital images and then superimposed them to represent two young men playing a traditional game of draughts with bottle tops – as they do. When I started out on this project, I did not intend to put myself in the photographs – it was almost accidental. I did not have the money to pay for models, so it was partly a question of budget, but also of time. I spend ages in these places creating my photographs, too long for most people to hang around, so in the end I found myself in front of and behind the camera. I often work alone with a camera, a tripod and a remote trigger. In the picture, you see a bag from the local market in Kinshasa that gives the scene a more global context – “See the north” is written on it. You cannot see anything out of the windows of the train, so this voyage could be taking place anywhere in the world. The picture is complete in itself, but fits in with the rest of the series to tell a bigger story: the series shows a trip that begins somewhere, but doesn’t end, and the destination is a mystery. Some figures in the other photographs in the series are transparent. They represent people who have passed through this abandoned place in the past, and those who may pass through it in the future. Many see them as ghosts, but I see them as representing people who have been here and will come here. Setting pictures in abandoned places evokes the duality of the personal and the collective memory, as well as the history of the DRC: the train carriage here is from the era of colonisation. The idea is to use a figurative voyage to evoke the passing of time, in a real and imaginary sense. My father is a professional photographer and I began as a teenager helping him out at weddings and other events. One day, I just took one of his cameras and didn’t give it back. When I decided, at around 17 years old, that I wanted to make this my career, too, he didn’t exactly try to discourage me, but he was worried that I wouldn’t be able to make a success of it. It is complicated in the DRC – and in many other African countries – because being a photographer was not considered a job for a woman and it still isn’t, largely. I would go to take pictures at an event and people would refer to me as the “Sunday photographer” meaning an amateur, someone who takes family snaps, so, while nobody actually told me to stop, it was very discouraging. When I tell people that I am a photographer they are surprised, even though there are more female photographers in the DRC today, our number is still small, and it remains a macho society. In 2013, I decided I was going to stop doing marriages and commercial work and focus on personal photography projects. It was a difficult time because I had no money, no resources and it took three years to sell my first photo. I had finished my studies and people would say: “When are you going to find some real work?” But for me, working on Imaginary Trip was my real work. I believe it is important, especially in this age, to detach oneself from what is fashionable and from so-called rules about what works or does not work. I tell myself, voila! I will do this photograph because it pleases me. Whether it works or not is not important. Gosette Lubondo’s CV Born: Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1993. Trained: Learned with father then studied communication and visual arts at the Académie des Beaux-Arts, Kinshasa. Influences: “The workshops of EZA Possibles collective, the Kin ArtStudio, photographers Sammy Baloji, Cindy Sherman and James Barnor.” High point: “The 2018 residence at the Musée du Quai Branly in Paris – Jacques Chirac (Imaginary Trip II). Then in 2019 I had an exhibition at a girls’ school in Lubumbashi, DRC, and the interaction with the young pupils was wonderful.” Low point: “The three years between starting doing my own projects and selling my first photo.” Top tip: “Stay true to yourself and what you want to do.”The Duke of York’s social media accounts are being deleted as he continues his legal battle to fight a sexual assault lawsuit filed against him in the US. Last week the Queen stripped her second son of his honorary military affiliations and royal patronages, and he agreed not to use his royal style HRH in any official capacity. Prince Andrew’s official Twitter handle, TheDukeOfYork, now leads to a blank page. His YouTube page is also no longer accessible. While his Instagram account, hrhthedukeofyork, still appeared on Wednesday, it is understood that that too is being removed, along with his Facebook account, but some accounts are taking longer to filter through. Royal aides have also updated the British monarchy’s official website as Buckingham Palace seeks to distance the institution from Andrew’s legal battle. While the prince still appears under the section titled Members of the Royal Family, the list of his military affiliations and patronages has been removed. Buckingham Palace announced last week that the roles would be shared out among other members of the royal family. The decision was made after discussion between senior family members. The website also includes details of the Queen’s statement, reading: “In January 2022, Buckingham Palace made a statement announcing that, with the Queen’s approval and agreement, the Duke of York’s military affiliations and Royal patronages have been returned to the Queen, and the Duke will continue to not carry out public duties.” Under the heading Supporting the Queen, Andrew’s official duties are listed in the past tense, such as attending trooping the colour and his diamond jubilee tour to India on behalf of the monarch. The website states: “An important part of the Duke of York’s role was to support the Queen’s work as head of state.” Virginia Giuffre, 38, is suing Andrew, 61, in the US for allegedly sexually assaulting her when she was a teenager. She claims she was trafficked by his friend Jeffrey Epstein, the convicted paedophile, to have sex with Andrew when she was 17 and a minor under US law. Andrew has denied the allegations. The Duke of Cambridge made no response when he was asked whether he backed his uncle on Wednesday. Prince William was leaving the Foundling Museum in London with the Duchess of Cambridge when a member of a TV news crew asked: “Do you support Prince Andrew?” William leaned closer to hear and then walked past without commenting.Mobile phones were still a rarity. Shopping online was a thing of the future. The launch of football’s Premier League was looming. This was Britain in March 1992, the last time the annual inflation rate was as high as it is today. Nobody under the age of 30 can really recall when the cost of living was a pressing political issue. There have been the occasional surges, usually caused by a rise in global oil prices, but nothing to match what has happened in the past six months. Even longer memories are needed for the time inflation hit its postwar peak in August 1975. Then the annual rate climbed above 25%, prompting a run on sterling, double-digit interest and a bailout from the International Monetary Fund a year later. For many years, it looked as if inflation was something to be read about in history books. In the late 1990s the economist Roger Bootle opened a book by asking readers to envisage “a world without perpetual inflation”, where prices would rise some years and fall in others, where in a good year pay would rise by between 2% and 3% and interest rates would fluctuate between 2% and 4%. Bootle’s book – The Death of Inflation – stirred up what he called a “hornet’s nest of criticism” at the time, but by and large what he predicted came true. By the late 1990s the period of high inflation lasting from the early 1970s to the early 1990s was pretty much over. During that two-decade period, inflation was akin to the impact of an earthquake. There was a big initial shock in 1973-4 followed by a series of aftershocks each less severe than the last. UK inflation peaked at 27% in 1975, just over 20% in the early 1980s and 11% in the early 1990s. It has never subsequently been anywhere close to 10%. Economists such as Bootle came to see the 1970s and 80s as the exception rather than the rule. Historically, periods of high inflation have tended to be during wars, when governments run the economy as hot as needed to ensure national survival and ignore the risks of overheating. The first real sustained inflationary pressure in the UK after the Napoleonic wars came when the first world war broke out. According to the Bank of England, a basket of goods costing £10 in the year of the Battle of Waterloo would have cost just £7.72 at the time of the assassination at Sarajevo. In the intervening period, inflation averaged -0.3% a year. There were reasons why the 1970s and 1980s bucked this peacetime trend. The global economy was at the end of a prolonged period of strong, sustained growth. Governments’ main economic priority was full employment. Capital controls and tariffs were deployed so countries could pursue expansionary strategies with little fear of being punished by the financial markets. Trade unions were far more powerful and could bargain for high wages to compensate their members when prices rose. Large parts of the world – China, India and the Soviet Union – were closed or only partially open economies. That world was disappearing by the early 1990s. Governments saw inflation rather than unemployment as the biggest threat. Trade union power had been diminished. Capital controls were abandoned and tariffs reduced. Above all, western consumers were starting to benefit from the cheap goods produced in China and other Asian countries. As a result, it has been clear for a while that it would take something exceptional for inflation to make a comeback. Something that would throw a spoke in the wheels of globalisation, make governments keener on self-sufficiency and persuade central banks of the need to embark on massive stimulus projects. Something like a global pandemic, for example.Last Friday, everyone living in London was told to avoid strenuous physical activity. An intense area of high pressure meant pollutants were caught in the air, rather than being blown away as usual. The government forecast the highest level of pollution – band 10 – would be reached, with air pollution at its highest recorded level since March 2018. The advice to avoid intense exercise put the onus on the most vulnerable in society – children, elderly people, those living with lung and heart conditions – rather than encouraging drivers to move to more sustainable transport options or limit their journeys. But, as a report published on Tuesday shows, we will not effectively tackle the climate crisis without real traffic reduction. If London is to be a city that works for everyone – drivers included – it needs to move seriously towards a future with fewer private cars on its streets. That’s why I was so heartened to see the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, acknowledging that traffic needs to go down by at least 27% in the capital to meet our climate targets. While I would argue that we could be more ambitious, Khan’s target is impressive, compared with the 2018 mayoral transport strategy, and marks real progress. Around the world, cities that have reduced cars have become better places to live and work: cleaner, safer, with healthier residents who have the option to move around in different ways, rather than relying on private cars.. London’s new deputy mayor for transport, Seb Dance, recently said that driving will soon be “socially unacceptable”, a “blip” in the history of transport, and I couldn’t agree more. I live in one of the most polluted boroughs in London, Tower Hamlets. And, while it has one of the lowest levels of car ownership in the country, the borough suffers from having three trunk roads – the A11, the A12 and the A13 – running directly through it. Tower Hamlets is one of the most culturally vibrant parts of the country – its rich history of political activism is, quite literally, painted on the walls. Yes, it’s beautiful, with docks and parks and mosques and museums. But on bad days, the air pollution is almost palpable. The impact of transport emissions on the health of residents here, including reduced lung capacity in children, is well documented. Internationally, these problems are also increasingly coming to be recognised: in 2020, Anne Hidalgo, the mayor of Paris, won a second term on a campaign platform advocating traffic reduction. Hidalgo proposed transforming Paris into a “15-minute city”, in which most daily tasks can be completed in short journeys on foot or bike, while Berlin is exploring introducing a car-free zone the size of Manhattan. The German capital has already installed 385 miles of dedicated cycleways, and ample public transport options mean the car is no longer immediately the best option. Decision-makers across Europe, and the rest of the world, are finally heeding warnings and witnessing, first-hand, the negative impacts of air pollution: impacts, I should add, that disproportionately fall upon communities of colour and members of low-income households, who tend to live in these areas of poorer air quality. Thankfully, leaders are coming to the same conclusion: the dominance of the car must end. Smart-pricing measures – which would charge drivers for journeys depending on factors such as distance travelled, time and location – will play a major part in reducing traffic on the streets. Such a system could help Transport for London raise desperately needed funds to maintain and improve the city’s public transport system – while freeing up the city’s roads for essential vehicles, including emergency services, transport for elderly and disabled people, taxis and other workers who need to drive. The necessity to radically rethink car use in London, and all of our cities, is something we can no longer ignore. London must be bold if it is to match Paris, Berlin and other pioneering cities in the global fight against climate breakdown. Implementing strategies like smart road-user pricing will put London’s city hall squarely in a leadership position in this regard. That’s something that makes me proud to live in London – to be a citizen of a city making genuine waves in its efforts to address the climate crisis and the dominance of car ownership. A city that is willing to ask itself serious questions about what it might look like decades in the future, and that offers innovative ideas for other urban centres around the world. Hirra Khan Adeogun is head of car-free cities at the climate charity PossibleA celebratory cry made famous by the footballer Cristiano Ronaldo has caused confusion and a degree of annoyance among tennis players and on-lookers alike, with shouts of “siuuu” heard from the stands at this year’s Australian Open. The cheer, which fans utter in an elongated deep tone, causing it to sound like a boo, was omnipresent during the opening two days of play at Melbourne Park, leaving some players uncertain about their popularity with the often boisterous Open crowds. Andy Murray’s epic five-set win over Nikoloz Basilashvili on Tuesday was soundtracked by cries of “siuuu” from early in the first set. What started as cheers from a small section of the crowd had spread across the stadium by the end of the nearly four-hour match. When Murray spoke in the on-court interview following his victory, he was interrupted by the noise. “Painful stuff … those guys,” the Scot said. Later Murray said he had been confused after hearing similar noise during his practice session: “Initially, I thought it was [jeering], because there were some people booing during my practice yesterday. I have no idea what for, so originally that’s what I thought it was,” he said. Murray continued: “But then after a few times it was like, no, they’re doing that, I think it’s like ‘siuuu’ or something that Ronaldo does when he scores. And, yeah, it was incredibly irritating. I think that’s what they were doing.” The cry has been made famous by Manchester United forward Ronaldo, who started using it along with his trademark goal celebration when at Real Madrid. It comes from the Spanish “si” for “yes”, although the five-times Ballon d’Or winner says he doesn’t know why he started to do it, but it just came to him naturally. “I started to say ‘si’, it’s like ‘yes’, when I was in Real Madrid,” said Ronaldo. “When we would win, everyone would say ‘siiiii’ and so I started to say it. I don’t know why, it was natural.” Raucous crowds are not uncommon at Melbourne Park, especially in the evening session and on the usually partisan John Cain Arena, which admits ground pass holders into its stands, where home favourite Nick Kyrgios opened his campaign on Tuesday night. “Siuuu” was again heard during the Australian’s straight-set win over Liam Broady, with Broady saying he found the overall experience of a night match in front of a partisan crowd on John Cain Arena “absolutely awful”. The Briton believed that the crowd was booing him from the very beginning of the clash. “The atmosphere was incredible, but it was, it’s the first time I’ve ever walked on to a tennis court and been booed, which was, which for me was a crazy experience. You get sledged from the sides like you can’t believe that they don’t pick up on TV. So it was a very, very difficult atmosphere to try and handle.” But as Kyrgios stepped up to the microphone for his on-court interview, he too was also greeted by a chorus of “siuuu”, prompting him to address the crowd directly. “I don’t know what I’ve done to this crowd because you guys are a zoo now. You guys are out of control. I’m just happy to be in front of you guys again. Honestly, it’s so much fun,” he said. In response, more chants of “siuuu” were heard from different parts of the crowd. In Kyrgios’s press conference, he was asked to comment on what appeared to be booing in the match. Kyrgios explained that the sounds were not what they seemed to be. “I wasn’t getting booed. That’s not getting booed,” Kyrgios said. “They actually weren’t saying ‘boo’. He continued: “It’s just a stupid, I can’t believe they did it so much. They were doing some Ronaldo thing. Ronaldo does it every time he scores. It’s like – I thought they were going to do it for like 10 minutes. They did it for two-and-a-half hours, like every point. I don’t know why, but I don’t know. It was a zoo out there.”With a Conservative leadership campaign appearing imminent, hopeful Tory MPs are checking their contacts and quietly ringing colleagues to gauge support – and not just the ones everyone expects. Away from Rishi Sunak, Liz Truss and the other perceived favourites, here are some others who could give it a try. Penny Mordaunt The junior trade minister has been increasingly talked up as a possible candidate for those unenthused by the main contenders. While not a household name, she is far from inexperienced, having been an MP since 2005 and a minister at various times since 2014, including as international development secretary and defence secretary under Theresa May. In a slight echo of Boris Johnson, she is Brexity enough to appeal to “red wall” MPs but also socially liberal. However, she is notably less chaotic. Mark Harper The chief whip under May and an MP since 2005, Harper has reinvented himself on the backbenches as chair of the lockdown-rejecting and influential Covid Recovery Group (CRG) of Conservative MPs. Its policy position appeals to many of his colleagues, not to mention the Tory members who will finally choose the new leader. However, Harper would have to do notably better than last time he ran, after May’s resignation, where he came ninth out of 10 candidates in the rolling series of MPs’ ballots that whittled the choice down to a final two. Steve Baker Another potential candidate from the CRG wing of the party – he is its deputy chair – Baker is a long-serving backbencher, beyond a one-year stint as a junior minister, but is nonetheless a relatively well-known figure. With his now traditional if not wholly serious media prefix of “Brexit hardman”, the Wycombe MP is known for his straight-talking approach and has been a regular critic of Covid rules in the Commons. Perhaps too specialist a figure to progress far if he does run. Tom Tugendhat Representing a somewhat different wing of Conservatism should he stand, the former army officer and MP for Tonbridge and Malling since 2015 supported remain in the 2016 referendum and is not associated with the Johnson strand of the party. While such views might make him a niche prospect for some fellow Tory MPs, not to mention the wider party membership, Tugendhat could present himself as a sober, policy-rich contrast to the incumbent, with added gravitas from his chairing of the Commons foreign affairs committee. Esther McVey Like Harper, another foiled hopeful from the 2019 contest – she finished in last place, as the choice of nine MPs – McVey does have considerable Commons experience and a string of former ministerial posts, including a brief stint as work and pensions secretary. As with her previous tilt at the job, McVey’s pitch would be that she can connect the party with working-class voters. She is the founder of the self-explanatory Blue Collar Conservatism group, which has a large number of Tory MPs signed up as supporters. Matt Hancock While the response from many voters, not to mention a number of his own colleagues, might be “What, him again, already?” the former health secretary is nothing if not a politician with a Tigger-ish bounce in approaching even seemingly lost causes. Banished to the backbenches since his breach of Covid rules via his relationship with a friend and colleague emerged last year, Hancock may feel he has served his penance. Photos this week of him emerging from some outdoor swimming, glistening and Putin-like, did not quell the sense that he is a man, once again, on manoeuvres.I have no audio or video of any of my four grandparents. As they were all born in the first decade of the last century, this is hardly surprising; they didn’t live long enough to have smartphones pointed at them. I suppose the only people of their generation recorded for posterity were those who worked in radio, film, television or music, or anyone who made the news. If your nan or gramps wasn’t some kind of celebrity, footage of them probably never existed, unless you had a cine-camera enthusiast in your bloodline. I don’t. No, this kind of remembrance was the preserve of a privileged few. Have I missed out? Much as it’s nice to see photographs of my grandparents, if some footage did suddenly turn up, I think I’d feel uneasy about watching it. I would have to brace myself, put it like that. This has been on my mind for a while. A couple of days before Christmas, I came across a tweet by a colleague at the BBC, the news correspondent Dan Johnson. “In the last few months of his life, I recorded my dad talking about his favourite music and comedy, Desert Island Discs style,” he wrote. “It’s taken me four years to finish editing it – often in tears – but I’m so pleased I have it. Best wishes, whoever you’re missing this Christmas.” I asked him to come on my radio show to talk about it. His dad was diagnosed with cancer in his early 60s and died at the age of 63. The recording, he told me, was his dad’s idea, and came at a stage when he was receiving treatment and the outlook wasn’t totally bleak. “We didn’t do any talking about the end of life or any looking back, really – apart from this suggestion which he came up with, thankfully – because I wasn’t going to be the one to take the situation there and add any negativity,” Dan said. “Dad raised the idea that: ‘We could do this thing where I talk about the songs, the music, the albums, the comedians, shows and sketches that I’ve laughed at over the years. And that might be a nice thing for people to listen to.’” And it is a nice thing, a beautiful thing, actually, to hear Dan and his late father talking and laughing. “Just to hear his voice again is special,” he added. A listener texted in to say that before his wife died, they went to a branch of Build-A-Bear and made one for each of their four grandchildren. All were fitted with a different voice message from their grandmother telling each grandchild what made them so special. While I found this incredibly moving, I also winced. Was this too much? The word macabre sprang to mind. What would it do to those children to hear their late nan’s voice every time they picked up their bears? I suppose I’d have to ask them, but I strongly suspect they wouldn’t have it any other way. Grieving, or at least remembering our loved ones, has changed for ever. Where once we had to use our imagination to remember how those we have lost moved and sounded when they were living and breathing, now that footage is on our phones and available 24/7. While I have nothing like it of my grandparents, my kids will have plenty of film of their grandparents. And my grandchildren will have plenty of me. Quite what the poor things will make of 1,000 episodes of Working Lunch, 500 One Shows, 100 Match of the Day 2s and one Strictly Come Dancing, I know not. Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnist“I learned more about my dad through those cards than I had my whole life,” says the son of snowboarding impresario – and the sport’s possible inventor – Jake Burton Carpenter, near the end of this biographical documentary. His father has been blinded and partially paralysed by Miller Fisher syndrome; where Carpenter once penned letters addressed “Dear Rider” to snowboarding’s swelling community, he is now reduced to scribbling half-legible pleas from his hospital bed. It induces a late swell of sympathy for a handsome maverick who, at least in this fitful portrait, had come across as distant and sometimes even a bit sharklike. Dear Rider labours in positioning Carpenter’s story as a piste-side Dogtown and Z-Boys; the rebellious upstart sport pricking the pomposity of institutionalised skiing. Its basic problem is that Carpenter – whose independent streak led him to experiment in the late 70s with creating surf and skate equivalent “Snurfer” boards – wasn’t the outsider for long. As the head of what grew into industry giant Burton Snowboards, he doesn’t seem – at least until the film’s closing stretch – wildly charismatic or inspirational. And in some ways his west coast rival Tom Sims is more prescient in hothousing the freestyle ethos that later dominated the sport rather than the more linear, ski-influenced, east-coast tradition Carpenter came out of. At one point, Carpenter – who had purchased the 1960s patent for an early version of the snowboard to annoy Sims – proceeded to enforce his ownership with businesses in the kind of fledgling position Burton once occupied. Totally heinous, dude! It’s telling that he later describes this as a “PR fuck-up”, not an ethical one. Dear Rider doesn’t exactly ignore such tricky aspects, but soft-treading criticisms from Burton employees and understandably partial recollections from Carpenter’s wife Donna (the current CEO) don’t fully weigh the man’s character either. Carpenter died in 2019 and the film’s remit is essentially celebratory – but perhaps split loyalties are why director Fernando Villena never quite hits on a compelling dramatic throughline. Still, the film proceeds down several intriguing cultural gullies, and the snowboarding sequences are pure mainlined beauty. • Dear Rider is released on digital platforms on 24 January.Bernie Sanders has said he may consider supporting primary challengers against colleagues Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the two Democrat holdouts in debate over whether to amend the filibuster to pass voting rights legislation. The progressive Vermont senator told reporters on Tuesday that he believes “there is a very good chance” that Manchin, a West Virginia Democrat, and Sinema, a Democrat from Arizona, will face primary challenges because of their stance on the filibuster. He said home-state voters would be disappointed that the pair have refused to support changing Senate rules to overcome a Republican filibuster against major voting legislation while also balking at the massive, Biden-backed spending and social plan known as Build Back Better. When asked if he would consider backing such primary challengers, Sanders replied, “Well, yeah.” Sanders, an independent who caucuses with Senate Democrats, didn’t elaborate on his comment, but it is unusual for senators to suggest they would be willing to campaign against colleagues from their own party. Sanders’s sentiments also lay bare progressives’ growing frustrations with the more conservative senators, Manchin and Sinema, whom the left has blamed for stalling many of Biden’s top legislative priorities. Manchin and Sinema say they support the legislation but are unwilling to change Senate rules to muscle the legislation through the chamber over Republican objections. With a 50-50 split, Democrats lack the 60 votes needed to overcome the Republican filibuster. Manchin is expected to deliver a floor speech on Wednesday afternoon outlining his position on changing chamber rules to allow voting rights legislation to move forward. Yesterday he countered Sanders’s comments, saying he would not be bothered by a primary challenger. “I’ve been primaried my entire life. That would not be anything new for me,” he said Tuesday, when asked about fellow Democrats urging voters not to back him in a primary. “I’ve never run an election I wasn’t primaried. This is West Virginia, it’s rough and tumble. We’re used to that. So bring it on.” Sanders remains one of the nation’s leading progressive voices after strong Democratic presidential primary bids in 2016 and 2020 – and is still popular enough nationally to potentially affect Senate primaries around the country. Manchin and Sinema are not up for re-election until 2024, but both could face serious primary challengers then. Democratic representative Ruben Gallego of Arizona, who has sharply criticized Sinema for not supporting the voting rights legislation, has not ruled out launching a challenge against her. Manchin and Sinema are also experiencing some external pressure as they resist efforts to change the filibuster to pass voting rights legislation. Emily’s List, the progressive group that backs female candidates who support abortion rights and has deep ties to Democrats, said it would withhold its endorsement from Sinema because of her stance on filibuster reform. “Our mission can only be realized when everyone has the freedom to have their voice heard safely and freely at the ballot box,” Emily’s List’s president, Laphonza Butler, said in a statement released on Tuesday. Naral Pro-Choice America, which supports abortion rights and is also influential in top Democratic circles, released its own statement suggesting it would no longer support or endorse Manchin or Sinema because of their stances on the legislation. The voting rights legislation in question is the Freedom to Vote: John R Lewis Act, which civil rights activists say is vital to safeguarding American democracy as Republican-led states pass new restrictive voting laws. It would make election day a national holiday while ensuring access to early voting and mail-in ballots – both of which have become especially popular during the Covid-19 pandemic. The package also seeks to let the justice department intervene in states with a history of voter interference, among other changes. Associated Press contributed to this reportMicrosoft recently announced plans to purchase Activision Blizzard – one of the world’s largest video game companies – for nearly $70bn, making it the biggest acquisition in tech to date. While big tech always seems to be facing some sort of – usually well-deserved – public criticism lately, the ire has mostly focused on social media. Facebook, YouTube and Twitter executives have all had to testify before Congress about their platforms’ roles in spreading misinformation and being used as organizing tools for events like the January 6 storming of the US Capitol. This is all on top of a history of alleged labor violations, including complaints that traumatized content moderators are paid poverty wages and reports that Black employees face racial discrimination. Video game companies mirror many of the alleged problems of social media yet have long evaded accountability, outside of the occasional attempt to ban a violent video game. This is troubling given the staggering size of the game industry, which produces more revenue than the film and music industries combined and whose biggest hits make more money in days than most entire franchises make in their lifetimes. A series of recent controversies at Activision Blizzard highlights everything wrong with the industry. The latest round of shame began with a 2021 lawsuit filed by the California department of fair employment and housing. The suit alleged that women across the company were “assigned to lower paid and lower opportunity levels” and received lower salaries than male employees for similar work. The suit also alleged a “frat boy” workplace culture in which men got drunk at work and crawled into women’s cubicles to harass them. One woman killed herself on a business trip with a supervisor who brought sex toys and lubricant with him. In early December, workers at Raven Software staged walkouts to protest what they said were the arbitrary firings of a dozen contractors. The next day at least 200 employees at Raven’s parent company, Activision Blizzard, replicated the protest. In response to the pressure, Activision Blizzard agreed to give contractors modest pay raises and paid holidays. This is all despite net earnings of $2bn the previous quarter and one of their games making the company an estimated $5m a day in revenue alone. In 2019, Activision Blizzard fired 800 workers, roughly 8% of its entire workforce, despite record net revenue the year prior. November 2021 saw rebellions from both employees and shareholders after a Wall Street Journal investigation found that Activision Blizzard’s CEO, Bobby Kotick, was aware of and failed to respond to a large number of sexual misconduct allegations, including rape, in the company. The Wall Street Journal also detailed “misconduct allegations against Mr Kotick, including [that] he threatened in a voicemail to have an assistant killed”. These are hardly isolated incidents within the industry. In 2019, over a hundred workers at Riot Games, a prominent video game company, walked out to protest an alleged environment of hostility and sexual harassment. In 2020, women began posting on Twitter about harassment, discrimination and sexual assault at video game industry companies and events; one organizer maintained a record of these stories, which have grown to a few hundred. Ubisoft, the makers of Assassin’s Creed, saw a wave of resignations and firings following stories of abuse, harassment, and the normalization of sexism and overwork within their offices. In 2021, a report by the International Game Developers Association found that 71% of survey participants “perceived inequity towards others based on gender, age, ethnicity, ability, or sexual orientation”. That same survey found that roughly a third of participants had experienced “crunch”. Crunch refers to long, often uncompensated, overtime that results in employees and contractors working between 65 and 80 hours a week. A 2019 investigation by Polygon alleged a culture of fear at Epic Games, the creator of Fortnite, where some employees reportedly worked 100 hours a week. The behavior of these companies is exacerbated by the same growing monopolization afflicting social media. There seem to be fewer and fewer mid-sized video game companies, while larger companies expand and swallow competition. Activision Blizzard itself is a merger of two video game giants. Last year Microsoft’s game division, Xbox, acquired another major player, ZeniMax Media, the parent company of the developers of the Elder Scrolls games. This wave of consolidation, Bloomberg News reports, could “eventually lead to creative stagnation and other symptoms of monopolization, like limited choices and higher prices”. Electronic Arts, the owner of the Madden franchise, is a great example. The company is only able to put out such terrible football games each year because it used its wealth to maintain an exclusive contract with the league, putting any current and potential rivals out of business. Steam, by far the largest online store for PC games, has a chokehold on the market. By 2013, Steam had acquired 75% of the global market for digital PC games. This near monopoly has enabled Steam to get away with the same kind of laissez-faire moderation that allowed white supremacists to fester on Facebook. An Anti-Defamation League investigation found hundreds of neo-Nazi Steam accounts, and many posts directly referencing the Holocaust and celebrating famous fascists and mass killers. Despite Steam’s market domination, it reportedly has a tiny paid moderation team supplemented by 13 volunteer moderators. The video game industry may not yet have the same power as the leading tech juggernauts, but the industry is not to be ignored – especially considering that other titans such as Amazon, Facebook (Meta) and Google (Alphabet) have recently begun moving into the space. There is another world in which video game employees are treated with respect and dignity, those who create the games we love have control over their workplaces and the products they make, and consumers play comfortably without the presence of Nazis. Until that day comes, the industry must be as scrutinized as its more dominant siblings in tech, and it must be regulated and dismantled before it becomes a new kind of vile. Akin Olla is a contributing opinion writer at the GuardianThe UK government has abandoned plans to introduce a law that would have allowed the leader of the Democratic Unionist party to potentially “double-job” in the Stormont assembly while remaining a Westminster MP. Before a debate on the legislation in the Lords on Wednesday afternoon, Boris Johnson told the Commons that an amendment enabling dual mandates was being withdrawn. He was responding to a question from Simon Hoare, the Conservative MP and chair of the Northern Ireland affairs committee, who had described the amendment as “a bad idea”. “The vast majority of people and indeed politicians across Northern Ireland believe that whatever the question, double-jobbing is not the answer. Could I urge my right honourable friend to listen to the majority and ask him not to move the government amendment in the other place later today?” Hoare said. Johnson replied: “I’m grateful to my honourable friend and I’m advised that I think the amendment in question is indeed going to be withdrawn.” The government had faced an avalanche of criticism over the amendment, with five of the six parties in Stormont and the Labour party opposing double-jobbing. The DUP was the only Northern Ireland party to support the move, with its leader, Jeffrey Donaldson, confirming this week that he would stand in his Lagan Valley constituency if selected for May’s local assembly election. On Tuesday Labour called on the government to immediately withdraw the proposal. The shadow Northern Ireland secretary, Peter Kyle, said Labour would vote against it as the government had “clearly failed the sufficient consensus” test among local parties for its passing. Donaldson said on Wednesday that the DUP had been “willing to support this proposal because it would have enabled an MP elected to the assembly to have a transitional period up to the following general election, bringing us into line with other parts of the United Kingdom.” With all parties now on an election footing in Northern Ireland, rivals lost no time putting the boot in. The Ulster Unionist party peer Reg Empey described the government’s decision as “a victory for positive dialogue and engagement”. In a sideswipe at the DUP, he added: “You don’t have to threaten to crash the institutions for unionism to have influence with government. There is another way.” The SDLP leader, Colum Eastwood, described the withdrawal as a “humiliating defeat for [the Northern Ireland secretary] Brandon Lewis and the DUP”. There was “no support for politicians squatting on seats to protect their own political position”, he said.Boris Johnson has announced the end of all Covid measures introduced to combat the Omicron variant – compulsory mask-wearing on public transport and in shops, guidance to work from home and vaccine certificates – from next week. The prime minister also told the Commons that the legal requirement on people with coronavirus to self-isolate would be allowed to lapse when the regulations expired on 24 March, and that date could be brought forward. To cheers from some on the Conservative benches, Johnson announced an immediate end to the need for pupils to wear masks at secondary schools. While Johnson’s statement will please a number of his backbenchers, it prompted concern from teaching and health unions, and from NHS and public health representatives. Responding for Labour, Keir Starmer said he would back the change as long as it was supported by evidence, saying Johnson must “reassure the public he is acting to protect their health, not just his job”. Updating MPs, the prime minister said Covid data was “showing that time and again this government got the toughest decisions right” and that the plan B rules imposed in December could be lifted from next Thursday, the day after a pre-existing review point. Although it had been expected that Johnson would announce the end of work-from-home guidance and the need to show a certificate proving vaccination or a recent negative Covid test to enter some venues, the immediate lifting of mandatory mask rules will come as a surprise to some. “From tomorrow we will no longer require face masks in classrooms and the Department for Education will shortly remove national guidance on their use in communal areas,” Johnson told the Commons. “In the country at large we will continue to suggest the use of face coverings in enclosed or crowded spaces, particularly when you come into contact with people you don’t normally meet, but we will trust the judgment of the British people and no longer criminalise anyone who chooses not to wear one.” Replying to the statement, Starmer said Labour “does not want to see restrictions in place any longer than necessary”. The Labour leader said he would back the relaxation “as long as the science says it is safe”. Teaching unions expressed concern about the sudden change, warning that many headteachers in England were still seeing widespread disruption to education owing to Covid. Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: “While the trend amongst secondary aged children is down, it is however uncertain, due to the short time schools have been back since the Christmas holidays, that this trend will continue. Such uncertainty could lead to a pronounced risk of increased disruption with children and staff having to isolate.” Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS trusts, warned that there were still nearly 20,000 Covid-19 patients in hospital “at a time when the NHS is already at full stretch and contending with the toughest winter on record”, and some regions were still seeing increased infection numbers. Pat Cullen, the general secretary of the Royal College of Nursing, said ministers would “regret sending the wrong signal to the public for political expediency”. Unison, the UK’s largest health union, warned that ditching plan B “in one fell swoop” risked jeopardising progress made. Christina McAnea, the union’s general secretary, said: “Rather than allowing a free-for-all, ministers should be urging caution and encouraging continued mask-wearing on transport, in public places and in schools, where it can still make a real difference.” A director of public health at a city in the north of England said they were also concerned at the move. “This feels like more of a political decision than a decision based on the evidence and the science, and it could be quite London-centric,” they said. “We’re seeing a reduction in cases, but they’re still incredibly high. Taking out all these measures does feel risky. And if our focus is keeping kids in schools as much as possible, this may result in more disruption to education. I worry the decision has not been made for the right reasons.” The changes apply only to England, as Covid restrictions, as part of health policy, are a devolved matter.Though their relationship on the international calendar means the two have always had a connection, the 2023 Women’s World Cup looms particularly large over this year’s AFC Women’s Asian Cup, which kicksoff on Thursday evening when China take on Taiwan at the Mumbai Football Arena. The tournament serves both as the forum to crown a continental champion and for World Cup qualification. Expansion from 24 to 32 nations at next year’s global showpiece event means that five of the 12 competitors in India this month will secure direct qualification, while another two will be able to book places in a 10-team intercontinental play-off for one of three more berths. While the likes of Japan or South Korea are virtually assured of qualification under the new format, the expansion – along with the withdrawal of North Korea from this year’s cycle – serves to open the door to others. Nations such as Taiwan can dream of a first World Cup appearance since the inaugural event in 1991 or young stars such as Indonesia’s 20-year-old attacker Zahra Muzdalifah targeting a grander stage. Automatic qualification for 2023 as one of its two co-hosts means Australian stakes in the coming tournament, superficially, have been removed; the Matildas have effectively been given a free hit at continental success. Yet in place of this short-term jeopardy looms a need to address a growing sense of unease surrounding the trajectory of the squad. “Off the back of our Olympic campaign, coming fourth, I think there’s a little bit of expectation for us to win this Asian Cup,” said Matildas defender Ellie Carpenter. “We should win this Asian Cup. That expectation is there and it’s good for us, we want to win tournaments, we want to win trophies.” After earning some respite from the cynicism that had marked the early stages of Tony Gustavsson’s tenure thanks to their Olympic run, a lack of progress in addressing the side’s ongoing issues in subsequent friendlies has prompted fresh concern. The US’s visit to Australia in November for a series Gustavsson labelled a “dress rehearsal” for the 2023 World Cup final was, off the field, a fine showcase of the excitement surrounding the Matildas and a demonstration of why international women’s football is the hottest ticket in town; the 36,109 fans that packed into a sodden Stadium Australia for the first game of the series set a new standalone record in Australia. Yet on the pitch, the reigning world champions – despite fielding an understrength side itself undergoing a generational transition – underlined that the defensive and midfield problems first exposed by Germany and the Netherlands in April remained frustratingly present at year’s end. A 3-0 defeat and 1-1 draw in the two games marked the conclusion of a 2021 calendar in which the Matildas won just three of their 16 games and had shipped 37 goals, at 2.31 a game. It must be acknowledged that 24 of those 37 goals were conceded in friendlies in which the coaching staff expressly prioritised the pursuit of experimentation in approach, the blooding of young talent and the development of a mindset that comes with regularly taking one’s lumps against the world’s best sides. Gustavsson reiterated that, though his sides would always play to win, results were a secondary consideration during this nuanced period and that, while not ideal, the short-term pain would pay off in the long run. Moves such as the deployment of 17-year-old Jessika Nash in the centre of defence against the US in the absence of first-choices Alanna Kennedy and Clare Polkinghorne were deemed necessary in the face of a potentially catastrophic lack of depth in youth exposed by a Football Australia study delivered just before Gustavsson’s tenure commenced. This approach lessened the stakes associated with poor friendly performances, but it also significantly raised them for the Asian Cup. When results are placed low on a side’s hierarchy of needs, it can become difficult to determine if a side is going through the necessary pain of finding a bedrock of future success or attempting to erect a foundation on shifting sands of mistaken assumptions and misplaced confidence. To glean reassurances that it’s the former, a noticeable uptick needs to be demonstrated when, to adopt the parlance of the Swedish coach, the side flicks the switch to transition from “preparation mode” to “performance mode”. “When we’re in preparation mode I want to make sure that as many players as possible get the opportunity to experience the Matildas’ environment,” Gustavsson said in announcing his squad for the tournament. “We’ve had 58 players and 13 debutants and that’s what we need to do when we’re in preparation mode. When we go into performance mode it’s all about what’s the best team possible to go and create results in a tournament.” In a practical sense, the indication of this ideological transition has no better example than the return of Aivi Luik to the 23-player squad. The ever-dependable 36-year-old, who had previously retired from international football, is not a pick for the future but should help deliver results now. Gustavsson hinted when announcing his squad that India 2022 has transitioned from being a part of a broader strategy to something approaching a must-win for Football Australia. The Matildas begin their campaign on Friday evening against Indonesia, before facing off against the Philippines on Monday and concluding group play against Thailand late on Thursday. The presence of former coach Alen Stajčić at the helm of the Philippines will add a layer of intrigue, but comfortable progression to the knockout stages should be straightforward. From there, the spotlight will intensify as the Matildas seek to prove they are on a path that can deliver on the grandest stage.We’re all on a never-ending pursuit to perfect the art of good shuteye. Theories abound, so it is easy to find yourself in a maze of advice, mindfulness techniques and mum’s advice about the magic of a cup of warm milk at night. But one tactic I found ticked all my boxes: reading for just six minutes before you go to sleep. Relaxing your brain in a way that Netflix before bed just can’t, this simple trick has both improved my sleep and put an end to my reading slump. Back in 2009 the University of Sussex conducted research that found reading a book reduced stress levels by 68%, outperforming other activities like going for a walk or having a cup of tea. Researcher and cognitive neuropsychologist Dr David Lewis explained that this is because sustained reading is more than a distraction and instead offers the chance to be engrossed in the author’s imagination and enter an altered state of consciousness that relaxes the brain. Six minutes sounds easy – and it is – so I’ve employed it as my pre-sleep routine. Not only has the theory proved itself for me, but nine times out of 10, I read for much longer, steadily making a dent in the toppling pile of books on my bedside table. In the time I’ve taken up this habit, waking up on the wrong side of the bed has been easily attributed to nights when I have not turned just a few pages. With so many of us glued to a screen before bed out of habit, bingeing a TV show or scrolling through social media, the best thing about this strategy is that anyone can do six minutes. Fighting off the feeling of being too tired, the reward is rediscovering the escapism and inspiration reading gives us. When we hit a reading roadblock, maybe we don’t always need a page-turner to get back into books. Maybe all we need is a routine.On Thursday the December labour force figures will come out, quite likely showing good news. The latest payroll job index released on Wednesday covers the same period – up to the week ending 18 December – and it revealed better numbers than in November: If the graph does not display please click here While the range of numbers from the best performing state or territory (WA), to the worst (ACT), remains relatively large, overall things looked to be returning to normal after the lockdowns in the second half of 2021 in NSW, Victoria and the ACT. And to be honest, even with those lockdowns, the job market in 2021 was generally much better than the annus horribilis of 2020: If the graph does not display please click here And so it is quite likely that the December unemployment rate will stay nicely below 5% and we can take a deep breath and relax, realising the worst is behind us. Or maybe not. You see the December labour force figures, like the latest job index numbers, will come from a survey done in the first two weeks of December. So let us check what the Covid case numbers were like then compared with now: If the graph does not display please click here In those first two weeks of December Omicron was decidedly on people’s minds, but the numbers were yet to takeoff. It is a reminder that whatever you may hear about pushing through the virus, things remain so fluid that nearly two years into this pandemic the bureau of statistics is yet to attempt to provide trend numbers for its data because numbers are subject to changes from week to week. The bureau does not even bother to provide seasonally adjusted figures for our international arrivals and departures because even that measure no longer makes sense. And perhaps there is no greater data point for showing just how far we are from normal than the number of people visiting Australia. In November last year the number of people who had arrived in Australia for a short-term stay surged to 20,860, up from just 4,310 people in October. And while a 383% rise may sound big: If the graph does not display please click here In November 2019, when no one had any worries about pandemics and travel was easy, 815,910 people came here for a short-term stay, so we are 98% below that level. Little wonder that yesterday prime minister Scott Morrison and treasurer Josh Frydenberg announced they would be providing a rebate on travel visas for students arriving here over the next eight weeks. And Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk announced that international travellers to that state will no longer need to isolate so long as they are double vaccinated. But the problem is that both announcements came on the day that the US government advised its citizens “Do not travel to Australia due to Covid-19-related travel restrictions”. That is certainly going to make the latest campaign by Tourism Australia that the Morrison government is allocating an extra $3m to, a tad more tricky. The need for travellers is of course vital. The lack of international tourists is horrendous for the hospitality industry: If the graph does not display please click here In December – and remember that was when things looked better – there were still 10% fewer jobs in accommodation than there were when the pandemic hit in March 2020. While air transport jobs, the worst hit sector in the entire economy, were down a full third. But on the other side of the ledger is the damage the lack of backpackers and international students does to the supply of workers. The halt of international university students especially has seen the number of people in the labour force aged 20-24 fall by approximately 5% – or about 90,000 people: If the graph does not display please click here It’s not that there is no work for those in their early 20s – in fact a higher percentage of those in their early 20s are working now than in the past decade: If the graph does not display please click here But what the government is after is labour that will work in the regions and in jobs with little prospects and often fewer protections. Morrison announced the government will also rebate the visa application fee for backpackers. “My message to them is ‘come on down, come on down now …’,” he said. He suggested that they “join our workforce and help us in our agricultural sector, in our hospitality sector, and so many of the other parts of the economy”. But while it is clear there are regions across the country suffering labour shortages given there are also about 105,000 unemployed people in their early 20s, the concern is not about the push to get more backpackers working here, but that the push is for workers who are more likely to be exploited. While the labour force figures and other economic data are yet to return to normal, what must not return is the plethora of wage theft and abuse directed to those here on short-term visas, all done in the name of curing labour shortages. Greg Jericho writes on economics for Guardian AustraliaAustralia should build its own network of Earth observation satellites to reduce reliance on foreign satellite data that could be compromised by environmental or geopolitical stressors, scientists say. The recommendation is included in a national 10-year plan for Australian space science, launched on Thursday by the Australian Academy of Science. Prof Stuart Phinn, director of the Remote Sensing Research Centre at the University of Queensland, said Earth observation satellites were important for weather forecasting and predicting and responding to natural disasters such as the recent volcano eruption in Tonga. “All of our crop production, our food production and grazing also depends on information from satellites for a range of purposes. Our defence forces in their operational planning and responses … depend on information from satellite systems,” Phinn said at a media briefing. The field of space science also has applications in environmental management and GPS navigation and timing technologies. Presently, Australia relies on Japanese geostationary satellites for weather information, as well as data from US and European Space Agency satellites, Phinn said. According to the national plan, “there is no guarantee all necessary data sources will always be freely available … This imposes a sovereign risk, especially if Australia is regarded as an unequal contributor to the global [Earth observation] community.” Building and operating satellites locally would ensure Australia’s independence, Phinn said, adding: “We can contribute back globally as well.” The decadal plan also recommends establishing a national program of space weather research. It warns that Australia’s current capacity “provides around a one-hour warning of major space weather events” that could knock out global aviation and communication. Solar flares – intense explosions in the sun’s atmosphere – can trigger magnetic storms and disrupt satellites, radio communications and radar operations. Emeritus Prof Fred Menk, chair of the AAS’s national committee for space and radio science, said: “I can guarantee that at some point, there’ll be a catastrophic space weather event that will fundamentally damage our infrastructure. “I can’t tell you if that’s going to be next week or in 100 years, and that is because we don’t have the science which allows us to make those sort of predictions accurately.” “What we can do is we can grow our science capability in Australia,” Menk said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The plan also recommends establishing space science as a national research priority, and investment in an ongoing national space program. Menk predicted there would be about 100 missions to the moon in the next decade, as well as other planetary bodies, calling it “a really exciting time to get into interplanetary science, and to see what we can learn about the solar system”.Unprecedented Covid cases in Australia have coincided with surging demand for pulse oximeters, as hundreds of thousands of people manage their infections at home. At-home care guidelines for Covid-19 suggest using pulse oximeters – portable devices worn on the finger – to provide a measurement of oxygen in the bloodstream. Low oxygen saturation levels may be a warning sign of worsening Covid, and people at higher risk of having their condition deteriorate – such as those who are over 65, pregnant, immunocompromised or Indigenous – may be provided with an oximeter by a local health service. But a run on pulse oximeters has made buying them difficult, with experts saying they aren’t a necessary device for everyone who is Covid positive. What is a pulse oximeter used for? President of the Australian Society of Anaesthetists, Dr Andrew Miller, said pulse oximeters were reliable devices often used during anaesthesia and in intensive care. “It’s a bit like a thermometer in that … it’s something that can be used at home by a layperson and get a meaningful result out of it.” The device, which clips painlessly over a fingertip, measures blood oxygen saturation and pulse rate. It works using lights and a sensor that measures the colour of blood, which is brighter red when there is more oxygen in it. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Cheaper oximeters display the measurements as figures, while more expensive models also display a waveform of the pulse in the finger. Some phones and smart watches have a pulse oximeter function, but the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners has warned that these “are not accurate and should not be used”. Oximeters can be a useful addition to proper medical care, but not a replacement, Miller said. “We would encourage that they only be used in the context of someone who’s getting clinical support to be at home by either a state hospital-in-the-home service or a general practitioner.” In the absence of an oximeter, breathing rate can be a good proxy, Miller said. “We’re normally breathing about 12 [breaths a minute]. People who are breathing over about 15 to 20 respirations a minute … we start to get concerned.” Dr Suzi Nou, an anaesthetist in Melbourne who has been managing Covid patients in the community said: “If you’re having trouble breathing, if it’s an effort to do things like walk up the stairs, if you’re having trouble talking in a complete sentence and that makes you breathless, if you’ve noticed your lips or fingernail beds are going a little bit blue – they would be very strong signs that there’s not enough oxygen in their body.” Are they accurate? For those who are able to source a pulse oximeter: an oxygen saturation of 95% or above is the typical baseline for a healthy person breathing at rest. According to Australian guidelines for people with Covid a saturation level between 92% and 94% at rest is a sign of moderate disease. “In a non-pandemic world, if I had a patient who is otherwise fit and healthy and a bad chest or viral chest infection with saturations of 93%, I’d want to be looking into that,” Nou said, adding that people with lung conditions such as emphysema or chronic bronchitis may have a baseline level lower than 94%. “Less than 92%, that is concerning: call an ambulance. Definitely seek medical attention,” she said. There are certain factors that will help to improve the accuracy of a reading. The devices are affected by movement – such as coughing fits, as well as poor circulation in the fingers. People with acrylic or gel nail polish should rotate the oximeter on their fingertip – so that it clips over the skin instead of the nail. Concerns have also been raised about the accuracy of the devices in people with darker skin pigmentation. Earlier this month, the Therapeutic Goods Administration warned that pulse oximeters could overestimate oxygen levels in people with darker skin tones – meaning that low oxygen levels had the potential to be missed in these populations. “If a state health system was rolling these things out, they need to make sure that they’re using one that’s been validated across ethnicities,” Miller said. Nou said the jury was still out on how significant an effect skin tone had on oximeter accuracy. “I do a lot of work in developing countries with people with darker skin pigment, and I haven’t been too concerned about the accuracy of them,” she said. “The monitoring is there to assist your … observation of the patient. So if I think someone is looking like they’re having trouble breathing and the monitor tells me it’s a great number, I’m always more likely to believe the patient.” Can I still get one? Nou said anecdotally people had been struggling to source them for personal use. “I’ve had some patients who have been able to get hold of them, so it is variable,” she said. A spokesperson for the Pharmacy Guild of Australia said members had not reported any noticeable uptick in demand for oximeters since the start of the pandemic. But only one of 10 chemists Guardian Australia contacted in Victoria and New South Wales said they had any in stock. One pharmacy worker at a major chain in Melbourne said they had been out of stock for two weeks and were not sure when a resupply would occur. Another said the products were “quite popular at the moment” and that they hadn’t had any available since Christmas. “Everyone’s been trying to get them,” said a third, while a fourth said their usual wholesale supplier was out of stock.It’s not easy to quantify the cost of the Omicron wave to Carolyn Campbell-McLean, but here’s a good starting point: $1,300. That is how much she says she has spent on rapid antigen tests since Australia’s PCR testing system began to falter. There have been other costs too: Campbell-McLean paid the price for the December PCR testing debacle when she couldn’t find a Covid-negative carer to help her get into bed on New Year’s Eve; and she has not left the home she shares with her husband, who also has a physical disability, since 15 December due to the spike in cases. But the cost to Campbell-McLean just to keep herself safe is perhaps neatly summed up in that figure of $1,300. “I’ve spent $1,300 of my own money on Rat tests so I can make sure my carers do them before they come in,” Campbell-McLean said. “The NDIS has not allowed me to claim that money. If I was living in a group home, the staff at the group home and their agencies that runs those homes are … able to claim this money. “People who support ourselves in our own home … are not able to claim that. I think that’s really unfair.” Campbell-McLean, 47, lives in western Sydney with spinal muscular atrophy, a form of muscular dystrophy, and sleeps with a Bipap machine, which is a type of ventilator. She cannot blow her nose by herself, nor cough. Last month, when Scott Morrison pushed back against calls for universal rapid antigen tests because Australia was at “another stage of this pandemic … where we can’t just go round and make everything free”, it’s unclear whether he meant people like Campbell-McLean were expected to spend hundreds of dollars on the tests. But, according to Campbell-McLean, the current policy settings means that is her reality. Campbell-McLean said she needed the tests to safely allow her support workers into her home. And without those workers, she cannot get out of bed in the morning, get dressed, have a shower or go to the toilet. The prime minister has also differentiated between aged care and health settings, where free tests are available, and so-called “casual” uses of rapid antigen tests, which he’s argued are “what the private market is for”. Where people with disability like Campbell-McLean are supposed to fit into that picture is unclear, though a department spokesperson indicated increased access to rapid antigen tests for the disability sector was being worked on. Campbell-McLean is not alone. Guardian Australia is aware of another family who has already spent about $1,000 on rapid tests to provide to staff caring for a man with motor-neurone disease. “I’ve taken what I think is personal responsibility,” Campbell-McLean said. “I’ve stopped going out to things, and not putting myself at risk. But I can’t survive without support workers coming in and helping me go to the toilet. “Everyday they report numbers and they say, ‘That person had an underlying medical condition.’ That doesn’t make it OK that they died.” Campbell-McLean’s team of seven support workers take a rapid tests before most, though not all, shifts. She will normally have three to four care visits a day from different workers. Campbell-McLean noted she was lucky to have obtained as many rapid tests as she did, and that she had the savings to buy them. Some she bought online, though they haven’t all arrived, while a local chemist also provided what Campbell-McLean called “his personal supply”. She said she expected this supply to be used up by the end of the month. Before PCR testing was overwhelmed, Campbell-McLean’s support workers underwent those tests regularly, but the long wait times – both to get tested and to receive the results – have made this unworkable. April Purdon, 19, is one of Campbell-McLean’s support workers and considers her a friend. “It’s been hard, we’ve gotten very close over the time,” Purdon said of the past two years. Ideally, Purdon said, rapid tests would easily accessible, or even free, so the support workers wouldn’t have to ration them. “I’d take one before every shift, so I wouldn’t have to worry about the stress or the guilt,” Purdon said. “[Campbell-McLean and her husband] are worried about it, and that makes me worried … That’s the thing, home support: you’re really bringing it into their home, their safe place.” The chief executive of Muscular Dystrophy NSW, Charlotte Sangster, who employs Campbell-McLean, warned people with muscular dystrophy had a restricted lung capacity and were “particularly vulnerable” to a “really poor outcome” if they caught Covid. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Campbell-McLean summed up the situation this way: “[The doctors have] said don’t get it. My lungs are a third the capacity of an average person. “That’s why I am on a ventilator at night. I can’t independently blow my nose, I need assistance to cough. I don’t want to get the virus, I don’t feel I would do well with it.” Advocates argued Campbell-McLean’s situation was emblematic of frustrations within the disability community that too often it had been forgotten in the pandemic response. Campbell-McLean is among the estimated 18% of NDIS participants excluded from the government’s scheme to provide 10 free rapid tests over three months. That’s because she does not hold an eligible concession card. “There is a subset of people here that don’t necessarily fit the pension group, who need to have enough rapid antigen tests to keep themselves alive and healthy and don’t necessarily have the funds to do it,” said Serena Ovens, the chief executive of the Physical Disability Council of NSW, who described the situation as “mind-boggling”. “I think the government needs to stump up.” The national disability insurance agency has limited its offering of rapid antigen tests to participants and providers in supported independent living, often called group homes. Of the 480,000 NDIS participants in the scheme, about 25,000 participants are able to claim the costs of those tests. Meanwhile, the peak body for disability providers has had its calls to gain access to the national stockpile of rapid tests, as occurs in aged care, rebuffed. The opposition NDIS spokesperson, Bill Shorten, said rapid tests should be free. He described Carolyn’s story as “heartbreaking”. A department of social services spokesperson said the department was “working with the department of health to support access to rapid antigen tests for the disability sector, as the supply increases”. A spokesperson for the NDIS minister, Linda Reynolds, pointed to recent announcements in NSW and Victoria to “supply rapid antigen tests to disability settings”. The Victorian government announcement referred broadly to “essential workers” in disability services, but the NSW statement referred only to those in supported independent living, which is separate to Campbell-McLean’s situation. The spokesperson added there were free PCR tests in state and territory clinics “with significant reductions in testing times across all jurisdictions”. An NDIA spokesperson said the agency continued to “review measures relating to Covid-19 on an ongoing basis to determine what changes are needed to safely deliver supports and services”, in accordance with “advice from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee”.I was initially anxious about kayaking around Australia’s busiest waterway. I cycle to work and Sydney’s roads can be hateful – why would the harbour be any different? While I have kayaked before, I still consider myself a beginner. It takes me back to memories of paddling till my arms fell off at school camp, or capsizing friends on a lazy river as cub scouts. Kayaking as an adult was more of a “fake it till you make it” proposition. Fortunately, I am in good hands with Sophie Morgan, whose company OzPaddle runs kayaking tours around the city. Morgan says that, in many ways, kayaking is a lot like cycling. With one key difference: less traffic. “There are very few places I wouldn’t recommend to kayak,” she says, adding that in Sydney anywhere east of the Harbour Bridge is ideal, as beyond there the waters do get busier and narrower. As we set out from the Andrew (Boy) Charlton pool, on the eastern side of the Botanic Gardens, the crowded city seems to disappear behind a canopy of trees. Then, as we paddle our way around the bend at Mrs Macquarie’s Chair, the Harbour Bridge and Opera House make a slow, dramatic reveal – framed by towering skyscrapers and blue water. The waters around here, even all the way up to the Opera House, are relatively empty, with only the occasional ferry pushing a small wave from afar. Morgan has been taking kayaking tours out on to Sydney harbour for 12 years now, and she is still energised by the view. “I go to the same place every time and I do not get bored.” The former Iron Woman is a good advertisement for her chosen sport’s fitness benefits. “You’ll get a six-pack,” she jokes as she corrects my paddling technique. The key is to hold the paddle with your arms at 90 degree angles, reaching forward as you paddle so you dip only the fin into the water. By holding the paddle properly, and avoiding pulling past your own body, you get maximal propulsion for minimal effort. Not no effort though. Kayaking is great resistance training for surfers and swimmers, Morgan says. It is also good exercise for those with bad knees – she knows kayakers who keep paddling into their 80s. For beginners, a class like hers, which runs for two hours and is priced at $125 per person, is a good way to learn the ropes. But once you’ve got a handle on the right way to paddle, you can hire a kayak on plenty of large, flat bodies of water around Australia, often for as little as $20 an hour. Morgan does warn beginners off double kayaks though. Even if you plan to paddle alongside someone else, “the divorce rate is lower in singles”. When it comes to buying equipment, Morgan says you get what you pay for. “A good paddle is going to make a lot of difference.” Longer, lighter and stronger gear helps conserve energy, but it comes at a cost. If you are looking to get your own kit, a kayak can cost you as little as $200, or as much as $5,000. Meanwhile paddles can go for as low as $15 and as high as $400; with life jackets as an added expense. Cheaper equipment tends to be shorter and heavier, Morgan says, forcing kayakers to put in more work. As for the best time of day to set out, she says “early morning – it’s always better”. While the middle of the day is both hotter and windier, at dawn it tends to be “more peaceful”. At the end of our paddle together, I’m surprised to find no trace of that school camp feeling. My arms aren’t falling off – instead I’m energised and ready to take on the day. Timing is important, but technique is everything. This article was supported by Destination NSW and activity was provided by Sophie Morgan from OzPaddle Sydney.Since its debut in 1993, the Triple J Hottest 100 has become a minor national obsession: the subject of intense scrutiny, widespread coverage and constant social media chatter. This year’s countdown – which will air on Australia’s youth broadcaster this Saturday – is no different: with a Justin Bieber and Kid Laroi collaboration tipped as a favourite to win, along with Olivia Rodrigo and Billie Eilish, conversations about Triple J’s playlisting of mainstream pop music have been reignited – while last year’s firestorm over an allegedly ageist tweet from the station still looms in the minds of many. If you haven’t been paying much attention over the past 12 months, or need a refresher before tuning in, here’s a form guide to help you through Saturday’s countdown. The sure things There’s a pleasing – or, depending on who you ask, galling – consistency to the habits of Hottest 100 voters, despite the music that gets released each year. For example, Eilish, winner of the 2019 Hottest 100 with Bad Guy, put out an album last year, so you can expect its biggest single, title track Happier Than Ever, to appear somewhere in the upper echelons of the countdown. Transformative and vaguely novelty Like A Version covers tend to do well too – for instance, DMA’s cover of Cher’s Believe (No 6 in 2016), and Alex Lahey’s cover of My Chemical Romance’s Welcome to the Black Parade (No 83 in 2020) – so it won’t be a surprise if the Wiggles’ cover of Tame Impala’s Elephant works its way up there. The website 100 Warm Tunas, which analyses Hottest 100 voting data from social media posts, actually has the kids’ group tipped for No 1. And perennial Hottest 100 favourites like Gang of Youths, Rüfüs Du Sol, Ball Park Music and Dope Lemon each released a swag of singles in 2021 – so keep an ear out for each of them. The (not-so) underdogs Nearly a decade after Taylor Swift’s Shake It Off was banned from entry into the countdown, it would seem that Triple J’s purview has changed – a lot. This year, the Hottest 100 is expected to feature an onslaught of Swift-level pop megastars of the kind you’d ordinarily hear on commercial radio. Laroi and Bieber’s collaboration Stay is tipped to take out the countdown, with tracks by behemoth Rodrigo, e-girl queen Doja Cat, and Eilish not far behind. 100 Warm Tunas also includes tracks by Halsey, Peach PRC, Lil Nas X, Bruno Mars and Lizzo on its prediction list. It’s easy to balk at this pop invasion, but you could argue that the countdown has always favoured mainstream stars: many past winners – including Glass Animals, Eilish, Kendrick Lamar, Angus &amp; Julia Stone, Mumford &amp; Sons, Kings of Leon and Muse – were all already major-label stars with huge international fanbases when they topped their respective countdowns. Despite the alternative veneer, their cheques were still being drawn from the same well as Swift’s. There’s plenty to be said about whether Triple J’s centrist shift is a good or a bad thing but at the very least it’s sure to be an interesting countdown. And if Laroi, a Kamilaroi rapper, does take out the top spot, it’ll be a historic one, too: he’ll be the first First Nations musician to ever reach No 1. The maybes Lorde, who made the top 10 in 2013 and 2017, likely won’t crack it this year, after her long-awaited third album Solar Power arrived to an overwhelmingly tepid response. Hottest 100 staples Hilltop Hoods didn’t release anything last year, so they’ll be a notable absence too – as will Flume for the same reason, after featuring in the last two consecutive top fives, he won’t be going for the hat-trick; he didn’t drop last year either. The absence of these heavy hitters, though, means that there could be some room for someone who had a massive 2021 to sneak into the top 20 – like, say, Genesis Owusu or Amyl and the Sniffers, who each released superlative records in the past 12 months. The talking points In September last year, Triple J’s Twitter account – which posts in a meme-y, ironic tone – tweeted “did it hurt? when you aged out of the youth radio station”. Backlash ensued from a number of listeners and musicians, including Ainslie Wills, who said that she stopped receiving rotation on Triple J once she turned 30; music journalist and editor Poppy Reid, who pointed out that there was a broader systemic and gendered issue at play; and Jack Colwell, who said that he was once told by the station he was “too old” to be played. Although an undeniably bad look, it might not have been an altogether bad move for the station: it’s no secret that, while its national mandate is to serve 18- to 24-year-olds, its audience tends to skew a little older, and there’s a chance that this mildly scorched-earth post signalled a shift. Still, perhaps the countdown’s winner will be the true judge of where Triple J sits in 2022: with Laroi-stanning Gen Z, or Wiggles-nostalgist millennials. Triple J’s Hottest 100 will be broadcast from midday on Saturday 22 JanuaryIt’s hard to know the moment Australia’s response to Covid turned from purposeful to a parody, but it was probably when economics trumped health advice. First there was the mid-December declaration by Dominic Perrottet to leave mask use to “personal responsibility” and discourage curbs on the movement of the unvaccinated just as the Omicron variant took off. Then there was Wednesday’s sirenic call by prime minister Scott Morrison to the 150,000 international students with visas. Not because we want them to be here studying courses they pay over the odds for. Rather, it would be “incredibly helpful” if they filled “critical workforce shortages”, not least in “healthcare, aged care, those types of sectors”, the PM said. BYO RATs? Now the NSW government is considering waiving “responsible service of alcohol” certificates as a priority because what we lack most right now is sufficient booze flowing in our pubs. Any humour, though, would probably be viewed darkly by Sydney paramedics who recently picked up a 93-year-old woman with a broken hip who had been waiting 13 hours for an ambulance. Or the surgeons at the city’s Liverpool hospital who cancelled cancer operations this week because there wasn’t a spare ICU bed if patients suddenly required one. With economics in the ascendancy, policymakers are relying on the health sector bending but not breaking. Draconian threats of retribution against those who speak out may help to cauterise the public debate, leaving empty supermarket shelves or deported tennis stars to dominate headlines rather than the images or appeals of patients or carers in distress. Our political leaders may also take heart from early signs that the hit to consumer and business sentiment from what independent economist Saul Eslake calls Australia’s “voluntary lockdown” will be short lived. True, confidence in January may be the lowest in 15 months – and at a nadir not seen in this typically cheery month since 1992 – according a ANZ-Roy Morgan survey. But another reading of sentiment by the Westpac-Melbourne Institute, released on Wednesday, points to only a modest retreat so far, although anxiety gathered pace during the period covered by the survey last week. Eslake says there’s few hard numbers since Omicron really took off. Still, Google and Apple mobility data signal people are sharply reducing their movements, presumably as they try to avoid being infected or because they or close contacts have been, and they are restricted from venturing to work or to shop. That’s bad news for the hospitality and tourism trade. “The economic impact to the extent that it’s going to get measured is probably bigger on the supply side than on demand side,” he says. “The economic consequences of people not being able to go to work are probably greater than the impact of people being afraid of going out and spending.” Households have become adept at finding ways to work and spend from home, which should provide some economic ballast. So, too, will their hoard of some $220bn in savings accumulated during the past two years. Those supply impacts are not to be sniffed at. According to the US Federal Reserve, that nation’s central bank, Omicron varies from previous Covid waves in its rattling of supply chains, stoking inflationary rather than deflationary pressures. Similar effects are playing out in Australia, Eslake says. Moves to fill our staff shortages by cutting Covid-positive isolation times from 14 days to seven and soon – if comments from the Morrison government are any guide – to five will increase the risk of further spreading the virus. “I don’t have the [epidemiological] expertise to know whether that’s the optimal trade-off or not, but it obviously is a trade-off,” he said. Richard Denniss, chief economist at The Australia Institute, is more blunt. “Letting people that are at high risk of having or spreading the infection return to work quickly helps the labour supply this week, and harms the labour supply in the coming weeks when it spreads,” Denniss said. “So this is the definition of short-termism.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It’s also reverse of the health advice that governed Australia’s pandemic response for the first 18 months. “We are so desperate at the moment, that we are willing to trade off an extra nurse today or an extra truck driver today at the cost of three or more absent in a week or two’s time,” he says. “So, we now have a Covid-induced labour supply problem.” The Doherty Institute modelling presented to national cabinet in late 2021 warned of 200,000 cases a day in a worst-case scenario, according to reports last month. The modelling assumed only baseline public health safety measures and partial contract tracing, the Sydney Morning Herald reported at the time. The institute is awaiting commonwealth government approval to release their assessment. Doctors warn privately the return to school of children from the end of next week – although Queensland has delayed the restart for two weeks – will contribute to another wave of patients. Not many will be children – although most remain unvaccinated – but rather infected parents, grandparents or teachers. “Even if there’s enough teachers for school to start in the first week, on current trajectory, three weeks after it starts, they’ll be very significant absentees and, you know, everyone presumably is going to be surprised when that happens,” Denniss says. When governments ditched health advice, the public might have assumed they had readied carefully honed policies to accommodate the surge in hospital cases, or had fallback measures to flatten that famous infections curve if need. Instead, what’s being revealed “is the opposite of planning”, Denniss bemoans. “Hope is not a strategy.”As the number of Covid cases in Australia has become impossible to accurately determine using test and case numbers alone, epidemiologists say it is crucial to undertake population-wide surveys to understand both current levels of infection and cumulative past infections. John Kaldor, a professor of epidemiology at University of New South Wales’s Kirby Institute, and his colleagues at other organisations conducted seroprevalence surveys in 2020 and 2021. They are hoping to conduct repeat surveys this year to better understand the spread of the Omicron outbreak. “Antibodies can fade, but people probably have some detectable antibodies at least six months after infection,” he said. “We are hoping to conduct some repeat surveys during the course of this year, but there are a range of approvals we need first.” Serology testing involves taking a sample of a person’s blood to look for antibodies against the Covid virus. The presence of the antibodies indicates a person has been previously infected, vaccinated or both. By taking a large enough number of blood samples from a diverse cross-section of people, this data can be extrapolated to provide a snapshot of the percentage of a population who have been infected and have some immunity. Kaldor said it would also be important to follow the UK and conduct regular random household surveys to ask people about their recent symptoms, and to undertake home swab testing. This would also detect asymptomatic cases and provide a clearer understanding of current infections. Fiona Russell, a professor of paediatrics and epidemiology at the University of Melbourne, said seroprevalence studies cannot be done “overnight” and there were particular challenges in collecting a representative sample in Australia. “There’s practical, logistical and feasibility issues around having a representative sample. For example, making sure you include people who live in regional areas, and then getting consent, collecting their blood … To do all of that you need funding,” she said. “It takes time, but it can and must be done.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In the meantime, Russell believes states with widespread Covid cases, including Queensland, Victoria and New South Wales should conduct mini “rapid” seroprevalence surveys. “It would involve examining blood that has already been taken and stored, for example from people who might have come into hospital for an operation, or had their blood taken for another reason,” Russell said. “You could do it by postcode, or by age, to get a quick look at what is happening in a certain age group or area.” Seroprevalence surveys can help estimate the level of immunity in a population, but are different to determining the incidence of the virus – that is, the rate of new cases of the virus being detected each day or week. When Australia had low case numbers and widely available and accessible testing with fast results, it was easier to estimate with higher confidence the number of people with an active case of the virus at any one time. While cases are always underestimated – even during small outbreaks – the sheer number of people now unable to be tested, asymptomatic people, or tests never being analysed in the laboratory due to lengthy delays from the time of collection means overall test numbers and positive cases from those tests are less accurate in understanding incidence in the population. Nonetheless, Kaldor said efforts were being made to provide estimates of incidence by using a mixture of data, surveys of testing behaviour, and modelling tools. Key pieces of information will be the proportion of people undertaking rapid antigen tests and actually reporting their results. “The epidemiological and modelling community is working on methods to make adjustments to correct for levels of testing in different parts of the population, and how to do that is still an area of discussion,” he said.Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel lamented the egregiously low vaccination rate in the US on Tuesday evening, citing a study that found it had the second lowest rate (66%) of the 15 countries tracked. “It’s almost like people here are getting bad information from someplace, you know?” Kimmel said. “The only country below us is Russia (49%), which is kinda nice – our countries haven’t been on the same page since like Rocky fought Drago.” The survey also found that 6% of Americans say they’re “planning” to get the vaccine. “OK, when?” Kimmel wondered. “The vaccine’s been out for more than a year! How busy could you be, really?” Meanwhile, as part of its evolving Covid strategy at home, the Biden administration on Tuesday unveiled its website for free Covid tests, promising four free tests per household, “which is great news for people who live alone and literally no one else,” Kimmel mused. “What if you have a family of five? Do you start ranking your children?” “Free Covid tests by mail, what a great idea – if this was a year ago,” he added. The site, CovidTests.gov, claims to ship requested tests within seven to 12 days. “Biden’s original plan was you send in a bunch of cereal box tops, but that didn’t work, and now he’s on to this.” Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah also reacted to the launch of the White House’s free Covid tests website: “just as soon as the Omicron wave is over.” “I mean, it’s great that tests are finally going to be available for everyone, but seven to 12 days? You don’t think that’s a little too long? In a pandemic? I mean, every day is precious. Every single day is precious in a pandemic – if anyone should know that, it’s Joe Biden. “I can’t help but think that if America just took a military approach to Covid, this testing thing would be solved [snaps fingers] like that,” Noah continued. “Because there’s no delays when it comes to the American military. America doesn’t need bombs, and then starts building them. America always has bombs ready to go! “If America wants to drone someone, no one is like ‘OK, we can place the order now and then we wait seven to 12 days, unless there’s a holiday, then in that case …’” he added. “It’s just boom! That terrorist is gone, baby. What? It was just a family? Well boom, they’re still gone! I stand by my boom.” “If America was that proactive when it comes to pandemics, we would’ve all gotten these tests months before Omicron even got here,” he concluded. Not that you could trust Americans to know how to handle the tests well. “We’re just going to test ourselves for antigens?” he joked. “Is that before or after we mess up the directions on an Easy Mac?” Stephen Colbert And on the Late Show, Stephen Colbert checked in on Democrats’ voting rights legislation, mired by a GOP filibuster in the Senate. The chamber’s Democrats plan to press ahead this week with an effort to pass the legislation, even though it appears, according to the New York Times, “all but dead”. “Come on, guys, don’t give up the fight! Do not get discouraged – in the Senate, there are a lot of things that appear all but dead,” Colbert said, cutting to a photo of Mitch McConnell, Chuck Grassley and other elderly senators. Democrats plan to push ahead with a vote anyway to put on record who’s for and against voting rights. “That’s right, because once you know which politicians are keeping you from being able to vote, you can vote them out – and, I see the problem. That’s a toughie,” Colbert quipped. The GOP filibuster of critical voting rights protection has drawn the ire of even musician Stevie Wonder, who this week released a scathing YouTube video calling on Republicans senators to “cut the bull-tish.” “I want to thank Stevie Wonder for standing up for democracy and swearing in a way I can air on my CBS television show,” Colbert saluted. “You, sir, are one bad mother-trucker.” “Senators, you know how hard it is to make Stevie Wonder that angry?” he added. “The meanest thing he’s ever said up till now is ‘you’re just my part-time lover.’”COMOROS FEEL THE NOIZE Two weeks ago the Fiver had never heard of Comoros, which we’ve since learned is the fourth-smallest nation in Africa. And while our ignorance might seem kinda condescending, the world’s most daily football email would like to assure the 850,000 or so inhabitants of this four-island archipelago our ignorance is entirely down to a school geography syllabus that was more focused on the excruciating minutiae of what constitutes a truncated spur, than anything so useful as the names and whereabouts of all the countries in the world. Nicknamed “Cloud Coup Coup Land” in some quarters, due to the 20 or so heads of state who have been ousted from office since its declaration of independence from France in 1975, Comoros staged one of the most seismic and audacious bloodless coups in international football history on Tuesday, knocking the star-studded four-times champions Ghana out of the Africa Cup of Nations. The Roumdé Adjia Stadium in Garoua was the venue for a thriller that ended with the plucky Coelacanths – a team of minnows who take their nickname from a comparatively massive fish that can unhinge its mouth to devour very large prey – performing an impressive giant-killing of their own. Boasting big name stars such as Thomas Partey, Daniel Amartey and the Ayew brothers in their line-up, Ghana had been expected to breeze into the last 16 despite a slow start in Group C. In a game that started badly for them and went quickly downhill, they were hamstrung by the early double whammy of going a goal down and losing André Ayew to what looked a slightly harsh red card. Shortly after the hour mark, Comoros increased the deficit to two. Despite Ghana rallying gamely to level the scores with 13 minutes to go, the team ranked 132nd in the world by Fifa delivered the knockout blow on 85 minutes, leading to scenes of delight in the Comoros dressing room. This jubilation was nothing compared to that on show in the home of Mikel Arteta and assorted Arsenal fans, who can now look forward to having Partey back in their side at the weekend, having not missed a single Premier League game while he was away. “This is something special – this victory is historic,” said Ahmed Mogni, who chipped in with two goals for Comoros. “When we open the history books in the next couple of years, it will be all these players who will be inside. It’s very important for me and for my team because we showed that we have the quality to compete with the big nations in Africa. Also this victory is very important for us because we continue to believe and hope that we can pass this group stage for the next round.” While Comoros’s hopes of advancing to the Afcon knockout stages as one of the best third-placed group sides are extremely slim with three groups still to be decided, anyone with a passing interest in world football will be praying they make it. A country that until recently was completely unknown to your underdog-loving Fiver is now represented by our favourite African football team. QUOTE OF THE DAY “The entire country is extremely disappointed by the abysmal performance and early exit of the Black Stars from the Africa Cup of Nations, and we share in the nation’s sentiment” – Ghana’s Ministry of Youth and Sports offers a damning verdict on the team’s Afcon efforts. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE More Afcon fun ahoy! Join Paul Doyle for live updates from Egypt 1-0 Sudan (7pm GMT). And stick around for Premier League action as Michael Butler guides you through Brentford 2-2 Manchester United (8pm). FIVER LETTERS “Last Sunday I took my lad to his first local non-league match and it turned out to be a giant rollercoaster of a ride. I thought some of your readers might like to share our story” – Rob Wright. “With Sead Kolasinac and Pablo Marí leaving Arsenal, are the club developing a new strategy to keep their squad so thin, they won’t have to play any games? That should at least earn them an honourable mention in the Stop Football fight” – Hanford Woods. “Regarding Stephen Rea’s letter about the next Everton manager, surely he (more than anyone) would realise that any appointment could only lead to The Crying Game? – Bruce Bradley [and others]. “The Best [Tuesday’s Fiver] may sound like a premium ready meal in England, but with a Bundesliga player winning, it should surely be the Wurst. I’ll be seeing myself out” – Christopher Smith. “Re: the problems at Goodison Park and Downing Street. The solution seems obvious: Manchester United send Marcus Rashford to No 10 on loan, Everton bring Wayne Rooney in as their new manager, and the Tories pay Derby £20m to appoint Boris Johnson on an interim basis” – Peter Rehwaldt. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Christopher Smith. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Peter Robinson, the former Liverpool secretary who played an instrumental role in the club’s rise, has died aged 86. “Sad news indeed, a special man left us,” wrote Dietmar Hamann on Twitter. “LFC wouldn’t be where they are now if it wasn’t for him. He’ll be badly missed.” Brighton have warned supporters they face indefinite bans and further police action if they enter the pitch, following incidents at the club’s recent home games against Crystal Palace and Chelsea. After their in-no-way-predictable 1-1 draw at the Amex, Chelsea players are being given a break. “We need to de-connect, that is my feeling,” sighed Tommy T. If he’s not careful, they may soon de-manager. Mikel Arteta is pure fuming at the reaction to Arsenal’s request to postpone Sunday’s trip to Tottenham. “We postpone a match for all the right reasons, believe me, and we get these reactions?” the Gunners manager bellowed. Everton have asked Duncan Ferguson to step in as caretaker manager. The Toffees will take their sweet time to appoint a new permanent head coach after the apparently unforeseeable sacking of Rafa Benítez. Ralf Rangnick has further endeared himself to Manchester United fans by suggesting Paul Pogba might play better now there are potential suitors to impress. “He will be highly motivated,” Rangnick cheered, “and why should I then not play him?” Newcastle continue to carry the January transfer window, and are currently waving £30m under the noses of Sevilla in a bid to buy Brazilian centre-back Diego Carlos. Dani Alves has a simple solution for solving Barcelona’s malaise: buy Lionel Messi. “Messi is the best player in the history of football,” Alves drooled. “It would be very good if he finishes his career here … the club could take care of it.” Allow him to be Frank: Brentford manager Thomas is open to a potential move for Christian Eriksen. “If players fit the criteria of no d!ckheads, they can play for us,” said the Dane, a motto that has served the Bees well since 2019. STILL WANT MORE? Bruno Lage’s appointment at Wolves didn’t look like an inspired choice, but he has led Wolves back into European contention, writes Ben McAleer. Match-going supporters and online fans don’t often see eye-to-eye, but perhaps they can both agree that their clubs should listen more, muses Paul MacInnes. CHE v CHF, Clyde v er, Clyde and other scorebox similarities, in this week’s Knowledge. Will Newcastle splash the cash to uproot half the Atalanta team to Tyneside? [They’ve had worse ideas – Fiver Ed] More in today’s Rumour Mill. Our men’s and women’s transfer window interactives have had a January glow-up. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! BACK IN THE GAMEI remember being taught in biology class in our 1950s grammar school in Manchester that peristalsis works both ways (Dairylea cheese ad showing child eating while upside down banned over choking risk, 19 January). Under teacher supervision, two of us held a boy upside down by his ankles while he drank half a bottle of milk through a straw. We all survived the demonstration. Dr Roger Merry Keynsham, Somerset • Lovely to hear the history behind the Gypsy Queen (Letters, 17 January). My housemates and I were still riding the Gypsy Queen from our student house to classes at Durham University in 1976. Judith Jesch Nottingham • Non sibi sed omnibus was the motto of the then grammar school, Whalley Range in Manchester, which I attended between 1947-54. Now an academy, the motto is “Aspire, believe, achieve”. Sign of the times? Janet Hurrell Winchester • Every day on my walk, I meet a number of “big dogs”. They are intelligent, honest creatures. Please stop demeaning them (‘Operation Save Big Dog’: who is in the line of fire at No 10?, 16 January). Dick Tuckey Ipswich, Suffolk • If I were asked of what, in my country, I could be proud, I would say the NHS, the BBC and our network of public footpaths and associated Ordnance Survey maps. Jojo Goodfellow Wolvercote, Oxfordshire • Six letters have torn this country apart: Brexit (Letters, 18 January). Paul Tattam Chinley, Derbyshire • The letter from Janet Hurrell was amended on 27 January 2022. The motto of the school was Non sibi sed omnibus, not Non sibi sed as an earlier version said due to an editing error. • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Marina Hyde’s article (How will the great wrecker Boris Johnson break himself out of this bind?, 18 January) is the best in-depth commentary on the fallout of partygate, and makes us realise that the daily cross-questioning on our screens is far more serious than mere scandal. As No 10’s actions become a spectator sport, the danger is that we don’t notice our NHS being bled dry, our national broadcaster being softened up for private sale, our schools hosting a virus that can be deadly and life-changing for our children, and more than £4bn being lost to fraudsters and not recouped. Thank goodness for the House of Lords, quietly sitting it out while everyone’s eyes are on the main stage, so that Priti Patel’s policing bill is voted down and we might get to keep our right to protest (Report, 18 January). Yes, serious emotional damage has been done by the party culture that may preclude any government from ever demanding such sacrifice again. But for now, we need to maintain our vigilance to protect the services and institutions that express the integrity and compassion that is absent at the very top. Yvonne Williams Ryde, Isle of Wight • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I am a composer of classical music. My pieces have featured on Radio 3 since about 1971, have been performed by BBC orchestras and have appeared in many BBC Proms. My initial reaction to Nadine Dorries’s assault on the corporation (Report, 17 January) was a sinking feeling that this was the end of the line for British music. On reflection, I realise it is worse than that. It is an attack on culture itself – an attempt to categorise as elitist anything except the most trivial commercial pap, and to brand as leftist any journalism that holds the government to account. It is a race to the bottom. The founding principles of Lord Reith were precisely the opposite: entertain the public and elevate them by treating them as equals and giving them the best of human thought and endeavour. Even more important than the destruction of British music and the devastation of the livelihoods of many hundreds of musicians, it is the BBC’s tradition of fearless, impartial reporting that is at stake. The government hates its actions being scrutinised. It hates noisy demonstrations – even when they are addressing environmental issues that have been ignored by governments – and is doing what narrow-minded, authoritarian governments have always tried to do: move against any organisation that speaks truth to power. If we allow this government to destroy the BBC (as we allowed it to cast us adrift from Europe on a raft of populist lies), we shall have no one to blame but ourselves. Giles Swayne Preston on Wye, Herefordshire • Your editorial (17 January) is spot-on. The BBC has a wider remit than just politics. It has been at the core of support for the arts and education for over half a century. As a kid, nearly 80 years ago in a Welsh village, my knowledge of music, literature, philosophy and science was nurtured by listening to the radio. In this respect, it is the envy of the world. I hope there will be a robust defence so that upcoming generations continue to have access to the cultural enrichment that the BBC offers. Meirion Bowen London • If it comes to crowdfunding a BBC licence fee top-up, I’m in, Rina (Letters, 17 January). Linda Rhead Hampton, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Prof Julia Sinclair is one of the most thoughtful doctors I have ever known (Millions in UK drinking harmful levels of alcohol at home, experts warn, 17 January). She reports a change to longer sessions of drinking in many more people during the pandemic. That is a sobering judgment. An alarm really rang for me, in relation to hospital care, when Sinclair said that there have been more patients going into “delirium tremens”, because that is an indication of alcohol dependence. For vulnerable people who are now drinking too much, introducing changes to the alcohol culture, such as Scotland’s minimum unit price, would pull some back from the cliff of addiction. But for those who have became dependent, clinical care and community support are essential for recovery. In the past 50 years, I have seen too many lives distorted by alcohol-related diseases to accept an extra 2m cases in the next decades as inevitable. The new integrated care systems will need to plan and mobilise services for this vulnerable section of the population and offer better support to their families and employers. Prof Woody Caan Former chair, special interest group for alcohol, Faculty of Public Health • Zoe Williams is right to point out that the tolerance of alcohol consumption at work has declined, if not disappeared, in recent times (Office drinking culture slowed down in the 90s. But not for journalists – and now they are running the country, 18 January). But even in the days of employees routinely going to the pub at lunchtime, they would have been paying for their drinks. One has to assume that Boris Johnson’s “wine-time Fridays” and other boozy shindigs were not all BYOB events, but were paid for out of expenses – in other words, by you and me. Isabella Stone Sheffield • I must dispute Zoe Williams’s statement that “a couple of pints at lunchtime, even in reputable careers such as teaching, was still commonplace in the 80s”. My husband and I began teaching in 1968 and, in our 40 years of working in a variety of schools, never saw workplace drinking. In the 1980s, my husband was deputy head of one of the largest comprehensive schools in the country. If anyone had been drinking he would have known, but it did not happen. Most teachers could not find time for a decent lunch and a cup of tea. Catherine King Palau-del-Vidre, France • It was not only journalists who enjoyed a workplace drinking culture during the 1990s. As a civil servant in London in the 1980s, I often felt obliged to partake in long working lunches. And I would swear on oath that this way of doing business persisted into the 1990s after I moved to Cardiff. But things gradually sobered up as more enlightened management in Wales brought staff to their senses and alcohol-free ways of working were adopted. Mike Pender Cardiff • How fascinating that as a town councillor we have a rule that there must be no alcohol at meetings and even that “meetings shall not take place in premises which at the time of the meeting are used for the supply of alcohol”. Meanwhile, our lords and masters may, apparently, drink all day at work. Owen Wells Ilkley, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Ireland is to get a bank holiday as a national commemoration of those who have lost their lives to Covid and to recognise those who worked on the frontline of the pandemic, the government has announced. Frontline healthcare workers in hospitals and nursing homes are also to receive a €1,000 (£830) tax-free bonus for their contribution to the national pandemic effort as part of a package of measures agreed by the cabinet on Wednesday. The government has estimated the cost of the giveaway at €100m, but questions remain as to who will qualify for the handouts. Leo Varadkar, the tánaiste and minister for enterprise, trade and employment, said the bank holiday was “to recognise all of those workers, volunteers and members of the general public, who helped us in this fight against the pandemic, and especially frontline healthcare workers”. It will be on Friday 18 March this year, creating a four-day weekend because it falls immediately after the bank holiday for St Patrick’s Day. From next year, however, the government will establish a new bank holiday on 1 February, St Brigid’s Day, which marks the Celtic festival of Imbolc, or rebirth and the coming of spring. The day is also seen as a way to celebrate women, with the government’s website describing the Celtic goddess’s heritage as a “symbol of feminine energy”. A range of prominent Irish figures including the singer Imelda May have suggested a new bank holiday for a while as a way of encompassing both the pandemic frontline effort and women. Melanie Lynch, the head of Herstory.ie, the group that started the St Brigid’s Day campaign, wrote to the taoiseach to argue that Brigid’s “healing powers and compassion for the sick and poor” was a reason to mark the day publicly. Another individual wrote anonymously to say that making St Brigid’s Day a bank holiday would recognise “that so many on the frontline are female”. The decision to give €1,000 to health workers will go some way to addressing concern that a bank holiday would not be a valuable reward for those work every day to keep hospitals and hospices operational. The Irish Nurse and Midwives Organisation said it was very happy with the bonus decision. “It’s a small thank you but it’s very welcome … it’s something that we sought last November and it’s the right thing to do,” its general secretary, Phil Ní Sheaghdha, said. Those who work in private healthcare settings will be included, the health minister, Stephen Donnelly, has said. The St Brigid’s Day holiday will bring the number of bank and public holidays in Ireland to 10, two more than England, but in line with Northern Ireland.A health official who helped lead Florida’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic has been put on administrative leave as state officials investigate whether he tried to compel employees to get vaccinated. The state health agency is conducting an inquiry into Raul Pino, director of the Florida department of health in Orange county, to “determine if any laws were broken in this case”, the state department of health press secretary, Jeremy Redfern, said in an email. Sources told WFTV that Pino was placed on administrative leave after he emailed staff members at the Orange county department of health regarding Covid-19 vaccination rates on 4 January. In the email, Pino wrote: “I have a hard time understanding how we can be in public health and not practice it.” He added that he had an analyst examine vaccination data among employees and that out of the department’s 568 active staff members, only 77 had received a Covid booster dose, 219 had two doses of the vaccine and 34 had only one dose. “I am sorry but in the absence of reasonable and real reasons it is irresponsible not to be vaccinated,” he wrote. “We have been at this for two years, we were the first to give vaccines to the masses, we have done more than 300,000 and we are not even at 50% … pathetic.” Last year, Florida’s governor, Ron DeSantis, signed into law a measure that bans government agencies from implementing vaccine mandates and restricts private businesses from having vaccine requirements unless they allow workers to opt out for medical reasons, religious beliefs, immunity based on a previous infection, regular testing or agreement to wear protective gear. “We’re going to stand up for Floridians’ jobs, stand up for Floridians’ livelihoods, and stand up for freedom,” DeSantis said at the time in a statement regarding the vaccine mandate ban. The state’s department of health has not yet disclosed the reason why Pino has been put on leave or what he is accused of. It has, however, said that the “decision to get vaccinated is a personal medical choice that should be made free from coercion and mandates from employers”. It went on to add: “The employee in question has been placed on administrative leave, and the Florida department of health is conducting an inquiry to determine if any laws were broken in this case … The department is committed to upholding all laws, including the ban on vaccine mandates for government employees and will take appropriate action once additional information is known.” In the past, Pino spoke at numerous Orange county Covid-19 briefings, providing updates regarding the pandemic and has worked closely with Mayor Jerry Demings, who has criticized DeSantis’s handling of the pandemic. Carlos Guillermo Smith, a Democratic state lawmaker, has called Pino’s suspension “political”. Associated Press contributed to this reportGreece has showcased its newly acquired defence capabilities by flying six Rafale fighter jets over the Acropolis hours after they arrived from France. The jets roared over the symbolic monument en route to the Tanagra airbase, highlighting the Greek government’s decision to press ahead with a major military overhaul amid tensions with Turkey. “These new warplanes make our air force one of the strongest in Europe and the Mediterranean,” said the prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, attending a reception ceremony at the airbase north of Athens. While deterrence was the ultimate goal, the acquisitions would bolster “the flexibility of our national diplomacy”, he said. The centre-right administration has announced a seven-fold increase in defence spending on last year. Greek combat pilots are frequently forced to engage in mock dogfights in Aegean airspace disputed by Turkey, and Mitsotakis described the need to upgrade the air force as urgent. In addition to 24 Rafales old and new, Athens will take stock of warships, helicopters and 84 modernised, US-made F-16s aircraft as part of a procurement programme that will also include the purchase of Meteor air-to-air missiles. The acquisition of F-35 stealth combat aircraft – seen as a gamechanger by the Hellenic armed forces – is also being discussed, according to defence experts in Washington and Athens. The purchase of the French-made Rafales is part of a military overhaul that is projected to cost Greece €11.5bn by 2025 and is not without controversy. The leftwing opposition party Syriza has called the spending excessive at a time when the pandemic and a cost of living crisis weigh ever more heavily on Greece. The overhaul is aimed as much at strengthening the nation’s war readiness against Turkey as reinforcing its security role on Nato’s south-eastern flank. Analysts described the acquisition of the Rafales as a turning point in the Hellenic air force’s long-range missile capacity. “Their arrival marks the first in a series of defence deals that are currently in motion,” said Ioannis Michaletos, of the Institute for Security and Defence Analysis. “Greece has not bought weapons in such quantities for more than a decade. It’s going to be a very eventful year in terms of European contractors coming to Athens to try and seal deals.” Tensions over rival claims to offshore gas reserves in the Aegean and eastern Mediterranean brought Greece and Turkey to the brink of war in 2020. Ankara’s recent economic woes, in the wake of the country’s currency crisis, has also caused nervousness in Athens. “Aside from the perennial antagonism between Greece and Turkey, both also want to upgrade their role within Nato because of the diplomatic and political consequences that will bring,” said Michaletos. The sight of the French fighter jets in Greek skies came barely four months after Mitsotakis signed an historic, multibillion-euro military accord with the French president, Emmanuel Macron, in Paris. Under the deal, France will deliver three state-of-the art Belharra frigates to Greece by 2025. France’s deteriorating ties with Turkey has been echoed by an enhancement in bilateral relations between Athens and Paris, cemented by the nations’ shared common interests in the Mediterranean.The mystery shrouding Amazon’s new JRR Tolkien adaptation has lifted slightly, as the show has revealed its title. The multi-series epic will be known as Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power, setting viewers up for an on-screen representation of a new Middle-earth story. “The Rings of Power unites all the major stories of Middle-earth’s Second Age: the forging of the rings, the rise of the Dark Lord, Sauron, the epic tale of Númenor and the Last Alliance of Elves and Men,” said showrunners, JD Payne and Patrick McKay, in a statement accompanying a video that shows the programme’s title being forged in a blacksmith’s foundry. “Until now, audiences have only seen on-screen the story of the One Ring – but before there was one, there were many … and we’re excited to share the epic story of them all.” Filming of the first season took place in New Zealand, with the second series due to begin shooting in the UK after a surprise decision to move countries. It is widely believed to be the most expensive TV show of all time, with Amazon beating Netflix to a $250m (£207m) deal with the Tolkien estate, HarperCollins and Warner Bros to acquire the rights to the fantasy story. It is reportedly spending around $1bn on the adaptation, over a multi-series deal expected to run to at least five series. In 2017, a Tolkien expert working on the Lord of the Rings adaptation confirmed that Amazon didn’t have permission from the author’s estate to use the bulk of the material from his novel – and, so, the plot would not cross over with the Peter Jackson movies. As a result, the series will be a prequel, set thousands of years before the novel and the book that precedes it, The Hobbit. Details of the plot are scarce, but Tolkien’s the Second Age begins after the banishment of the dark lord Morgoth. It ends with the first demise of Sauron, Morgoth’s servant and the primary villain in The Lord of the Rings, at the hands of an alliance of elves and men. Amazon’s synopsis describes the show as, “beginning in a time of relative peace”, stating that it will “follow an ensemble cast of characters, both familiar and new, as they confront the long-feared reemergence of evil to Middle-earth.” The teaser video features a speech known as the “Ring Verse”. Given that it references 20 separate rings, it seems likely that the Prime series will feature 20 rings of power, unlike the one featured in previous adaptations. Its first episode is scheduled to premiere on Amazon Prime Video on 2 September, as well as being simulcast in 240 countries.The EU must open its own talks with Russia rather than rely on Washington, France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, has said as he warned of the prospect of the “most tragic thing of all – war”. In a wide-ranging speech in Strasbourg, Macron said it was not sufficient for the US to negotiate with the Kremlin over its threats to peace but that Europe needed to have its voice heard. Macron said he hoped to revitalise four-way talks between Russia, Germany, France and Ukraine, known as the Normandy format, to find a solution to the escalating crisis. The French president, who was speaking to mark the start of his country’s six-month presidency of the EU, told MEPs: “I think our credibility vis-a-vis Russia lies primarily in entering into demanding dialogue. “And we see that looking at the dialogue that the US and Russia are currently undertaking. I think that it is good for there to be coordination between Europe and the US but it is vital that Europe has its own dialogue with Russia.” Officials in Brussels insist that Russia has not been able to divide the west in recent months as it has amassed more than 100,000 troops on its border with Ukraine. But for all the protests of a unified approach, the EU was sidelined from talks held last week between Russia and the US, Nato and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. The Normandy format is a legacy of a meeting of the leaders of Germany, France, Ukraine and Russia during the 2014 D-day celebrations. It subsequently became a vehicle for implementation of the 2015 Minsk agreements designed to end the separatist war in Ukraine’s Donbas region that followed Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea. Macron said, however, that the EU had to work out a coordinated approach in its future talks with Russia and address its vulnerabilities with regard to the Kremlin, including energy supply. The EU has threatened severe economic and diplomatic consequences should there be a further military incursion. But the 27 member states are divided as to what should trigger sanctions, with some arguing that cyber-attacks or false-flag operations should be dealt with in the same way as a full-on occupation. Macron said: “We’ve seen migration movements being manipulated. We’ve seen cyber-attacks. We’ve seen hikes in gas prices. And on this front we need to build in collective resilience together. “The security of our continent requires strategic rethinking, strategic rearming of Europe as an area of balance and peace. And when it comes to dialogue with Russia in particular. “This dialogue is something I’ve been standing up for for many years. It’s not just a vague idea … We need this dialogue we need in Europe collectively to set out our own requirements and make certain that they are respected, and we need to be in a position to make that happen.” Beyond the escalating security threat to the east, Macron touched on a range of EU priorities for the French government, including strengthening the rule of law within the bloc, reducing the gender wage gap and giving rights to people who are commissioned with piecemeal work through web platforms. He also proposed including the right to abortion in the European Charter of Fundamental Rights. Citing the issues of Northern Ireland and fishing rights in UK waters, he warned the British government that in order to “remain friends” it “needs to commit to itself in good faith respecting the agreements already concluded with the union”. Macron told critical MEPs that he would not use the EU presidency as a “springboard” for his reelection as French president in three months’ time. However, he challenged those who equated his belief in stronger powers at an EU level with a lack of patriotism. He said: “I will distinguish between those that love their country and culture … and those that want to destroy Europe. I think actually there is a majority here, for example, who believe in Europe but also the cultures and identities of each country but still fight against the barbaric acts of nationalism.” Ahead of the first round of the French presidential election in April, Macron’s political opponents, including on the European parliament benches, sought to use his appearance to criticise his record. Yannick Jadot, the Green MEP and presidential candidate, told Macron he had “sacrificed” Europe’s ambitions on the climate crisis. “You will go down in history as the president of climate inaction.” Jordan Bardella, an MEP from Marine Le Pen’s far-right National Rally, told the parliament that European immigration policy meant member states and their people could no longer decide “who enters or leaves their territory” so Europe risked “no longer being Europe”. Meanwhile, the far-right TV pundit and presidential challenger Éric Zemmour headed to Calais in northern France to deliver a speech on the site of a former makeshift camp where thousands of migrants had once slept rough as they hoped to stow away on lorries to reach England. He said France should immediately deport any migrant entering its territory who hoped to reach the UK. He said that, because of immigration, Macron’s idea of Europe was “a Europe without mind, body or soul, pulling up its own roots, erasing its own history”.They were once among Boris Johnson’s most loyal defenders. Many of the army of more than 100 MPs who sat in Westminster for the first time in December 2019 felt they owed the prime minister their seat. So they were initially on their best behaviour, keen in a much-expanded parliamentary party to stand out from their peers and secure early promotion to the lowest rungs of the ministerial ladder. And most still feel that way. But a small and growing number have been turned off Johnson and feel enough is enough. They bit their tongues through a slew of crises and have now concluded that Johnson will not be the same electoral asset at the next general election as he was at the last. Among their number was Christian Wakeford, the MP for Bury South perhaps best known for calling the disgraced former cabinet minister Owen Paterson a “cunt” as MPs voted on changing the standards system to save his skin. Wakeford was a longtime agitator of the government, unafraid to make his feelings known in public. He admitted on Tuesday to having put in a letter calling for a no-confidence vote in Johnson the week before. Then, minutes before prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, he defected to Labour. However, Wakeford had not been invited to join the group of about two dozen Tory MPs who met twice this week to discuss whether to submit letters. The first took place on Monday in the office of Chris Loder, the MP for West Dorset. He has made clear his unhappiness at the rule-breaking Downing Street parties, telling constituents: “I’d like you to know that I and most of my colleagues feel deeply embarrassed and humiliated by such revelations.” The second was on Tuesday afternoon in an office shared by Alicia Kearns, another 2019er who represents Rutland and Melton, and Lee Anderson, the bombastic “red wall” MP for Ashfield. This became known as the “pork pie plot” – a name bestowed by detractors in a reference to the savoury snack that originated in Kearns’s constituency. Among those also at the 2019ers’ meeting were Gary Sambrook, the MP for Birmingham Northfield, Aaron Bell, the MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme, and Tom Randall, the MP for Gedling in Nottinghamshire. But the newer MPs are not acting alone. After the second meeting, some debriefed more experienced colleagues who are also trying to engineer Johnson’s deposition. And before PMQs was over, the role of longstanding MPs among the rebels was underlined as David Davis, the former leadership contender first elected to parliament in 1987, told Johnson: “In the name of God, go.” It is understood junior colleagues had been pressing Davis to make a statement publicly calling for Johnson to go, saying the situation needed a “big figure” to intervene. Kearns is on the 1922 Committee executive, some of whom met at the members-only Carlton Club in London on Tuesday night as speculation reached fever pitch that the number of no-confidence letters was approaching the 54 needed to trigger a vote. Allies of the former senior Ministry of Defence civil servant, who was dropped as a parliamentary private secretary last year, denied she was leading a rebellion. Such is the level of mistrust that briefing and counter-briefing in Westminster turned to misinformation. A Tory MP wrongly proclaimed that Johnson had personally arrived at the Carlton Club at about 11pm in “a last-ditch desperate attempt to persuade people to support him”. Rumours also abounded that a special adviser to the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, had been sent to spy on the group – though she said they were there to speak at a club dinner. Some older MPs look down their noses at the latest intake, whom they view as too big for their boots. “We’ve got enough problems with kids running No 10 without promoting more 2019 [MPs] with no experience,” one said. Another talked about them condescendingly as “boys and girls”. Some of the “old guard” of one nation Tories are fearful their fresh-faced colleagues will trigger a confidence vote before the report into Downing Street parties being written by the civil servant Sue Gray is completed. “It boosts his chance of survival if he can say he hasn’t had a fair hearing yet,” one said. But the new intake feel they have just as much right to make their views known as other colleagues. “Every MP is entitled to their own view no matter how long they’ve been here,” said one. “I don’t think trying to pull rank based on seniority is a good idea.” There are also still plenty in the new intake who still support Johnson and have not given up on hopes he will lead the party into the next election. A frontbencher said that beyond a few dozen malcontents, the rest backed the prime minister and were “absolutely furious” at their colleagues’ actions. Given the magnitude of Johnson’s success in the 2019 election, they believe he deserves at least one more chance. Johnson’s supporters come from different pools – red wall MPs, those in Lib Dem marginals, safe seats that became vacant at the last election, and others with complex psephological factors. But his critics are from equally disparate pools. Having not been present for the last regicide that took place less than three years ago, the 2019ers trying to force Johnson out have no experience at engineering a revolt from the backbenches. Neither they, nor angry older colleagues biding their time until Gray’s findings are released, have won yet.Xavi Hernández has delivered Ousmane Dembélé a public ultimatum: extend your contract or leave now. The Barcelona manager said the 24-year-old, whose deal expires at the end of the season, had told him that he wanted to continue at the club but no agreement has been reached. With little prospect of a solution and Dembélé’s agent Moussa Sissoko accusing the club of mishandling negotiations, patience has run out. “We’re in a position in which we have to stop this right now,” Xavi said. “Either he renews or we will look for an exit for him.” Whether Barcelona are able to impose that ultimatum is another matter, with Xavi admitting that Dembélé has the “upper hand”. He can leave for free at the end of the season and has been allowed to talk to other clubs since 1 January. The coach was inclined to continue playing him even if he admitted that he intends to depart, but the club are considering leaving him out of the squad for the remaining six months if he does not renew – not least as a means of forcing a solution. It is a threat that Sissoko accused them of having already made: “That will not work with us,” he said. Asked about the prospect of leaving Dembélé in the stands for six months, Xavi said: “That’s not something I’m contemplating.” “I too ask myself why he says he wants to renew but hasn’t,” Xavi said, hinting at the apparently different positions held by Sissoko and his client, as well as the possibility that Dembélé has not been honest with Barcelona, seeming instead to avoid a commitment. The coach was speaking before Barcelona’s Copa del Rey meeting on Thursday with Athletic Club and he admitted that a decision must be made on whether or not to leave Dembélé out of the squad. He and Mateu Alemany, the director of football, were due to meet for further discussions on Wednesday. When Xavi was presented as Barcelona’s manager, he insisted that Dembélé could be “the best in the world” in his position, describing his renewal as a “priority”. Alongside him the president, Joan Laporta, smiled and said: “Understood.” His renewal was also a means to free up salary mass and enable them to sign other players, the dependence on Dembélé’s deal deepening. But no agreement has been reached, the player’s camp reportedly asking for a salary of about €40m a year. “If Barcelona had wanted to negotiate they could have sat down with us to discuss it,” Sissoko said. Alemany insisted during the presentation of Ferran Torres: “We have been very patient. They knew we want him to stay and he has our offer. We can’t delay much longer.” Now, with 12 days remaining in this transfer window, they have decided that they cannot delay any more. Xavi also revealed the extent to which he has had to adopt the position of the club. With pessimism growing to the point where Barcelona no longer believe Dembélé intends to sign a new deal, they have sought to force the issue and break the deadlock. “In the end, the club has decided that if he doesn’t renew, we have to seek a solution,” Xavi said. “We have to do what’s best for the club. It’s five months now that Mateu Alemany has been talking to him and his representatives. “I have been very honest with him. It’s not an easy situation. It doesn’t feel good but the club’s interests have to come first. This case is very complex and we have reached a point where we have to decide. The player has to think about the club a bit. He knows what the project is; I couldn’t have put more trust in him.”Boris Johnson’s fall is not yet a fact. But it grows more likely by the hour. The hue and cry resumed at full throttle on Wednesday morning. Then Christian Wakeford, Conservative MP for the “red wall” marginal of Bury South, who had been the regional chief of the Back Boris campaign in 2019, defected to Labour. Thirty minutes later, David Davis quoted Leo Amery (who was quoting Oliver Cromwell) telling Neville Chamberlain in 1940: “In the name of God, go.” No leader can indefinitely survive these levels of assault. Assuming it now takes place, there are two important things to keep in mind about the 2022 Conservative leadership election. The first is that the many twists in this extraordinary story may not have all been exhausted. Experience of recent Tory leadership contests suggests that we should expect the unexpected. There are many possibilities. Johnson could pre-empt a confidence vote by the uncharacteristic act of resigning. He may decide to walk away from No 10 immediately, presumably leaving Dominic Raab as temporary prime minister and boosting the justice secretary’s otherwise slim chances. One or more leadership candidates may also pull out unexpectedly, as Johnson and Andrea Leadsom did in 2016, opening the way for Theresa May’s win. Improbably, the Tory party could unite behind Rishi Sunak without a vote, as it did behind Michael Howard in opposition in 2003. The second, if the election process runs its full course, is that this will produce the first change of leader of its kind in British political history. Never before would a prime minister have been forced out by his or her party’s own MPs and then been replaced by a new prime minister chosen by the party’s members. That scenario is stuffed with political dynamite. It could be a brilliant, gamechanging success – but it could just as well be an absolute disaster. There are no precedents. One thing is sure. If Johnson loses the vote of confidence for which MPs are now sending in letters, he would certainly be out. He cannot contest the leadership election that would follow. Not even Johnson can break that rule. This is what happened to Iain Duncan Smith as leader of the opposition in 2003. But it has never happened to a serving Tory prime minister. The last three Tory prime ministers who lost power midterm all did so by resigning. Each quit because the writing was on the wall. Margaret Thatcher decided not to contest the second round of the 1990 contest in order to open the way for someone else – John Major, as it turned out – to stop Michael Heseltine. David Cameron stepped down after losing the vote to leave the European Union in 2016. Although May had survived a confidence vote the previous December, she was forced to quit in May 2019 as the Tory party fell apart over her Brexit strategy. To kick a prime minister out in a vote of no confidence is a very big call indeed. It would be a damning verdict on Johnson personally and on his “great man” view of history and himself. He might not hang around in the Commons, triggering a very losable byelection in Uxbridge. His rejection could cause him to become bitter in his old age, as Ted Heath’s did in 1975. Even more significantly, it could entrench lasting political divisions in the Tory ranks, as the fall of Robert Peel did in 1846. There would be implications for party political realignment here. The immediate political question that most matters is whether the ousting of Johnson will outrage the party membership. There is every reason to expect this, and MPs need to be prepared for it. Judging by the Tories’ recent leadership contests – this would be the third in six years – there will again be lots of candidates: not surprising, with the premiership as the prize. Eight tried to enter the race in 2016. Thirteen tried in 2019. With no overwhelming favourite this time, expect another crowded field as MPs seek to winnow the contest to the final two, from whom the membership will choose. Conventionally, political parties in revolt against themselves tend to choose the opposite kind of leader to the one they have just got rid of. Johnson rather than May is a classic example. Further back, Major rather than Thatcher is another. That might point to Rishi Sunak this time as the candidate with most of the skills Johnson lacks, or suggest Jeremy Hunt would be in with a chance. This doesn’t take into account the cultural and ideological differences between the largely southern, largely old, largely white membership and many of the parliamentarians. For that reason, the candidates who claim to be picking up the populist standard from Johnson may do best. Liz Truss is the initial frontrunner, judging by membership surveys, but Priti Patel will see this contest as her best shot too. Watch out for Steve Baker, who may decide he has the organisation skills to beat Truss among the MPs. Baker will then offer himself to the membership as the only candidate who can be guaranteed to save Brexit and prevent Nigel Farage from mounting a comeback. Much will also rest on the contest’s length and timing. The 2019 contest took nearly two months before Johnson was confirmed winner. If this one does the same, the candidates may have to juggle their responses to anything from a new Covid variant to the energy price rise, trying to sort the Northern Ireland protocol before the May elections, or a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Sunak is still probably the best bet in this race. But do not believe anyone who claims they know for certain where all this is leading. They don’t. • Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistConservative MPs have revealed their anger at the Downing Street party scandal in response to emails from concerned constituents, as support for the prime minister across the party continues to drain away. In a number of emails to constituents seen by the Guardian, Tory MPs said they were “appalled”, “embarrassed” and “disgusted” by the revelations, with many saying they were not prepared to “defend the indefensible”. Although many MPs said they were withholding judgment until the outcome of the Sue Gray inquiry, others said they doubted any findings would be enough to restore public confidence in the leadership. Many said they had been inundated with hundreds of emails from constituents on the subject, detailing their own personal sacrifices during Covid and showing “the strength of anger and distress” over the issue. Below are some excerpts from their responses: Stephen Crabb, MP for Preseli Pembrokeshire “The multiple revelations suggest a culture of casual disregard for some of the most intrusive and restrictive rules imposed on the British public since the second world war. Everyone has a right to be angry about this. I hope the Metropolitan police will investigate these gatherings … it makes me feel extremely disappointed and genuinely let down.” James Sunderland, MP for Bracknell “I am furious at the apparent lack of grip shown by government officials. Something has also clearly gone wrong with the political machine at No 10.” Paul Beresford, MP for Mole Valley “The PM’s decision to attend [the 20 May 2020 gathering] was amazingly stupid. I expect those staff who organised or attended [the party the night before the Duke of Edinburgh’s funeral] to be removed without delay. Both their judgment and level of maturity is clearly such that they have nothing worthwhile to contribute to the governance of this country. As we await the full report on events, and in all likelihood for the foreseeable future, I and many of my parliamentary colleagues will regard the prime minister as being ‘on licence’. He has behaved foolishly and is undeniably a diminished figure now.” Peter Aldous, MP for Waveney “Personally, I found [the prime minister’s] defence that he was ignorant as to the nature of the gathering difficult to comprehend. I cannot, at present, see how [the Sue Gray] report could exonerate the prime minister and alleviate public anger. If he is found to have actively misled parliament, or if he faces criminal sanction [or both], his position is untenable and he should resign. I would hope that he would do this without the need for a formal vote of no confidence by Conservative MPs.” Duncan Baker, MP for North Norfolk “It is indefensible and I have made my thoughts very clear internally. For those at the heart of government to show such a total lack of empathy and awareness to the rules is wholly irresponsible. I hope you will respect my decision to not publicly be telling anybody whether I have or have not written to Sir Graham Brady at this stage – even my wife will not know that information! But as you have seen from my previous actions, I am not a person who is appalled and takes no action.” Martin Vickers, MP for Cleethorpes “It was irresponsible, reckless and unacceptable and disciplinary actions, and possibly prosecutions, should follow.” Andrew Selous, MP for South West Bedfordshire “Like you, I am angry and upset to learn about this latest revelation. I want every one of these allegations to be fully and independently investigated, if necessary, by the police and I want all of those, however senior, who have broken the law or government guidance to be appropriately punished.” Tom Hunt, MP for Ipswich “I must say that I’ve been appalled. The fact that a big bash was organised the night before Prince Philip’s funeral fills me with disgust. This is not an isolated example of modest rule-breaking. It’s clear to me that whatever happens there needs to be almost a total clearout of No 10 and all of those who were in any way connected with what appear to be clear rule-breaking events need to properly be held to account.” Paul Maynard MP for Blackpool North and Cleveleys “It is hard to believe the current stream of revelations, and I have no intention of mounting any defence. Not only am I disappointed at the behaviour of the Downing Street operation (including civil servants who should know better) but, as I have had to say too often before, events of recent months have dented my confidence in the prime minister to say the least, and I feel he has seriously let the country as a whole down.”The Football Association is investigating reports of suspicious betting activity around the awarding of a yellow card to an Arsenal player during a Premier League match this season. According to reports originally published in the Athletic, bookmakers alerted the FA to unusual betting patterns after the match and the governing body is looking into the claims, although a formal investigation has not been undertaken at this stage. An FA spokesperson said: “The FA is aware of the matter in question and is looking into it.” Arsenal declined to comment. Spot betting allows gamblers to place bets on specific details of matches – from whether an individual will receive a yellow card to the number of corners. Although bookmakers will offer odds on such an outcome before a match, the markets also remain live during play where greater rewards are possible. The data analysis company Sportradar has reported that up to 90% of suspicious activity around sport gambling markets occurs during in-game betting. Although spot fixing has long been a subject of concern in British sport, it has rarely been confirmed at the top level of professional competition. In 2012, the Essex cricketer Mervyn Westfield was jailed for four months after admitting to bowling in a way that would allow the scoring of a certain number of runs during a Natwest Pro40 match. In April 2018, the professional footballer Bradley Wood was banned from playing for six years after he was found to have intentionally got booked twice while playing for Lincoln City during their run to the FA Cup quarter-finals the previous season. Text messages revealed he had agreed on a plan with seven friends and acquaintances who stood to win £10,000 collectively, though the sum was never paid out in full. The former Southampton and England midfielder Matt Le Tissier revealed in his autobiography that he had placed a spread bet on the timing of the first throw-in in a match in which he played. The matter was referred to Hampshire police but the Crown Prosecution Service elected not to pursue a case.The Vietnamese leader of a people smuggling gang has been sentenced to 15 years in a Belgian jail over the death by suffocation of 39 men, women and children transported across the Channel in a sealed trailer. Vo Van Hong, 45, was also ordered to pay a €920,000 (£760,000) fine by the court in Bruges, while prison sentences of between 18 months and 10 years were handed to 17 others for their roles in conducting a large-scale smuggling operation between Vietnam and Britain. Those convicted were told they had cynically exploited their victims – 31 Vietnamese men and eight women, aged between 15 and 44 – who arrived dead in Grays, Essex, in October 2019. They had all died from suffocation and hyperthermia (overheating) after paying nearly €25,000 each to be transported to the UK. The victims were treated as mere cargo and described as “chickens” by their smugglers, the court heard. Customs papers said the shipment contained Vietnamese biscuits. The convictions in Belgium, where the smuggling network had been based, followed that of Eamonn Harrison, 23, a lorry driver from Northern Ireland, and Gheorghe Nica, 43, the Romanian coordinator of the operation, who were found guilty of manslaughter at the Old Bailey in London in December 2020. They were sentenced to 20 and 27 years in prison respectively. During earlier proceedings in Bruges, the court heard from Ann Lukowiak, a federal prosecutor, of the horrific scenes she saw in the back of the trailer when she travelled to Essex. “What stays with me the most is a bloody handprint on the door of the container, a silent witness to what happened on that journey,” she said. “One couple has died in each other’s arms.” Vo, who organised a total of 409 crossings to the UK and rented a safe house in Anderlecht, had the job of ensuring that those seeking to get to Britain arrived at the loading points and made their payments. He told those being smuggled to switch off their mobile phones before departure. In a 234-page verdict, Judge Bert Salembier wrote that Vo was “indisputably the leader of the Belgian cell of the criminal organisation”. The Bruges court convicted 11 people from Vietnam or of Vietnamese origin for allowing their property to be used as a meeting point, where documents or mobile phone sim cards for the victims were distributed. Six taxi drivers, who took migrants largely from Brussels to meeting points, were also convicted, including their leader, a Moroccan man who the court heard continued these activities even after the events of October 2019. He was given a seven-year prison sentence. The dead were found inside the truck container on 23 October 2019 at an industrial estate in Grays. They had crossed the Channel from the Belgian port of Zeebrugge on the ferry Clementine before arriving in Purfleet. The victims suffocated in the stifling hot weather after failing to pierce the metal container’s roof with a pole. Most of the victims were from Nghệ An and Hà Tĩnh provinces in north-central Vietnam, where poor job prospects, environmental disasters and the promise of financial reward were reasons to seek a new life in the west. Vo and the others were arrested at various points in the year after the discovery of the bodies. Belgian, Vietnamese, French and British police forces were involved in the investigation.Christian Wakeford told Boris Johnson that the Conservatives “have shown themselves incapable of offering” the “government this country deserves”, in a parting shot as he defected to Labour. But the Bury South MP, who had submitted a letter of no confidence against the prime minister, is not the first to defect to another party due to disagreements with leadership. Here are some famous cases of MPs moving across the political spectrum. Tory to Liberal Democrats – Sam Gyimah Wakefield is not even the first MP to leave due to disagreements with Boris Johnson. The former universities minister Sam Gyimah defected to the Liberal Democrats in 2019, accusing Johnson of “veering towards populism and English nationalism”. The then MP for East Surrey said he had left the Conservatives to fight against the government’s “scorched-earth approach” to delivering Brexit, regardless of the cost to the country. Labour to Liberal Democrats (via Change UK) – Luciana Berger Berger had been a member of the Labour party but was critical of the former leader Jeremy Corbyn’s approach to antisemitism and Brexit. In February 2019, members of her local party briefly proposed motions of no confidence in her for “continually” criticising Corbyn. She went on to join other former Labour and Conservative MPs in forming Change UK, a pro EU party, but left this group in June 2019 to sit as an independent MP, before joining the Liberal Democrats. She stood unsuccessfully for Finchley and Golders Green in the 2019 general election. At the time she left Labour for the Lib Dems she said they were “the strongest party to stop Brexit”. Labour to Change UK – Mike Gapes Gapes had been a Labour MP for 27 years but left the party due to being unhappy with the leadership of Jeremy Corbyn. For Gapes, foreign policy differences were the major factor, and he accused Corbyn in his resignation letter of taking the “wrong side on so many international issues, from Russia to Syria to Venezuela.” Similarly to Berger, he joined Change UK. In the December 2019 election, Gapes was defeated by Labour’s Sam Tarry. Conservatives to Change UK – Anna Soubry Soubry was among a number of MPs who left their political parties due to Brexit turmoil. When she left the Conservatives she said it was because of her party’s shift to the right and support of leaving the EU. She became leader of Change UK but lost her seat in the 2019 general election, finishing a distant third. Conservatives to Labour – Quentin Davies Wakefield is also not the first Tory MP to defect to Labour. In 2007 Quentin Davies made the move, “delighting” the new Labour leader Gordon Brown. The MP for Grantham and Stamford made his decision after clashing with the then Tory leader, David Cameron. He wrote that the party seemed “to have ceased collectively to believe in anything, or to stand for anything”. Cameron wrote back to Davies saying: “You have made your choice and the British people will make theirs.” Conservatives to Ukip – Mark Reckless The Tory MP for Rochester and Strood was among a number of Conservatives to defect to Ukip in 2014. The Eurosceptic politician said he had not taken the decision lightly but claimed the Conservative leadership was “part of the problem that is holding our country back”. His announcement came just before the Conservative party conference in Birmingham and was a blow to Cameron at the time. The defection came eight months before the general election. At the Ukip conference in Doncaster, Reckless said voters felt “ripped off and lied to”, adding: “Today I am leaving the Conservative party and joining Ukip.” He had wanted more action on a European referendum, tax and immigration. • This article was amended on 20 January 2022. An earlier version said that Luciana Berger had been critical of Jeremy Corbyn; the detail that she was especially concerned about his approach to antisemitism as well as Brexit was added.Delaying and preventing infection as much as possible through this pandemic was a worthwhile strategy. In early 2020, there were few treatments, limited testing and no vaccines. The costs of those lockdowns were big, but the effort to buy time paid off. In that time, science has transformed Covid from a deadly virus to a much less serious, nasty disease – one that is manageable at home, for the vast majority of those vaccinated. It has, largely, defanged it. But even as we have had success treating and preventing serious infections, Sars-CoV-2 has become increasingly transmissible. ONS survey data indicates that one in 15 are positive in England, with similar numbers for the other three nations. While the good news is that the Omicron variant is resulting in less severe disease and a smaller fraction of hospitalisations, so many people are infected and isolating that critical services are struggling with staffing. This is what is driving governments to rethink isolation policies, and ask whether they are becoming more disruptive than the virus itself. In England the prime minister announced today that restrictions including masking requirements will be removed from next week, and self-isolation requirements will be reviewed in March. I think this is largely reasonable – all governments face the question of how to approach this new landscape. For policymakers, it’s a bit like landing an aeroplane on an icy landing strip. The fuel of public patience is running low; and wear and tear, in the form of economic and social damage, has built up over two years in a holding pattern. The need to land is obvious, and we have the tools to do so, but it’s still a tricky feat in current conditions. There are now clearly three camps of scientists voicing opinions on what is happening and what to do in the coming weeks. This can be confusing for the public. The first group still seem to see the virus as the same deadly one of March 2020, despite the massive scientific progress in managing it, and they suggest extremely cautious measures. The second say they’ve been right all along in that mass infection is unavoidable; this is the “let it rip” group. They ignore the dramatic difference that mass vaccinations and treatments have made – avoiding serious illness from Covid-19 now is wholly different from 2020. The third group – where I sit – have evolved their position as the data and tools, namely vaccines and therapeutics, have also evolved to transform Covid-19 into something more akin to other infectious diseases that we control and manage. My analysis has consistently responded to the latest evidence. First, we now have safe and effective vaccines that protect the vast majority of people from hospitalisation and death. Recent data from the UK Health Security Agency shows that unvaccinated people are between three and eight times more likely to be hospitalised with Covid-19. Early in the Omicron wave, New Yorkers who were not vaccinated were more than eight times more likely to be hospitalised than New Yorkers who were fully vaccinated. If everyone who was offered a vaccine and booster would take it, the pandemic would be effectively over in richer countries. And while our current vaccines don’t stop us getting infected, major investment is being made in next-generation vaccines that offer sterilizing immunity, meaning they stop infection completely in those getting two doses. Next, we have exciting home treatments on the horizon for Covid-19, two in particular. The first is Pfizer’s Paxlovid and the second is Merck’s molnupiravir. Both are seen by scientists as groundbreaking because early trial data showed they significantly reduced the chances of hospitalisation and death in high-risk patients. The pills aren’t affected by new variants such as Omicron as they don’t target the spike protein where most mutations have occurred. And unlike vaccines, which must be taken weeks before infection to be effective, these treatments can help fight active infections. Antivirals need to be tied to a good diagnostic system as the pills need to be taken as soon as possible after confirming Covid-19 diagnosis and symptoms. This means we need a smooth system for getting tested, getting a prescription from a medical professional and starting the course of oral pills. Although, because of current supply issues, rather than general population use they will be targeted at older people and those who are more vulnerable due to health conditions such as heart disease, cancer or diabetes. What does all this mean in terms of living with Covid-19? We still need to test. We still need to vaccinate and combat misinformation. We need to encourage people to wear medical-grade masks such as N95s in crowded and indoor settings. Employers need to recognise and support employees who have been identified as in a shielding group. We also need to review isolation and other policies so they remain safe, but are less disruptive to the functioning of society. We will still need to monitor Covid-19 in public health, as we do other diseases. When people say it will be “endemic”, that doesn’t mean harmless. Endemic means that we accept a circulation of a disease because elimination or eradication is perceived as too difficult. Malaria, dengue and measles are endemic in certain parts of the world even though they are all serious diseases. Malaria was endemic in the United States until the government decided to eliminate it. This is part of a larger question about how much we continue to alter what “normal” social relations are, given the circulation of Sars-CoV-2. Humans are social: we need to hug, dance, sing and recognise each other’s faces and smiles. A sense of community and connection are vital to wellbeing too. Public health is not about one disease; it is broadly about wellbeing, which includes mental health and being able to pay the rent, feed your family, stay warm through winter and have a meaningful role in society. Slowing the spread of Sars-CoV-2, even stopping it completely in certain countries, helped save lives. It allowed two transformative antiviral pills to be made available. It allowed doctors to develop better ways of treating patients, and to understand what we’re facing. It allowed a better understanding of transmission and risk. But now, two years into this pandemic, we need to find a better way of living alongside Sars-CoV-2 using the tools we have. We have created ways to minimise the impact of Covid-19. And now is the time to start to recover and heal as a society and move forward, treating this virus like we do other infectious disease threats. Prof Devi Sridhar is chair of global public health at the University of Edinburgh • This article was amended on 21 January 2022. The prime minister’s announcement about the removal of some restrictions relates to England, not the UK.Downing Street’s parties during lockdown have galvanised Westminster and incensed voters, leaving Boris Johnson fighting for his political life. But amid tumbling Conservative opinion poll ratings, a MP defecting to Labour and the daily drip-feed of further revelations, one interest group has been unmoved: the financial markets. The City’s main share yardstick, the FTSE 100 index, has risen by 400 points in the past month as the prime minister’s partygate woes have worsened. Over the same period, the pound has risen by two cents against the dollar and is trading at its highest level against the euro since early 2020. Markets have a long list of things that worry them. They are anxious about a Russian invasion of Ukraine. They are worried about the possibility of oil supplies from the Middle East being disrupted. But as far as the UK is concerned, they are more interested in the Bank of England’s response to rising inflation than whether Johnson will be replaced by Rishi Sunak, Liz Truss or a Tory dark-horse candidate. Paul Donovan, the chief economist at UBS Global Wealth Management, summed up the prevailing mood in the City: “Markets are unlikely to care if the prime minister resigns, as it would not be expected to signal a significant change in policy.” Nor are markets factoring in the possibility that Keir Starmer may be on course to be prime minister after the next election. Labour has a 10-point lead in the opinion polls, its biggest since 2013, when Ed Miliband was leader, but the current thinking in the City is that the Conservatives are merely suffering a bad case of midterm blues and have plenty of time to recover under a new leader and see off the challenge from Starmer. That said, assuming Johnson quits or is forced out, his successor will be in no hurry to go to the polls. The squeeze on living standards and higher tax will, if history is anything to go by, make the Conservatives unpopular and put to the test the theory that any Tory can beat Starmer. Shane O’Neill, the head of interest rate trading at Validus Risk Management, said the relaxed mood may not last, even if Sunak or Truss left government policy broadly unchanged. The markets have a strong preference towards the “devil it knows”, with inexperience and unfamiliarity breeding nerves and increased volatility in shares and the pound, he added. “So far, market reaction to the Tory scandals has been muted and we’ve remained focused on the more pressing issues of inflation and central bank action. This can change quickly and if it does, headlines from Whitehall will begin to have serious impacts on markets and hedging strategies.”Tracey Emin has demanded that an artwork she donated to the government’s collection be removed from 10 Downing Street, saying the “current situation is shameful”. More Passion, a neon artwork, was installed in Downing Street in 2011 when David Cameron was prime minister. In an Instagram post on Wednesday, Emin said she was asking for it to be removed. She later told the Guardian that Boris Johnson’s “behaviour and lack of contrition” over the Downing Street parties scandal were “bizarre”. “This is my neon that hangs at 10 Downing Street. It was a gift from myself to the government art collection,” she wrote on Instagram. “I am now in the process of requesting that my artwork be removed from 10 Downing Street. I feel More Passion is the last thing this present government needs. This current situation is shameful.” Cameron, who invited Emin to create an artwork after he became prime minister, hung the neon sign outside the first-floor Terracotta Room, which is often used for hospitality purposes. Its position made it visible to many visitors. Emin said: “I gave [the artwork] as a gift, I’m not asking for it back. The artwork belongs to the government, not whoever’s in power right now. It could hang in the British embassy in Cairo, or go back into storage. There are many places it could go, but just right at the moment I don’t think it’s a very good idea if it’s at 10 Downing Street.” Revelations about parties in Downing Street while people were “holding funerals through their telephones” were shameful and “people were really hurt by this”, she said. “Everybody throughout society has suffered through Covid. I just find the [prime minister’s] behaviour and lack of contrition bizarre.” Emin, 58, was nominated for the Turner prize in 1999, exhibiting My Bed, an installation of her own unmade bed featuring used condoms and blood-stained underwear. Her work has been created in a variety of media including drawing, painting, sculpture, film, photography, neon text and sewn appliqué. The government art collection contains more than 14,000 works, most of which are on display in buildings in the UK and embassies across the world. It includes oil paintings, sculptures, prints, drawings, photographs, textiles and video works, mainly by British artists, dating back to the 16th century. Last year a freedom of information request from the Spectator revealed that Johnson and his wife, Carrie, had chosen 44 works from the collection to display in Downing Street. They include several by Peter Blake, the pop artist who designed the cover of the Beatles’ 1967 album Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band. The government art collection declined to comment.A former teacher, traveller, poet, bibliophile and enthusiastic dancer, my friend David Barnett, who has died aged 92, was for 15 years the owner of Aardvark Wholefoods in Carmarthen, known to many as “David Aardvark”. Born in Mitcham, Surrey, David was the son of Joyce, who worked for the Pearl &amp; Dean cinema advertising company, and Bearron Barnett, the manager of a bookmaker’s. During the second world war, David was evacuated to Bedford. Later he attended Dame Alice Owen’s grammar school, in Islington, north London, and subsequently won a scholarship to study modern history at Oxford. Following his graduation in the 1950s he set out alone on a low-budget adventure to the far east, living for a time with tribal people in the forests of Northern Thailand. Soon after his return, he met Paula Tibble, secretary at an advertising agency. They married in 1959 and immediately embarked on a further, extended, world-tour “honeymoon” adventure lasting three years, taking in India, Australia (where they arrived with only £1), Polynesia, Tahiti and Panama by cargo ship, and Mexico. Back in London, David spent 10 years teaching disadvantaged children at schools including the Charles Lamb school, Islington, where he became deputy head, a task that he found “exhilarating but ultimately exhausting”. Then, in 1978, on a visit to Wales, David spotted a wholefood shop for sale. Soon the family, now including three children, Emma, Natasha and Damian, had moved to rural west Wales where they ran Aardvark Wholefoods. David retired in 1993, but Aardvark is still going strong. For 23 years from 1989, David was a regular participant at the annual Dance Camp Wales event, where he made many enduring friendships and learned to circle-dance. I got to know David while sitting and talking late into the night around campfires there. He was also a prolific poet whose published collections included Bent in Water (1985), Fretwork (1990) and All the Year Round (1993). In 2005 and 2006, he won the PIP Gertrude Stein award for innovative poetry in English. His poem Wintergreen, written for Paula, includes the lines “Sounder now/ than then, you bring a hamper/to a pond of willows/ with their paddling roots,/ so we can picnic on/ a bed of wintergreen.” He was an avid reader of good literature, a passionate admirer of Shakespeare (claiming to have seen every play on stage at least once) and a lover of music. Indeed, David truly immersed himself in the best that life had to offer: literature, music, dance, travel, love, laughter, compassion, good company, sunshine, the exuberance of nature – and ice-cream. In 2013 he and Paula moved to Spain. Emma died in 1992. David is survived by Paula, Natasha and Damian, two grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.Two asylum seekers who arrived in the UK as children but were wrongly assessed as adults by Home Office social workers have won a victory in the high court after it ruled that the way they were treated was unlawful. In his ruling on Wednesday, Mr Justice Henshaw found that the Home Office policy of conducting age assessments soon after arrival in the UK was unlawful, the decision to detain young people for them was unlawful, and the lack of an appropriate adult present for the assessments was also unlawful. The ruling has been hailed as a victory for hundreds of unaccompanied asylum seeker children thought to have been subjected to the process. Shortly before Wednesday’s judgment was made public, the Home Office stopped social workers from carrying out age assessments of newly arrived young people at a processing centre for new asylum seeker arrivals called Kent Intake Unit and issued new guidance about age assessment for the new arrivals. The two children – a 16-year-old Kuwaiti Bidoon who arrived in the UK in the back of a lorry on 15 December 2020, and a 17-year-old Iranian boy who had spent seven to eight hours crossing the Channel in a dinghy – were subjected to truncated age assessments by social workers appointed by the Home Office. Previously, new arrivals in need of an age assessment to determine whether they were a child or an adult were assessed by Kent county council social workers. When the council was no longer able to manage the volume of new arrivals, the Home Office began to conduct age assessments “in house” from September 2020. Determining the age of young people is notoriously difficult. There is no proven scientific way of doing this and accepted good practice is for specially trained social workers to conduct a series of assessments before arriving at a decision in what is known as a “Merton compliant” age assessment process. The judgment highlights the way children and young people are treated by Home Office officials on arrival in the UK after enduring difficult journeys and fleeing danger in their home countries. The Kuwaiti Bidoon boy was detained in Yarl’s Wood immigration removal centre in Bedfordshire for three days after his age assessment, and the Iranian teenager was detained in Tinsley House immigration removal centre near Gatwick for five days. Both had arrived in the UK in poor condition after their journeys. The first said he had not eaten properly for two months, while the second said his journey by dinghy was terrifying and he arrived soaking wet and freezing cold. Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, welcomed the judgment. “We are relieved that the practice of hasty decisions is no longer allowed to continue,” he said. “Distinguishing between adults and children is not something that can be done quickly; it takes time and expertise to make the right decision. “Children seeking safety arriving alone in the UK are bewildered and frightened. They have been subjected to processes with neither safeguards nor oversight, relying on little more than luck to ensure that someone identifies them as being wrongly deemed adult and helps them access the care they are entitled to. No child should have been faced with disbelief and such appalling practice.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “We are disappointed by the court’s decision. The government is committed to protecting children and the vulnerable but we cannot allow asylum-seeking adults claim to be children – this presents a serious safeguarding risk. Our Nationality and Borders Bill seeks to improve the challenging age assessment process and will widen the evidence base for social workers to consider when making assessments and lead to better informed decisions.”Britain’s skeleton bobsleigh squad have warned their rivals not to write them off at next month’s Winter Olympics after revealing they have deliberately not gone “all guns blazing” during a mixed 2020-21 season. The skeleton has been Britain’s gold medal banker at the past three Games, with Amy Williams winning in Vancouver in 2010 and Lizzy Yarnold achieving back-to-back victories in Sochi and Pyeongchang. However medal success looks more unlikely this time with Matt Weston, who sits 1oth in the world, the highest ranked member of the Team GB squad announced on Wednesday. However Weston says the four-strong squad, which also includes 2018 bronze medallist Laura Deas and newcomers Marcus Wyatt and Brogan Crowley could yet spring a surprise. “As a nation we’re so good at competing at the Games,” said Weston, who won Britain’s first men’s World Cup gold medal for 13 years in Igls in November but had inconsistent results in recent weeks. “We haven’t gone all guns blazing in any event yet. So the fact I’ve had a gold medal on not the Games’ equipment, and not the Games’ processes, fills me with a lot of confidence. So definitely don’t write us off.” Wyatt, who took silver in the Olympic test event in Beijing last October but has since slipped to 19th in the world, has also shown he can raise his game. Meanwhile Deas, who is ranked 20th in the women’s world rankings, says she can repeat her success in Pyeongchang if she gets to grips with her new sled. “This season has been pretty up and down,” Deas said. “But we’re constantly trying to learn and figure things out and we don’t roll everything out as a finished product until the Olympics itself. So I still very much feel like when I’m there, and we put our entire package together, that I can still do something special. “I’m not dwelling on what happened four years ago. The sport has moved on. We’ve had to move on. I’ve been adapting to a new sled this year as one example of how we’re trying to innovate and keep moving forward. Because you can’t rely on what you did last time round, or the time before that.”Novak Djokovic is the controlling shareholder in a Danish biotech firm aiming to develop a treatment for Covid-19 that does not involve vaccination, it has emerged. The world No 1, who was deported from Australia this week after the government cancelled his visa in a dispute over a medical exemption relating to his unvaccinated status, bought an 80% stake in QuantBioRes in 2020. Ivan Loncarevic, the company’s chief executive, confirmed the investment to Reuters. He subsequently told the Financial Times that he had not spoken to Djokovic, who has won more than $150m in prize money, since November and that the tennis star was “not anti-vax”. Djokovic flew out of Australia on Sunday after losing a legal challenge to overturn the cancellation of his visa by Alex Hawke, the country’s immigration minister, who said Djokovic’s presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he was a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. QuantBioRes has about 11 researchers working in Denmark, Australia and Slovenia, according to Loncarevic, who stressed the company was working on a treatment, not a vaccine. The company’s website says it started developing a “deactivation mechanism” for Covid-19 in July 2020. Djokovic, who may also be barred from defending his French Open title in Roland Garros in May after the French government ruled on Monday that all athletes will have to be vaccinated in order to attend and compete in sporting events, acquired his stake in the company in June 2020. The company is developing a peptide, which inhibits the coronavirus from infecting the human cell, and it expects to launch clinical trials in Britain this summer, Loncarevic said. A spokesperson for Djokovic did not immediately respond to a request for comment. • The headline of this article was amended on 20 January 2022, changing “drug” to “treatment”.Name: Matt Hancock. Age: 43. Appearance: James Bond’s hapless uncle. Oh no, is he spying now as well? No, worse. He’s been pictured emerging dripping from a lake like Daniel Craig in Casino Royale, if the 007 actor was allergic to sunshine and trapped in London on a freezing January day. This is because he went swimming in the Serpentine in Hyde Park this week, isn’t it? Bingo. It’s the newest stage of his public rehabilitation tour, after he resigned from his job in June. Remind me why that was again. It’s because he was caught on CCTV smooching with his mistress in a manner that breached social distancing regulations. Apparently, it seems, the best way to bounce back from a sex scandal is to be photographed in public with your top off. Who knew? So he’s rehabilitated? Not at all. Hilariously, the swim seems to have only made things worse for him. How? How do you think? He’s a Conservative MP in 2022. He’s in trouble for allegedly breaking the rules. Of course. The problem seems to be that Matt Hancock failed to acquire the proper accreditation before hurling himself into the Serpentine. And this in turn irked the Serpentine swimming club, which quickly posted a tweet reading: “Serpentine swimming is strictly for members only, and no guests permitted.” They’re worried about the public. That’s right. The general public has done an incredible job of obeying the rules by simply not hurling themselves into a lake willy-nilly like a pitiful ghost whenever they felt like it. Now that a member of the ruling class has done it, it has made a mockery of their sacrifice. God, the number of lakes I could have thrown myself in for a cheap photo opportunity lately. Me too. But we resisted the urge for the common good. This is nothing less than a scandal. Has he apologised at least? Of course not. Through a spokesperson, Hancock stated that he had been on a run, and was “invited in for an impromptu swim by enthusiastic club members”. Right. But no guests are permitted apparently. Exactly. It’s a terrible excuse. How can he ever recover from this? My big fear is that he’ll go on another comeback tour and make more of those “man on the street” videos he’s so fond of, where he walks around Suffolk, while locals fruitlessly attempt to console him. Let’s hope it doesn’t come to that. Yes, we have all suffered enough already. Do say: “Matt Hancock breached social distancing laws, cheated on his wife, handed out PPE contracts without publishing details, rode maskless in a chauffeur-driven car and may now have broken swimming regulations.” Don’t say: “Still not the least trustworthy Conservative MP, though. Weird.”The Premier League is planning to revise its controversial Covid regulations which have caused the postponement of 22 fixtures over the past five weeks. Rules could be changed for the round of fixtures beginning on 8 February, with the league crediting a recent fall in the number of positive Covid tests among players and staff. Discussions have taken place with clubs but no changes are expected before this weekend’s matches. Teams will then go on a planned winter break between 24 January and 3 February, with the FA Cup fourth round running from 4-7 February. A shareholders’ meeting could be held next week and any rule change would require the support of 14 or more clubs. Regulations on Covid suspensions were agreed by clubs, who voted them through at a board meeting last year, but they have become the subject of dispute, with Tottenham releasing a statement criticising the decision to postpone their game at home to Arsenal last weekend and calling for “clarity and consistency on the application of the rule”. Spurs said that whereas “the original intention of the guidance was to deal with player availability directly affected by Covid cases”, the “unintended consequences” of the rule meant that decisions were being taken due to “player availability unrelated to Covid”. On Wednesday Mikel Arteta defended Arsenal’s decision to apply for a postponement. “We got to a point where we could not make a squad available with the numbers required in this league to play a game,” the manager said. “That’s why we did not play; it’s as simple as that.” The rules as laid out do allow games to be called off for injuries unrelated to Covid, if they contribute to an overall shortage of players. Applications are considered by the league when a team cannot field 13 outfield players and a goalkeeper from “either its squad list or its appropriately experienced Under-21 players”. The league says its medical team scrutinises all requests and will go back to clubs if they feel there is insufficient clarity on the status of players’ fitness. A Premier League spokesperson said: “The Premier League is consulting with our clubs regarding Covid-19 postponement rules and guidance in light of the changing national picture and the falling number of cases within our squads. “The League’s current guidance was amended in December following the emergence of the new Omicron variant and we continue to monitor the ongoing effects of the virus and will update our guidance accordingly.”Emma Raducanu has cited her reaction to recent adversity as essential in helping her remain on the right track and to arrive at the Australian Open in an optimal frame of mind. Last week in Sydney, Raducanu opened her season with a brutal 6-0, 6-1 loss to Elena Rybakina in less than an hour, a defeat that came while she was still recovering her fitness levels after contracting Covid in December. Minutes after leaving the court, Raducanu returned to practice and she was in a positive frame of mind as she spoke afterwards. “I didn’t waste any time at all,” she said. “I was constructive and straight back on the practice court working, which was pretty unusual to go out there straight after a loss like that. So I was feeling good, and that’s definitely a moment where I was like, ‘OK, you know where you’re at, let’s just keep working and see what happens next week.’” On Tuesday, Raducanu defeated Sloane Stephens 6-0, 2-6, 6-1 to reach the second round of the Australian Open on her senior debut. Raducanu’s victory marked the first three-set match she has played despite having won a grand slam and reached the fourth round at Wimbledon. Since she arrived in Australia, she has been spending nearly 12 hours on site each day, to the bemusement of her team. “I don’t even hang out and talk to anyone. I’m just doing training. And then in between having lunch, recovery, and then training again. And then gym and then more recovery. So I’m here from 8.30 to 7.30. I don’t know what’s happening.” A newcomer in the locker room, Raducanu says she has been speaking in Mandarin with Chinese players, some of whom have lockers situated near her own, and also her close friend Gabriela Ruse of Romania. Otherwise, she keeps to herself. “I think everyone’s still very nice to me. I mean, going into the locker room, I’m not really hanging out so much. But I’m kind of just at the club to get my business done and then leave even though my business takes 12 hours,” she said, laughing. Raducanu has also been taking inspiration from Andy Murray’s fighting spirit after the Scot survived a gruelling five-set battle with Nikoloz Basilashvili. She said: “When I was in the third set I actually thought: ‘Andy was up a set then he got pushed to five but he fought back so hard and took the decider’, so, when I went to three, I was also thinking: ‘Actually, I can fight back and win, fight like he did’. I was definitely inspired by him.” Meanwhile, Raducanu continues to grow accustomed to her coaching partnership with Torben Beltz. The German is well known for motivating his charges with forfeits and rewards. Raducanu says he has been offering acai bowls and mints for drills well done, and she has been impressed with his positivity. “He brings some great positive energy. So to have that in your corner is definitely an uplifting thing. And when we’re working, for example, last week after a loss, he was like, straight back on it. He was happy, he wasn’t dwelling on it at all. So I think that was great for me to feed off.”WH Smith has been hit by a massive shareholder rebellion, with more than half its investors failing to back payment of a £550,000 bonus to the retailer’s chief executive after it benefited from tens of millions of pounds in pandemic relief. In the group’s second bloody nose from investors in two years, just over 53% registered their dissent on the remuneration report including those voting against and those withholding their votes. Just over 45% of votes cast were against the retailer’s plans at the annual shareholder meeting on Wednesday. WH Smith has been a big beneficiary of taxpayer funds via furlough support and business rates relief through the pandemic. The vote came after WH Smith said its chief executive, Carl Cowling, who has led the retailer since November 2019, was in line to receive a bonus of £550,000 on top of a salary of £550,000 for the year to September 2021, as well as benefits and pension payments worth £85,000, according to WH Smith’s latest remuneration report, a total of £1.18m. From April, Cowling’s pay will rise to £600,000 with the potential to earn an annual bonus of £960,000 on top. In January last year the FTSE 250 retailer delayed a £25,000 pay rise given to Cowling in July 2020 after investors expressed anger against the move. WH Smith took £40m in business rates relief and £11m in payments from furlough schemes in the UK and elsewhere in the year to September 2021 according to its annual report. That was on top of £20m in business rates relief in 2020. The company said that it thought Cowling deserved the pay rise, which was delayed until September last year, amid concerns over the top-up when workers had been furloughed and the value of its shares had fallen. A spokesperson for the company, which has long been known for chunky executive payouts including handing former boss Kate Swann £9m after her final year, said there were no plans to alter its pay award for Cowling. “Despite being among the businesses hardest hit by the pandemic, WH Smith has emerged in a strong position and anticipates a return to profit in 2022,” it said. “This is as a result of the hard work of all our people, led by our executive directors. “The remuneration arrangements published in our annual report and accounts are consistent with the remuneration policy which over 98% of shareholders supported in 2019 and come alongside the award of bonuses to approximately 1,750 colleagues across our stores and head office to recognise their exceptional efforts through the pandemic.”Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today (you haven’t missed much): An intense and chaotic session of PMQs was often overshadowed by doubts over the prime minister’s future, encapsulated by the Tory grandee David Davis calling on Boris Johnson to resign: “In the name of God, go,” he said. Davis told the Guardian that the interview given by the prime minister to Sky News on Tuesday was “not what I expect from a leader”. “Up until now I had been supporting him … but it’s not leadership,” he said. “Yesterday’s interview was an attempt to escape responsibility, not to shoulder it. And that is a test of leadership.” Earlier in the session, the Labour leader Keir Starmer had lambasted Johnson for what he called “absurd and frankly unbelievable” explanations over Downing Street parties. Story here. Minutes before PMQs, the Bury South MP Christian Wakeford defected to Labour, blaming Johnson’s “disgraceful” conduct. The move piled furhter pressure on the PM as growing numbers within his party want him to go. Wakeford – elected in 2019 – crossed the floor to sit with Keir Starmer’s party moments before the session, declaring in a letter to Johnson resigning the Conservative whip that he was “incapable of offering the leadership and government this country deserves”. Story here. Plan B restrictions are to be scrapped in England from 26 January, along with compulsory self-isolation for people with Covid from 24 March, Boris Johnson announced. Mandatory mask-wearing on public transport and in shops, guidance to work from home and vaccine certificates will all come to an end from next week. While the announcement pleased a number of Johnson’s backbenchers, it has prompted concern from teaching and health unions, and from NHS and public health representatives. Keir Starmer responded saying he would back the change as long as it was supported by evidence, saying Johnson must “reassure the public he is acting to protect their health, not just his job”. Story here. Q What is your response to people who feel the government has lost all credibility leading the country through the pandemic? Javid says it’s right that the PM has accepted there were mistakes and asked for a proper investigation to establish the facts and then come back to parliament. Q Will you be publishing an impact assessment of the lifting of restrictions e.g. on the NHS? Javid says evidence has been shared throughout the pandemic and the government will continue to be as transparent as it can be. Q When will the government be updating the definition of “fully vaccinated” to two jabs and a booster? Javid says it is now known that two vaccines are not enough against Omicron but three can give 88% protection against hospitalisation, so it’s right to keep updating the definition of “fully vaccinated”. Please get vaccinated if you’re eligible, he says to end. Q Can you rule out a return to Plan B if another variant of concern emerges? Javid says we have to remain vigilant as there will be many future variants, and learn from what has worked. Q How can the PM claim to have strong leadership when he was stopped from bringing in tougher measures in England against Omicron before Christmas by his cabinet? Javid did not appear to answer this question. Q What is the scientific evidence and assessment for scrapping self-isolation in March or even earlier? Hopkins says over time they have looked at the evidence to reduce the self-isolation period using daily lateral flow tests. She adds that they will continue to monitor the impact of the virus in the population. Q The latest daily deaths figure is 359 and you’re now lifting restrictions. Is this the kind of daily death toll the country has to be comfortable with in shifting to living with Covid? Javid says the death rate has fallen dramatically thanks to the vaccine. That is how we can keep deaths low, he says. Some 40% of people with Covid in hospital are there not because they have Covid, but they happen to have Covid - almost double the number we saw with Delta, he says. So many people who have died within 28 days of a positive test did not die would not have necessarily died of Covid, he says. Hopkins adds the daily death figure quoted doesn’t account for people who died with Covid rather than of Covid. Q Is the PM living on borrowed time and will you be throwing your hat into the ring in the leadership contest again? Javid says we have a leader in the prime minister. Q Is the UKHSA completely comfortable with the decisions taken today and what will happen to cases? Hopkins says case numbers have declined and people’s behaviour will determine whether it rises or declines. Q Are you personally frustrated that you have to keep defending the PM’s actions whilst delivering important public health advice? Javid says we’ve all been pained and angered by the photos and videos that have come out in recent weeks. It’s right for the PM to come back to parliament when the investigation is complete, he says. Q Are you saying that by the end of March we will effectively be living with no restrictions whatsoever? Javid says we got the big decisions right throughout the pandemic and that’s why we can take these steps today. He says he will come back in the spring to update on the remaining restrictions, including the self-isolation requirement and testing requirements related to travel. Q What is the public health justification for ending the requirement to self-isolate if infected, and is the government prepared to bring that forward against the guidance of the World Health Organization in a global pandemic? Javid says there is still a high rate of prevalence and it’s therefore important at the moment to keep the rules in place. But we will eventually have to find a way to live with Covid as we do with flu, he says. Q Do you as health secretary offer the PM your unqualified support or are you, like Rishi Sunak, reserving judgement ahead of the Gray report? Javid says he fully supports the PM, who has apologised. When the facts are established through the report, the PM will answer further questions, he says. Q Can you hand on heart say that you’ve never bent the rules? Javid says with full confidence he has absolutely observed the rules at all times. It hasn’t been easy, he adds, but it was the right thing to do. They are now taking questions from the media. Q How can the PM continue to lead the country when one of his most senior MPs has called on him to resign? Javid says there was a huge amount of support for the prime minister’s announcement today. He says he understands people’s pain and anger. The PM has apologised and asked for the time and space for the investigation to be completed so the facts can be established and he can be scrutinised in parliament, he adds. Q Do you expect cases to continue falling quite quickly? Hopkins says cases have been falling now for the last two weeks all across the country. How people react to the removal of Plan B will determine how fast infection can spread in the population, she says. We must take our personal behaviour seriously, she adds. Michelle from Lincolnshire asks why the self-isolation period has changed to 5 days with a negative lateral flow test when since the pandemic began it’s been advised that tests can return a false result within 90 days of the infection. Hopkins says PCR tests can return positive for quite some time, so aren’t advised repeatedly unless there are repeat symptoms. However, the evidence for lateral flow has come hard and fast over the last 6-9 months, showing that once individuals have finished their infectious episode, those lateral flows become negative and remain negative for the vast majority of people, she says. That is why individuals who have two negative lateral flows can be released from isolation early, she says. The earliest that can be is day five or six, she says, allowing people to get back to work or school. They are taking questions now. Christina from Berkshire asks if there are plans to vaccinate children under 12, given high levels of hospitalisations of children with Covid. Javid says vaccination programme is currently focused on over-12s. He says the JCVI has said we should vaccinate under-12s who are at-risk and that will start this month, but this is being kept under review to see if this should be expanded. More than half the people being admitted to ICU with Covid over the last 7-8 months are unvaccinated, she says. In the general population, only 10% are unvaccinated, she says, but those individuals are disproportionately represented in ICU. The greatest thing you can do to protect yourself against hospitalisation and ICU is to get vaccinated, she says. More than 52 million people have had their first dose, over 48 million their second dose and over 36 million their booster/third dose, she says. That is two-thirds of the eligible population, she says, adding we need individuals who haven’t been jabbed to come forward as soon as possible. We have reached case numbers of less than 20,000 cases in hospital across the UK, less than half the peak we saw in December-January 2020/21, she says. There are only 703 patients in mechanical ventilator beds, which is as low as last July, she says. It is also much lower than the wave last January, she says, reflecting high levels of vaccination in the population and the reduced severity of Omicron. Dr Susan Hopkins, chief medical officer of the UKHSA, is speaking now. The number of cases in December-January, there was a three-fold higher caseload than in the same period last year during the Alpha wave, she says. The most recent 7-day average is 93,210 cases per day, a substantial come-down from a peak on 29 December of almost 220,000 cases, she says. This is a milestone, not the finish line, Javid says, as we cannot eradicate the virus and future variants. The government will set out its long-term plan for living with Covid in the spring, he says. A pandemic is a marathon, not a sprint, he says. The government is also looking to replace legal requirements on self-isolation with guidance and advice, Javid says. In the coming days, he will set out plans to further ease restrictions on visits to care homes, he says. This data supports a return to Plan A, he says. Effective immediately, the government has ended its guidance on working from home, he says. From next Thursday, mandatory certifications based on vaccines and tests will end, but organisations can still choose to use the NHS Covid pass voluntarily, he says. Also starting next Thursday, the wearing of face masks will no longer be mandated, but the government will continue to suggest that they are worn in enclosed and crowded places, especially where you come into contact with people you don’t normally meet, he says. From tomorrow, face coverings will no longer have to be worn in classrooms, and the Department for Education will shortly remove the guidance on their use in communal areas, he says. The plan has worked and Omicron is in retreat, Javid says. ONS data shows a fall in infections and hospitalisations, he says. The number of patients in ICU with Covid is now at the same level as it was back in July, he says. Instead of another lockdown, we put in place Plan B contingency measures, he says, leaving us with far fewer restrictions that most of Europe and buying us time against Omicron. Since then, 15 million people have been boosted, he says. Testing capacity has also been expanded, he says. We’ve also secured more antiviral treatments, he says. Reopening during the warmer weather back in July showed us how to live with Covid, he says. Four months later, when Omicron was identified, case numbers rose to record levels - over a third of the UK’s total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases happened over the last 8 weeks, he says. Javid is speaking now. Thanks to the progress we’ve all made, he says, we’ll be lifting Plan B restrictions and returning to Plan A. The health and social care secretary, Sajid Javid, is holding a press conference at 4pm to outline the latest update to Covid guidelines in England as Plan B restrictions are set to come to an end. The final nail-biting episode of the sixth series of Line of Duty was watched by 12.8 million people last May, the biggest audience for a television drama for 20 years. Now more than 5 million people have watched a four-minute clip of AC-12’s feared officers interrogating the man at the heart of a real-life scandal gripping the nation: Boris Johnson. The spoof video was posted on Twitter by its creators, the satirical artists Led By Donkeys, on Tuesday and was swiftly retweeted by the Line of Duty writer Jed Mercurio with the words “brilliant work”. Using clips from the television series cut with excerpts of Johnson’s statements on so-called “partygate”, it purports to show the prime minister being questioned by AC-12 investigators Ted Hastings, Steve Arnott and Kate Fleming as part of Operation BYOB. Read more here: In case you missed it, my colleague Simon Hattenstone interviewed the Labour leader, Keir Starmer. In the interview, Starmer said: The cover-up isn’t worse than the crime, but the cover-up compounds the crime. Johnson’s now on his third defence. His first defence when we tackled him on this at the beginning of December was: ‘I’ve been assured there were no parties,’ and his second defence when the video came out was: ‘I’m furious there have been these parties; I’ve only just found out.’ And if the third defence is true, then obviously the first two are false – and that’s a major problem for him.” Christian Wakeford said “compromise isn’t a dirty word, but it is possible to compromise too far”. He told broadcasters: There’s been far too many issues where I’ve felt we’ve been on the wrong side. And compromise isn’t a dirty word, but it is possible to compromise too far. And when it’s getting to a point where it’s difficult to explain some of these issues then you know it’s wrong. At the moment we [have] a party trying to defend the indefensible and they are doing so gladly. Christian Wakeford said defecting from the Tories to Labour was “the most difficult decision I have ever had to make”. The Bury South MP told broadcasters: This isn’t a matter of just deciding this morning, you know, I want to be a Labour MP – this has been many months in the build up. And whether it goes back to the issues over free school meals and Dominic Cummings, or over universal credit and the cost-of-living crisis... the Owen Paterson affair or now partygate, there has been a lot of... build up to this and a lot of soul searching that’s taken many sleepless nights. He added: This is something that has taken many months to come to and it’s not been an easy decision, if anything it’s been the most difficult decision I have ever had to make. But I do think it’s the right decision for me, I think it’s the right decision for Bury South. He said he was elected as a centrist and remains a centrist following his defection to the Labour party. He told broadcasters: I was elected as a moderate and as a centrist and I am still a moderate and a centrist. I’m just wearing a different rosette. On whether there should now be a byelection in Bury South, he said: I think it was quite clear that even the prime minister wasn’t calling for a by-election today, and I think it’s been quite clear that they know they’d lose. I want to get on with the day-to-day job of representing the people who elected me as a centrist. With a Conservative leadership campaign appearing imminent, hopeful Tory MPs are checking their contacts and quietly ringing colleagues to gauge support – and not just the ones everyone expects. Away from Rishi Sunak, Liz Truss and the other perceived favourites, here are some others who could also give it a try: Conservative MPs have called on Boris Johnson to rethink plans for the Covid-19 vaccine to be compulsory for NHS workers. PA Media reports: Danny Kruger, Desmond Swayne, and former ministers Esther McVey, Mark Harper and Andrew Murrison called in the Commons for the policy to be reviewed after advice to ministers was leaked suggesting evidence for its effectiveness is weak. The prime minister said the plan is supported by the NHS, has increased vaccine uptake amongst NHS staff, and that healthcare workers have a “professional responsibility” to get the jab. But Johnson also said: “We will reflect on the way ahead. We don’t want to drive people out of the service.” Frontline staff must be fully vaccinated against Covid-19 with two jabs by 1 April – meaning they must have had their first vaccine by 3 February. Healthcare employers have been told that from the following day – 4 February – unvaccinated staff should be invited to a meeting and told that a potential outcome may be dismissal. Former minister Esther McVey said: “Over the last two years, these people have worked tirelessly on the front line and we have clapped these key workers. Can the prime minister now make sure he doesn’t sack them? It is utterly unjustifiable.” Johnson said: “It is a very difficult point when it comes to patients who have contracted fatal Covid” in hospital. Boris Johnson will challenge any no confidence vote launched against him by his own MPs and expects to fight the next general election, according to the No 10 press secretary. PA reports that Johnson’s press secretary said he would have further meetings with MPs on Wednesday to shore up support on his backbenches. Referring to the Bury South MP, Christian Wakeford’s defection to Labour, the press secretary said: “I think we’re obviously sorry to see a colleague - who was elected by constituents, who voted for a Boris Johnson-led government - leave and attempt to put Keir Starmer into No 10, which will be a disaster for the country.” She added that she was not aware of any further impending defections of Tory MPs. Setting out what the PM had been saying to MPs he had met with, she said: “The broad message of all of these meetings is to focus on what we’ve delivered for the country so far since we were elected, from getting Brexit done to record investments in local transport and infrastructure, to tackling this unprecedented pandemic, and we’ve consistently made tough decisions which have resulted in us being in the position we’re in now.” The deputy Labour leader, Angela Rayner, said she “welcomes” Christian Wakeford joining the Labour party. PA reports: Speaking to media as she left parliament, she said: “I welcome it, I really welcome it.” She did not answer any questions about his previous voting record. The shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, said: “We’re really pleased, it just shows the support there is for the Labour party and we’re being an alternative government, so it’s really good news.” Asked her thoughts on doubts about his voting record, she said: “We’re welcoming people because we want to show how the Labour party is an alternative government to the country.” She added that the party would welcome hearing from any other defectors. “We’d love to talk to people who want to join us.” Cooper also described Boris Johnson’s appearance at PMQs as “chaotic”. She said: “I don’t think he’s taking seriously how angry people are about what’s happened. You just can’t behave like that.” Shadow health minister and A&amp;E doctor Rosena Allin-Khan has lambasted the Downing Street parties as “an insult to all the [healthcare] staff who made sacrifices”. She told PoliticsHome: It’s an absolute joke. It’s an insult. It’s like a slap in the face to everybody who has put their lives at risk – some of whom lost their lives – and risked harming their loved ones. I remember going to shifts and coming back and shouting at my young children not to run up to me and hug me, so I could take my clothes off, shower, wash my hair, everything so as not to have them catch Covid. That was what people were going through on a daily basis. We saw our colleagues die, some of my colleagues were in intensive care for months. I will not buy for a hot second that a bunch of civil servants felt so stressed that they thought it was okay to break the rules, that they took suitcases to local supermarkets, filled it with bottles of wine, and then came back and decided which civil servant was going to be the DJ. Downing Street has said it will review the rules on testing for travel within 48 hours of arriving in England in January. PA reports that the prime minister’s spokesperson defended the decision not to ease travel rules on grounds it is important to maintain “that extra layer of surveillance” at this point in the pandemic to watch out for the emergence of new variants. Professor Martyn Bennett, an expert in history at Nottingham Trent University, has got in touch to give a bit of background to MP David Davis’ quote imploring the prime minister to “in the name of God, go”. He said: Davis credited the statement to Sir Leo Amery who said these same words to Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain in May 1940. It was part of the pressure put on Chamberlain in the wake of his failure to prevent war. Within days, Winston Churchill was the Prime Minister. However, these words were spoken in parliament almost 300 years earlier. Amery was quoting Oliver Cromwell from 20 April 1653 when with armed guards he burst into the one chamber parliament and turfed it out after it had failed to reform government and set new elections to replace itself. Cromwell effectively closed parliament, thus opening the way for the establishment of a reformed government and later the Protectorate eight months later. These are truly dramatic words, with a long history and one which herald great change. Will they do so again? Tory MP Jonathan Gullis has told Sky News that MPs are withdrawing letters of no confidence from Sir Graham Brady, but when pressed on who and how many, he said he didn’t know and hadn’t spoken to anyone who intended to do so. Rachel Hall here taking over from Nicola Slawson. I’ll be keeping an eye on everything that’s happening on this tumultuous day in Westminster so you don’t have to. If you’ve got any tips, queries or general thoughts I’d love to here them, you can reach me at rachel.hall@theguardian.com. Following David Davis’ plea for Boris Johnson to ‘in the name of God, go’, Conservative Sir Edward Leigh (Gainsborough) told the prime minister “for God’s sake, keep going”. He said: But for this Prime Minister we would have had far more severe lockdowns and restrictions, so may I say to him, please prime minister remain true to your instincts, please sweep away all these remaining controls like isolation which are crippling the NHS and may say to him lastly to paraphrase Leo Amery for God’s sake, keep going. Johnson replied: That’s right, I haven’t sat here quite long enough, indeed nothing like long enough in my view ... I think that masks do erode our ability to educate properly and to learn properly, and I’m glad that they’re going. To laughter in the chamber, SNP Stephen Flynn asked: Can I have confirmation from the prime minister, is he getting rid of the Covid rules simply because he doesn’t understand them? Johnson replied: We’re able to make progress on the Covid rules and to get rid of them because of our deep understanding of the pandemic. Treasury chief secretary Simon Clarke has brushed off a call by David Davis for Boris Johnson to resign as prime minister. Clarke said Johnson was focused on leading the country out of the Covid pandemic. He told BBC Radio 4’s The World at One: The prime minister was very clear we will get on with the job of getting the country through the pandemic. I disagree very strongly with David Davis, I disagree very strongly with Christian Wakeford. The priority now is to make sure that this country which has, like much of the world, gone through such difficult times in the last two years is now in a position to come out of the pandemic really strongly. We have the strongest economic growth in the world. I am fully supportive of the prime minister. Boris Johnson is sorry to see former Tory MP Christian Wakeford defect to Labour, No 10 has said. The Prime Minister’s press secretary said: I think we’re obviously sorry to see a colleague who was elected by constituents who voted for a Boris Johnson-led government leave and attempt to put Keir Starmer into No 10, which will be a disaster for the country. What the people of Bury South and the whole country need is a strong Conservative government making tough decisions to deliver for them, and as you heard the PM say in the house the Conservative Party won Bury South on an agenda of uniting and levelling up and delivering for the public. The press secretary was asked about reports that Wakeford had been threatened by Tory whips with having his seat boundary changed, but she said: “I’m not aware of that.” Asked whether there should be a by-election in Bury South, she added: “I think that that is up to the constituents of Bury South.” A Labour spokesman said he would be “very happy” for Boris Johnson to call a general election and put his claims that the Tories would win again in Bury South “to the test”. At Prime Minister’s Questions, Johnson said: As for Bury South, let me say to him, the Conservative Party won Bury South for the first time in a generation under this Prime Minister on an agenda of uniting and levelling up and delivering for the people of Bury South. We will win again in Bury South. The Labour spokesman told a briefing for journalists: I’m very happy for him to call a general election and put that to the test. The Tory grandee David Davis told Boris Johnson: “In the name of God, go,” during an often chaotic prime minister’s questions overshadowed by intense doubt about Johnson’s future. After a fierce set of exchanges between Johnson and Keir Starmer, Davis rose to tell Johnson that he had spent weeks defending him from “angry constituents”, but that repeated reports about lockdown-breaching parties were too much. The former Brexit secretary said: I expect my leaders to shoulder the responsibility for the actions they take. Yesterday he did the opposite of that. So I will remind him of a quotation which may be familiar to his ear, Leopold Amery to Neville Chamberlain: ‘You have sat too long here for any good you have been doing. In the name of God, go.’ Asked by the Guardian afterwards what had motivated him to make an intervention, Davis said the interview given by the prime minister to Sky News on Tuesday was “not what I expect from a leader”. He said: Up until now I had been supporting him … but it’s not leadership. Yesterday’s interview was an attempt to escape responsibility, not to shoulder it. And that is a test of leadership. It is understood junior colleagues had been pressing Davis to make a statement publicly calling for the prime minister to go, saying the situation needed a “big figure” to intervene. Read more from my colleagues Peter Walker and Rowena Mason here: A cross-party committee of councillors is to decide the future of the Sheffield city council chief executive, Kate Josephs, a week after she apologised for having leaving drinks in Whitehall during lockdown. Josephs led the government’s Covid-19 taskforce from July to December 2020. After details of the gathering emerged in the media she released a statement admitting it took place and saying she was “truly sorry”. Sheffield city council, her current employer, said a committee of councillors would be set up “to consider what steps, if any, should be taken next”. Terry Fox, the leader of Sheffield city council, said: I have heard strong and emotional views from across the city. I absolutely understand the reaction after all that Sheffield has been through these last couple of years. We now need to let the committee carry out this work and we also continue to await the outcome of the Cabinet Office’s wider report. There is nothing further to add at this time. The council said there was a prescribed statutory procedure for roles at this level in local government, which meant it had to be dealt with by a cross-party committee. Josephs, it said, had this week taken a short period of annual leave. There is no deadline for the committee to report. The council said: We expect the committee to begin work in the coming days. While we cannot yet know how long it will take, we expect it to move at pace. We expect that it will also take in the findings of the Sue Gray report. Read more here: Asked if Labour are in talks with any more Tory MPs who might be considering defecting, a spokesman for the Labour party said: “I am not going to get into that.” Speaking during a briefing for journalists, he said: What you’ve seen today is a decision from Christian Wakeford that shows his confidence in the Labour Party led by Keir Starmer and we are very pleased to welcome him to the Labour Party today. Christian Wakeford’s defection did not come as a surprise to Labour who said it has been on the cards for a while A Labour spokesman said the party had been in talks with the former Tory MP for “some time”. Asked if he could be more precise, the spokesman added: “A while.” He said the contact pre-dated the Downing Street party allegations. The spokesman said: As he says in his letter today ... there are a number of issues that he’s highlighted in his letter, whether it’s the cost-of-living crisis or the government’s failure on levelling up, that have led him to this decision. It’s a decision that he’s been thinking about for some time. He added that Keir Starmer had met with Wakeford personally on Monday evening. Not everyone in the Labour party is impressed with the new MP in their ranks. The left-wing Momentum campaign group said Christian Wakeford “should be nowhere near the Labour Party”. A Momentum spokesman said: Christian Wakeford has voted with this hard-right Tory government almost 400 times in just two years - voting against measures to stop climate change and tax avoidance and against enabling domestic abuse victims to have access to benefits. He should be nowhere near the Labour Party and the decision by Starmer to accept him is an insult to the millions of working people who want to see a fairer country. Wakeford should be booted out of Labour and a by-election called immediately. Labour must back a candidate that will stand up for the people of Bury South and against this Tory government. Other members of the party have also been raking over the MP’s voting history with journalist Owen Jones suggesting Wakefield needs to explain the political journey he has been on and if he now embraces progressive values. A Labour spokesman indicated the party’s leader believes there will be no need to hold a by-election in Bury South following Christian Wakeford’s defection. Asked if, as far as Keir Starmer is concerned, there is no principle requiring anyone who defects from one party to another to stand for re-election, the spokesman said: “Correct.” On whether Wakeford will face a trigger ballot in the coming months, the spokesman said: We’ll set out all of the process, obviously, once we’ve had a chance to speak to people, the relevant people that vote in the local party and nationally, and we’ll happily set out the process at that point. But I don’t want to pre-empt that now. Awkwardly, Wakefield previously co-sponsored a bill mandating by-elections for MP who defect. Linked to the announcement that Plan B measures will be dropped in England from next week is falling infection levels across most of the country, writes our science editor Ian Sample. Covid infections are falling across most parts of the UK, according to the latest official data which suggest that the winter wave driven by the Omicron variant has passed its peak. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimates that infections in the community fell in England, Wales and Scotland in the week ending 15 January, with the trend in Northern Ireland still uncertain. The figures mark a turning point in the latest phase of the epidemic which has seen weeks of record-breaking infections in the UK fuelled by Omicron. While infection levels are still high, the ONS estimates that they fell in England from 3,735,000 in the first week of January, with 1 in 15 people testing positive, to 2,984,200 or 1 in 20 testing positive last week. Similar declines were seen in Wales and Scotland where the ONS estimates that 1 in 25 and 1 in 20 people, respectively, had the virus in the week ending 15 January. Infections may be approaching a peak in Northern Ireland too, where a further 1 in 20 were estimated to have the virus last week. The interim data from the ONS, which will be followed by a full report on Friday, show Covid infections declined in all regions of England in the most recent week, except the north-east and the south-west where it was unclear whether cases had peaked for now. While infections decreased in most age groups in England in the latest week of the survey, they rose in young children aged two years old to year six of primary school. Sarah Crofts, the head of analytical outputs for the ONS Covid-19 infection survey, said the latest figures showed “a welcome decrease in infections across most parts of the UK and among all age groups apart from younger children”. Boris Johnson has announced the end of all Covid measures introduced to combat the Omicron variant from next week, including compulsory mask-wearing on public transport and in shops, guidance to work from home and vaccine certificates. The prime minister also said the legal requirement on people with coronavirus to self-isolate would be allowed to lapse when the regulations expired on 24 March, and that date could be brought forward. Responding for Labour, Keir Starmer said he would back the move as long as it was supported by evidence, saying Johnson must “reassure the public he is acting to protect their health, not just his job”. Updating MPs in the Commons, Johnson said so-called plan B restrictions would be lifted on 26 January, the review date for the measures introduced in December as Omicron swept across the UK. Johnson argued that he had taken a “different path” to much of Europe, but that Covid data was “showing that, time and again, this government got the toughest decisions right”. The swift change has been seen as an attempt by Johnson to placate Conservative MPs angry with him over reports about lockdown-breaching parties in No 10 by introducing a move demanded by many backbenchers, including the Covid Recovery Group. However, there is concern among some directors of public health that ending all restrictions immediately could be too soon, especially in the north of England, where the Omicron wave hit slightly later than in London. To cheers from some on the Tory benches, Johnson also announced an immediate end for the need for secondary pupils to wear masks at school. Read more here: MPs and pundits have been sharing their views on the performances of Boris Johnson and Keir Starmer at that dramatic and very noisy PMQs. Here’s a selection of tweets: And here’s Keir Starmer’s full statement in response: I would like to welcome Christian Wakeford to the Labour party. He has always put the people of Bury South first. As Christian said, the policies of the Conservative government are doing nothing to help the people of Bury South and indeed are only making the struggles they face on a daily basis worse. People across Britain face a cost of living crisis but this incompetent Tory government is asleep at the wheel, distracted by a chaos of its own making. Meanwhile families, businesses and pensioners are suffering from the Conservative failure to tackle rising food, fuel and energy prices. Labour are the only ones who have put forward a plan to help people through the Tory cost of living crisis. I’m determined to build a new Britain which guarantees security, prosperity and respect for all and I’m delighted that Christian has decided to join us in this endeavour. Here’s Christian Wakeford’s letter to Boris Johnson in full: Dear prime minister, I am writing to inform you of my decision to resign from the Conservative party and apply to join the Labour party. From today I will be sitting as the Labour MP for Bury South because I have reached the conclusion that the best interests of my constituents are served by the programme put forward by Keir Starmer and his party. I care passionately about the people of Bury South and I have concluded that the policies of the Conservative government that you lead are doing nothing to help the people of my constituency and indeed are only making the struggles they face on a daily basis worse. Britain needs a government focused on tackling the cost of living crisis and providing a path out of the pandemic that protects living standards and defends the security of all. It needs a government that upholds the highest standards of integrity and probity in public life and sadly both you and the Conservative Party as a whole have shown themselves incapable of offering the leadership and government this country deserves. Being elected as MP for Bury South was the proudest day of my life. I care passionately about the area and will always be grateful to those who have supported me. Today, however, I am in no doubt that they will be better served by my joining a party that genuinely has their interests at heart. I have wrestled with my conscience for many months, and you will know that I have made my policy misgivings clear on many occasions in private and sometimes in public. I can no longer support a government that has shown itself consistently out of touch with the hard working people of Bury South and the country as a whole. Under Keir Starmer, the Labour party is back firmly in the centre of British politics, in touch with working people, and ready to provide an alternative government that this country can be proud of, and not embarrassed by. My decision is about much more than your leadership and the disgraceful way you have conducted yourself in recent weeks. However, I don’t believe all politicians are the same and I do believe in the power of politics to be a force for good. So does Keir Starmer. He has shown that integrity in the way he has led his party on issues that matter to me, not least the vital challenge of combatting antisemitism. I will always put the people of Bury South first and will continue to speak out for the changes the area needs. Changes that can only be delivered by a Labour government with Keir Starmer. Yours, Christian Wakeford The SNP Westminster leader, Ian Blackford, told the Commons during PMQs: Will the prime minister finally take responsibility, resign, go, prime minister. This week was supposed to be ‘Operation Save Big Dog’ but it’s quickly become ‘Operation Dog’s Dinner’. Over the past few days we’ve had more damaging revelations about Downing Street rule-breaking, more evidence that parliament has been misled and an even longer list of ludicrous, absolutely ludicrous, excuses from the prime minister. First he claimed there were no parties, then he wasn’t present, then he admitted he was at them but he didn’t know it was a party and then the latest sorry excuse is really them most pathetic of them all, nobody told me ... nobody told the prime minister he was breaking his own rules. Absolutely pathetic. The prime minister laughing once again, laughing at the British public. The prime minister is taking the public for fools, nobody believes him. Will the prime minister finally take responsibility, resign, go, Prime Minister. Boris Johnson replied: No, but I thank him for his question again and let me just remind him that there’s an inquiry that is due to conclude. I believe he is wrong in what he asserts, but we’ll have to wait and see what the inquiry says. The most important thing from the point of view of the UK government is that we’re coming out of the restrictions that we’ve been in. I’m delighted to see that that’s happening in Scotland as well. Keir Starmer concluded his questions by raising soaring energy bills, insisting Labour has a plan to respond while the government is offering “nothing” and “too distracted by their own chaos to do their job”. He said: While Labour was setting out plans to heat homes, he was buying a fridge to keep the party wine chilled. While we were setting out plans to keep bills down, he was planning parties. And while we were setting out plans to save jobs in the steel industry, he was trying to save just one job - his own. Doesn’t the country deserve so much better than this out-of-touch, out-of-control, out-of-ideas and soon to be out-of-office prime minister? Boris Johnson defended the government’s record during the pandemic and beyond, adding: When the history of this pandemic comes to be written and the history of the Labour party comes to be written - and believe me, they are history and will remain history - it will show that we delivered while they dithered, and we vaccinated while they vacillated. He went on to hail the booster jab programme and praised staff in Whitehall, the government and the NHS, adding: I am intensely proud of what this government has done. Keir Starmer said during PMQs that the prime minister’s defence requires the public to believe that “as he waded through the empty bottles and platters of sandwiches, he didn’t realise it was a party”. Starmer said: The prime minister’s account gets more extraordinary with each version of his defence. If the prime minister’s new defence were true, it requires him to suggest that his staff are not being truthful when they say they warned him about the party. It requires the prime minister to expect us to believe that whilst every other person who was invited on 20 May to the party was told it was a social occasion, he alone was told it was a work meeting. It also requires the prime minister to ask us to accept that as he waded through the empty bottles and platters of sandwiches, he didn’t realise it was a party. Does the prime minister realise how ridiculous that sounds? Boris Johnson said “lots of people are interested in the exact legal justification” for the picture of the Labour leader “drinking a pint of beer, of a bottle of beer”. The prime minister added: Perhaps he can tell the house about that in a minute. But what I can tell the house is that throughout the pandemic, people across government have been working flat out to protect the British public. PMQs is over for another week. There have been a few questions about whether or not the royal family can be discussed in the house of commons. It is actually the case as Alice Lilly of the Institute of Government points out: The rules say: No question can be put which brings the name of the Sovereign or the influence of the Crown directly before Parliament, or which casts reflections upon the Sovereign or the royal family. A question has been altered at the Speaker’s direction on the ground that the name of the Sovereign should not be introduced to affect the views of the House. Questions are, however, allowed on such matters as the costs to public funds of royal events and royal palaces. A little refresher on why this came up, if you missed it: Keir Starmer told the Commons: Last year Her Majesty the Queen sat alone when she marked the passing of the man she’d been married to for 73 years, she followed the rules of the country that she leads. On the eve of that funeral, a suitcase was filled with booze and wheeled into Downing Street, a DJ played and staffed partied late into the night. The prime minister has been forced to hand an apology to Her Majesty the Queen. Isn’t he ashamed that he didn’t hand in his resignation at the same time? Speaker Sir Lindsay Hoyle, intervening, said: We normally would not, quite rightly, mention the royal family. We don’t get into discussions on the royal family. Boris Johnson added: Well in that case, Mr Speaker, I must ask (Sir Keir) to withdraw it. Hoyle said he had dealt with it before Johnson got back to his feet but was pulled back to his seat by Chancellor Rishi Sunak tugging on the prime minister’s jacket. In a dramatic moment to match Christian Wakeford defecting, Tory MP and former minister David Davis has urged Boris Johnson to go. He told Johnson he had spent weeks defending him from “angry constituents”, including by reminding them of the “successes of Brexit”. I expect my leaders to shoulder the responsibility for the actions they take. Yesterday he did the opposite of that. Davis then raised the roof by concluding with a quote from Leo Amery to Neville Chamberlain: You have sat there too long for all the good you have done. In the name of God, go.” Responding, the prime minister said: I must say to him, I don’t know what he is talking about. What I can tell him – I don’t know what quotation he is alluding to – what I can tell him is and I think have told this house repeatedly, I take full responsibility for everything done in this Government and throughout the pandemic. Labour MP Diana Johnson delivers one of the most scathing questions: When the prime minister has to spend his time trying to convince the British public that he is stupid not dishonest isn’t it time for him to go? Boris Johnson said in response: I’ve made my point. I think that the British public have responded to what this government has had to say in the most eloquent way possible. They have beaten Covid so far. They have helped to defeat Covid so far, with the steps they have taken, by getting vaccinated and implementing Plan B, and I thank them. Keir Starmer asked Boris Johnson when he first became aware that any of his staff had “concerns” about the gathering in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 20 2020. Starmer said: Not only did he write the rules, but some of his staff say they did warn him about attending the party on May 20, 2020. Now, I have heard the prime minister’s very carefully crafted response to that accusation. It almost sounds like a lawyer wrote it. So, I’ll be equally careful with my question. When did the prime minister first become aware that any of his staff had concerns about the 20 May party? Johnson replied “it is for the inquiry to come forward with an explanation of what happened”, adding: “I am afraid he simply must wait.” Here’s some more quotes from earlier: If the prime minister thinks the only accusation he faces is that he once had a beer with a takeaway then Operation Save Big Dog is in deeper trouble than I thought. If the prime minister misleads parliament, should they resign? Boris Johnson replied: [Starmer] is continuing to ask a series of questions which he knows will be fully addressed by the inquiry, he is wasting this house’s time, he is wasting the people’s time, and continues to be completely irrelevant. Starmer countered: I know it’s not going well prime minister, but look on the bright side – at least his staff at No 10 know how to pack a suitcase. This jibe refers to reports that junior staff were sent out with a suitcase to fill up with bottles of wine for the parties at No 10. As the prime minister laughs and looks at his watch, SNP’s Ian Blackford says Boris Johnson is “absolutely pathetic” and “laughing at the British public”. “Nobody believes him,” he says. He said: Mr Speaker, I’m afraid nobody is buying this act any more. There ought to be some respect and dignity for the prime minister. He said that the prime minister “believes he is above the rules” and “brazenly twists the truth” and he “simply isn’t fit for office”. Kate Ferguson of the Sun says Boris Johnson is not receiving support from the backbenchers although those in the cabinet are being as loud as they can. Silence descends in the chamber as Keir Starmer raises the fact that the Queen sat alone at Prince Phillip’s funeral while the day before at No 10, there was a party that included DJ’s and late night revelry. The Speaker, however, points out that the royal family are not to be discussed which means we miss out on Boris Johnson’s response (although he did try and waste some time by calling for Starmer to retract his comments on the Queen). The noise in the chamber raises again as the speaker of the house struggles to maintain order. Chris Smyth of the Times points out this might be in Johnson’s favour: Keir Starmer continues to mock Boris Johnson for his response to questions about the party on 20 May, suggesting a lawyer helped him write his responses. Johnson is sticking to his script and saying MPs must wait for Sue Gray’s inquiry into parties at No 10 during various lockdowns. Losing his temper a little, Johnson says: He continues to ask questions which he knows will be fully addressed by the inquiry. He is wasting people’s time. Boris Johnson decides to address the decision of Christian Wakeford to defect to Labour and claims credit for the MP winning his seat in 2019. He said: As for Bury South – the Conservative party won Bury South for the first time in generations under this prime minister. We will win again in Bury South. His comments are met with huge cheers and bench banging from his Tory colleagues. Keir Starmer is clearly really enjoying himself and makes a joke that goes down well saying: I’m sure the chief whip has told them to bring their own boos. When welcoming his new MP, Keir Starmer said: I would like to welcome Christian to the Labour party. He has always put the people of Bury South first. As Christian said, the policies of the Conservative government are doing nothing to help the people of Bury South and indeed are only making the struggles they face worse. Christian Wakeford was cheered by Labour MPs as he arrived in the Commons ahead of prime minister’s questions and took his seat on the opposition benches. He opted to sit on the second row behind Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer. Starmer is clearly in high spirits and has welcomed his new colleague to more cheers in the chamber. Wendy Chamberlain, Liberal Democrat MP for North East Fife mocks Boris Johnson for continuing to change his mind about his excuse for the party on 20 May. Johnson said: I apologise sincerely for any mis-judgments that were made. Hold on to your hats, prime minister’s question time is due to start in a few minutes and newly defected Christian Wakeford is rumoured to be planning to sit behind Keir Starmer. This is a huge blow for the prime minister ahead of what is one of his most important PMQs since he took over in 2019 and while he is extremely vulnerable. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer welcomed MP Christian Wakeford’s defection from the Tories and said he was “delighted”. He said: I would like to welcome Christian Wakeford to the Labour party. He has always put the people of Bury South first. As Christian said, the policies of the Conservative government are doing nothing to help the people of Bury South and, indeed, are only making the struggles they face on a daily basis worse. I’m determined to build a new Britain which guarantees security, prosperity and respect for all, and I’m delighted that Christian has decided to join us in this endeavour. Christian Wakeford, the Tory MP for Bury South is defecting to the Labour party, Sebastian Payne of the Financial Times has tweeted. Harry Cole of the Sun has the statement. Wakeford has told Boris Johnson that “you and the Conservative party as a whole have shown themselves incapable of offering the leadership and government this country deserves”. The defence minister James Heappey has urged his Conservative colleagues to wait for Sue Gray’s report before submitting letters of no confidence in the prime minister, calling for “cool heads” as Boris Johnson battles for his political future. Johnson will face the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday for the first time since No 10 was forced to apologise to the Queen over two parties held the night before Prince Philip’s funeral. Heappey conceded that Johnson had appeared under pressure in a Sky News interview on Tuesday. “He looked like the man who has the weight of the world on his shoulders,” he said. The minister acknowledged the intensity of public anger, saying he had had “hundreds of emails” from constituents, and expected the prime minister to have to make further apologies. “People are absolutely furious at what they have heard and seen,” he said. But Heappey called on Tory MPs to await the findings of Gray, who is the heading the investigation into alleged rule-breaking at Downing Street, before moving against Johnson. “I wish that they would wait. This feels like a time for cool heads in parliament,” he said. “I think we should all be wanting to wait to see what evidence she has gathered from across everybody she has spoken to and what judgments she comes to and then we can make a decision about what happens next.” Read the full story here: Paul Brand from ITV has some intel on the timing of further letters being sent as it will affect when the vote of no confidence takes place if enough MPs write in. Those who want to get rid of Boris Johnson do not want the vote to take place on Friday which means some MPs may delay writing in. Gordon Rayner from the Telegraph points out why the timing is so important: The pub chain JD Wetherspoon has criticised the government’s “hypocrisy” over parties at 10 Downing Street while restrictions forced pub sales to crash. Wetherspoon also said the latest plan B restrictions brought in at the start of the Omicron wave of infections in December had depressed sales over the crucial festive period in the hospitality sector for a second year running. The pub chain, run by chairman and founder Tim Martin, directed its ire at the government over “partygate”. Wetherspoon said “there would have been a number of advantages for the nation” if pubs had been open on 20 May 2020, the date on which the embattled prime minister attended a “bring your own booze” party in the garden of No 10. The trading update alleged that Covid-19 controls in pubs at the time “were superior to private parties”. It argued that this was true because no outbreaks of the virus among customers were reported in public health data, although it did not cite any specific evidence for the claim. Scientific modelling has repeatedly suggested that limiting crowded gatherings helps to reduce coronavirus infections. The update on Wednesday also claimed that staff in Wetherspoon’s pubs “would have easily dealt with the ‘high jinks’ alleged to have occurred at No 10” and that CCTV in central London pubs would have helped “subsequent inquiries” into the parties. Read more here: The Tories in Wales have backed a legal challenge by the civil liberties campaign group Big Brother Watch against the Labour government’s Covid pass scheme. Big Brother Watch is pursuing a judicial review of the pass scheme and full disclosure of the documents and advice that led Welsh ministers to implement it. The group is ultimately seeking a court order quashing mandatory Covid passes. The pass – which the Tories describe as a “vaccine passport” – allows people to prove they are vaccinated or have had a negative lateral flow test so they can attend large events or venues. Shadow health minister Russell George said: Vaccine passports are coercive, ineffective, costly to business, and continue to have no evidence base. We must not forget that they are not a route out of restrictions, they are a restriction. Therefore, the Welsh Conservatives are supportive of this legal challenge against the Labour government’s continued imposition of the freedom-limiting passport on the people of Wales. As legislators, our job is to make good law and strike down bad law: vaccine passports neither limit the spread of the virus nor increase uptake of the vaccine, so have no place on the statute books. Labour, with Plaid Cymru’s support, are only keeping them in place so they do not look like their U-turning on one of the most poorly informed policies ever implemented during the age of devolution. Boris Johnson is expected to instruct millions to return to workplaces across England as he tries to placate furious MPs with a review of Covid restrictions that could end all rules introduced to combat Omicron. The cabinet will meet on this morning to examine Covid data and review plan B restrictions imposed in December amid the rapid spread of the variant, with Johnson set to update the Commons later in the day. While an official statement said decisions remained “finely balanced”, ministers are widely expected to approve the end of current advice for people to work from home where possible and the use of vaccine certificates to enter venues like nightclubs and sports stadiums. This would happen from 26 January, the pre-set review point for the plan B measures. It is also possible, if considered less likely, that the cabinet could drop the final plan B restriction which mandates masks on public transport and in shops. This move in particular would please many Conservative backbenchers, especially those in the influential Covid Recovery Group. Read more here: Professor Jason Leitch was asked about suggestions that free lateral flow tests may come to an end due to the cost. Scotland’s national clinical director told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme it is “too early” to decide, adding that the UK countries have discussed it. He said there has “certainly been no suggestion that in the near future they will be charged for”. Leitch added: I think they are a crucial building block of our baseline, a bit like Test and Trace, Test and Protect for us in Scotland, the alcohol gels, the vaccinations, I think these are what we’re going to be left with post-Omicron. A rising Conservative rebellion against Boris Johnson that could see the prime minister ousted over the No 10 party scandals dominate the front pages. The manoeuvring by some Red Wall Tory MPs – dubbed the “pork pie putsch” – follows a disastrous interview given by Johnson in which he says he had not lied over the Downing Street parties. The UK newspaper front pages are full of Johnson’s latest woes. Here’s a look at what they say: Boris Johnson will face MPs for prime minister’s questions later and will also seek to boost his position with Tory MPs and the public by announcing an easing of England’s coronavirus restrictions. Armed forces minister James Heappey urged his colleagues to keep “cool heads” as he said now was not the time to change leader, with looming economic and international challenges. Heappey, previously a parliamentary aide to Johnson, suggested the prime minister may not have fully understood the nature of the event he was going to in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020 as his diary was rigorously controlled by staff. He told Times Radio: The first time that what he was going into would have been brought into focus would have been in the pre-brief he had as he was going down the stairs. He said he had received “well over” 500 emails about the partygate scandal and “the overwhelming majority, at least nine in 10, if not 19 in 20, are absolutely furious and cannot understand how all of this has happened”. But he added: I choose to believe what the prime minister has said. But I know that that’s not good enough for many of my constituents. If Gray’s report “says something different then we’re in a different place”, he acknowledged, indicating that Johnson would have to resign if he was found to have misled parliament. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: The ministerial code is clear: the highest responsibility that any minister has is to be accurate in what they say to the House of Commons. That is the very foundation of our parliamentary democracy. Meanwhile, environment secretary George Eustice told BBC’s Good Morning Scotland: I’ve got confidence in the prime minister. Clearly the revelations that have been coming out are damaging and it’s unsettled parts of the Conservative parliamentary party, there’s no denying that. The mood of Conservative MPs was hardening against Boris Johnson last night, with open talk of how to oust the prime minister and who should succeed him as he gave a disastrous interview claiming not to have lied over Downing Street parties. A string of Tory MPs from various ranks and wings of the party said they believed there would be enough letters to trigger a leadership contest after the publication of the Sue Gray report into allegations of lockdown breaches, with some reports on Tuesday night that it could come sooner. Johnson was trying to shore up his support in the parliamentary party after it emerged a group of a dozen or so of the 2019 intake had met in the office of Alicia Kearns to discuss his future as prime minister. After the meeting – dubbed the “pork pie putsch” as Kearns’ constituency contains Melton Mowbray – one MP said there were about 20 letters, “some sent, some in draft”. There needs to be 54 letters submitted to trigger a confidence ballot against the prime minister, who met some of the new cohort on Tuesday evening. With MPs plotting his demise, Johnson emerged from isolation in No 10 to defend himself against claims from Dominic Cummings, his former aide, that he lied to parliament about believing a garden party in the first lockdown was a work event. The prime minister said “no one warned” him that the 20 May 2020 “bring your own booze” party he attended alongside 30-40 staff was against the rules, and confirmed he had given his account of events to Gray. “I can’t believe we would have gone ahead with an event that people said was against the rules … nobody warned me it was against the rules, I am categorical about that – I would have remembered that,” he told Sky News. Read more from my colleagues Rowena Mason, Jessica Elgot and Aubrey Allegretti here: This post has been removed. One Tory backbencher has said he expects enough Conservative MPs will submit letters this week to trigger a confidence vote in Boris Johnson – and that Dominic Cummings and had others would release more damaging information ahead of the vote. Andrew Bridgen, one of seven MPs to have publicly declared they have written to the chair of the backbench 1922 Committee, Sir Graham Brady, calling for a vote, said he expects at least 20 more letters to go in on Wednesday from MPs newly elected in 2019. Under party rules, there will be a confidence vote if 54 Conservative MPs submit letters to Brady. Bridgen told the PA Media news agency: I heard first-hand last night that another 20 from the 2019 intake will be going in today. I would have thought that will encourage a considerable number of others who are wavering to put their letters in. I think will we get to threshold of 54 this week. Graham Brady will announce we are having a confidence vote next week, probably Tuesday or Wednesday. The Sue Gray report, I think, will be out Tuesday or Wednesday next week. and of course Dominic Cummings and those who have got information damaging to the prime minister will probably dump everything into the press this weekend to influence the vote next week. A former adviser to Boris Johnson when he was mayor of London has also been defending the prime minister this morning. He said his former boss should not be forced out before Sue Gray’s report. Lord Moylan told Sky News: I think we have to see what Sue Gray says about what the rules were in a work environment at that time. People who had to go to work, had to work in a work environment with social distancing, as far as possible, he (the prime minister) walked into the garden, he shouldn’t have stayed in the garden, he’s apologised for that, and now we go forward from there. The question of the ‘pork pie plot’ is one that I think some MPs have been a bit giddy about, but I don’t think they should force the elected prime minister out on the strength of this. They need to reflect on the facts, they need see Sue Gray’s report, and they think need to think about the consequences and the follow through. James Heappey signalled he thinks that if Sue Gray’s report shows Boris Johnson misled parliament he should resign. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, the armed forces minister said: The prime minister has my trust, he has my confidence, he stood at the despatch box the other day and he gave an account of himself that I can understand and that I accept. If Sue Gray comes out and says something different then we’re in a different place and I’m happy to come back and reflect on my feelings then. He added: The ministerial care code is clear: the highest responsibility that any minister has is to be accurate in what they say to the House of Commons. That is the very foundation of our parliamentary democracy. Armed forces minister James Heappey has been doing the rounds on radio and TV this morning defending Boris Johnson over the partying scandal, as the prime minister prepares for what is likely to be a difficult PMQs later today. While Heappey did say he believed and trusted Johnson, there were a few caveats and he also acknowledged public opinion. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: I choose to believe what he said, but there’ll be millions of your listeners who won’t. That’s why Sue Gray is doing her investigation. Heappey stuck to the line that the prime minister thought the party was a work event. He said Johnson had not said he did not know the rules surrounding Covid at the time a party was held at Downing Street in May 2020, but that he “did not know, as he was going to it, that he would break the rules”. He also said he wished colleagues submitting letters of no confidence i Johnson would wait, and that during an interview on Tuesday the prime minister “looked like a man that has the weight of the world on his shoulders”. Asked if he wants Johnson to lead his party into the next election, Heappey said: “As things stand right now, yes.” He added: I suspect he’s going to have to apologise for this many more times because people are not going to let their anger die down easily.Manchester United have rejected an approach from Newcastle United to take Jesse Lingard on loan. The 29-year-old has six months left on his contract and Eddie Howe is keen to make the forward his third signing as Newcastle’s manager. Whether Newcastle make another attempt to agree a deal remains to be seen. Ralf Rangnick has stated that United’s squad is too big and the interim manager said he would not try to stop any player who wants to leave from departing. Lingard has made 14 appearances this season, with only one start. He had a successful spell on loan at West Ham in the second half of last season. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang has been offered a route out of his Arsenal exile by the Saudi club Al-Nassr, who have bid to take him on loan for the rest of the season. The former club captain is back in London for tests after Gabon released him from their Africa Cup of Nations squad, apparently because of issues with his recovery from Covid-19. Once seen as Arsenal’s talisman, he has not played for them since 6 December after repeated disciplinary breaches led to Mikel Arteta dropping him and stripping him of the captaincy. A quick parting of ways could be convenient for all parties. Al-Nassr’s offer is believed to contain the potential for a permanent move this summer. Although they have the resources to put forward a credible package, the 32-year-old’s appetite to operate in the relatively obscure Saudi league is unknown. Arsenal are yet to respond to their bid and may be tempted to decide on his future later in the window. Asked on Wednesday about Aubameyang’s immediate prospects, including any return to the Gabon fold for the Afcon knockouts in Cameroon, Arteta said: “He contracted Covid and then the national team decided to bring him back here and this is where we are. Let’s go step by step and do the right examinations and make sure the player’s health is in the best possible condition, and then we’ll see what happens.” Watford have reached an agreement with Bordeaux to sign the Nigerian winger Samuel Kalu for €500,000 (£416,000) plus add-ons. The 24-year-old, who has played for his country but is not at Afcon, was with Gent before joining Bordeaux in 2018.Boris Johnson’s habitual boosterism was back on display on Wednesday after a humiliating TV interview a day earlier raised questions about his state of mind. By scheduling a House of Commons statement on lifting Covid restrictions in England immediately after prime minister’s questions, Johnson’s team enabled him to return to comfortable territory, hailing the UK’s booster vaccine rollout and bashing Keir Starmer. But the fact it was Sajid Javid, not Johnson, fronting the Downing Street press conference on Wednesday evening underlined the fact that the prime minister remains bruised and reluctant to face a string of journalists’ questions. Those who have worked closely with Johnson describe his changeable moods: a constant tug-of-war between bullishness and insecurity – and a tendency to be thrown off course by negative press coverage. His allies have been rallying round in recent days in an effort to instil some fight in him, something they see as critical to his political survival. “When he’s up he’s very up, and when he’s down it affects everything,” one MP said, adding that the party needed him to “recover his mood”. The MP cited Tuesday’s badly received interview as an example of how the prime minister performs when he is not feeling positive. In the extended grilling by the Sky News political editor, Beth Rigby, a hangdog Johnson repeatedly apologised but continued to defend himself, saying of the 20 May 2020 Downing Street drinks party that “nobody told me it was against the rules”. “I can’t believe we would have gone ahead with an event that people said was against the rules … nobody warned me it was against the rules, I am categorical about that – I would have remembered that,” he said in one rambling answer. The former cabinet minister David Davis cited that interview as he dramatically called on Johnson to resign in the Commons on Wednesday, saying: “I expect my leaders to shoulder the responsibility for the actions they take. Yesterday, he did the opposite of that.” After the awkward semi-contrition of the Sky interview, there had been questions about whether Johnson would even contest a vote of no confidence, triggered if 54 of his MPs send letters in to the 1922 Committee chair, Graham Brady. But asked if he would fight it, his press secretary said on Wednesday: “Yes he will.” She also robustly denied reports that the prime minister had been in tears in a meeting with MPs, insisting “it’s not true”. Johnson spent the afternoon meeting more Tory MPs and peers. “The broad focus of all these meetings will be on what we’ve delivered for the country so far since we were elected, from getting Brexit done to record investments in local transport and infrastructure to tackling this unprecedented pandemic,” his press secretary said. He was keen to show that he could still be the upbeat, charismatic campaigner who helped MPs win their seats, though current polling suggests he may be an electoral liability rather than an asset. With several cabinet ministers including Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss plotting leadership bids – though Truss is currently far from the action in Australia – Johnson appears to have retreated to a small circle of ultra-loyal friends. It is understood he has been seeing a lot of Conor Burns, a minister for Northern Ireland, ardent Thatcherite and very close confidant, who is supporting him through his political troubles. Even his closest allies acknowledge the mood could rapidly darken once again in the coming days as his MPs continue to gossip and plot – and Sue Gray completes her inquiry into the Downing Street parties that have pushed the prime minister into the biggest crisis of his premiership.My aunt, Mona Warren, who has died aged 94, recently recalled how, when she was the only female solicitor in Cornwall during the early 1960s, those addressing Cornwall Law Society meetings would begin: “Gentlemen and Miss Warren”. After ill-health prevented her completing a chemistry degree at the University College of South West of England (now the University of Exeter) in the 40s, she learned shorthand working at the Methodist Missionary Society in London before becoming an articled clerk in St Buryan, Cornwall, where she lived, and subsequently a solicitor in Penzance. Mona experienced severe epilepsy from young adulthood until late middle age. My parents had moved from Cornwall to Stevenage in 1957, and in 1973, when Mona was unable to live alone, she came to stay with us. Despite adversity, Mona was active in many fields, volunteering with the Citizens Advice Bureau (now Citizens Advice) and the Samaritans, and becoming a Labour councillor for Broadwater ward in Stevenage in 1989, and vice-chair of Hertfordshire county council in the 1990s. She was re-elected as councillor for Broadwater in 1993, retiring at the 1997 election. When I was a boy, Mona took me to a court hearing where she was the defence solicitor. Afterwards I asked her how she could defend people who were guilty. Her response stayed with me: “That is not for me to decide – their case should be heard.” Justice was core to Mona’s outlook – but social justice, not just narrow legalism. She gave witness to this in many ways: as a Methodist lay preacher in the 1960s, a national director of CND (1998-2000), and a member of the executive committee of the Christian Socialist Movement in the 1990s. Mona was born on the Isle of Man. Her parents, Lily (nee Radcliffe) and William Warren (known as Norman), were Methodist missionaries. They had to leave their home in China in 1927 when the country was experiencing increasing violence. My mother, Mary, remembered the journey, recounting how, with their mother pregnant with Mona, their father hired a sampan, declining a naval boat proposed by the British consul, fearing this would make things worse. An encounter with “bandits” at one point was resolved, although their luggage was lost. Perhaps learning of this episode contributed to Mona’s tremendous ability in advocacy and negotiation. Mona attended Trinity Hall in Southport, a boarding school for girls provided by the Methodist church in order to avoid any disruption to their education. In the 20s and 30s, Methodist ministers, such as my grandfather, were required to move frequently. After settling in Stevenage in the 70s, Mona remained there, living with a close friend, until moving back to Cornwall, to Saltash, where my parents were then living, in 2003. Mona is survived by her nephews, Rod and me, five great-nephews and two great-great nieces.Unilever has said it will not increase its offer for GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer healthcare division above £50bn after investors and analysts balked at the risk of it pulling off a large merger. Data shared by GSK suggested the “fundamental value” of the business was no higher than £50bn, Unilever said after the stock market closed on Wednesday. Unilever, which owns brands ranging from Hellmann’s mayonnaise to Dove soap, made three offers to GSK, the last of which was worth £50bn in cash and Unilever shares. GSK is planning to list its consumer arm, which includes brands such as Aquafresh toothpaste and Panadol, by the summer. News of the bids was leaked at the weekend, forcing Unilever to clarify its strategy. In a hastily arranged announcement its chief executive, Alan Jope, said the company was planning to focus on fast-growing health, beauty and hygiene brands and sell slower-growing operations, with parts of its vast food portfolio a key candidate. However, investors did not appear to welcome Unilever’s ambition. Its share price dropped by almost 11% on Monday and Tuesday, before rallying by 4.5% on Wednesday. The credit rating agency Fitch on Tuesday said a debt-fuelled purchase of GSK consumer healthcare division could trigger a “multi-notch downgrade” of Unilever’s rating, which could make borrowing much more expensive and force some investors to dump the shares. Unilever has struggled under Jope’s leadership, and shares remain almost 30% below their 2019 record high. The market value has fallen by a fifth during the last 12 months even as the FTSE 100 has gained 13%. The company was criticised by Terry Smith, a prominent fund manager, for focusing on sustainability rather than the fundamentals of the business – although Jope argues that environmental, social and governance credentials will protect it financially in the long term. Yet Unilever is also facing pressure from another front, with some shareholders keen to see it push further on improving the health of customers, adding to its ambitious goal of net zero carbon emissions by 2039. On Thursday, Unilever investors who manage $215bn (£148bn) in assets revealed they had filed a shareholder resolution urging the company to adopt ambitious targets to increase the share of healthy foods in its sales. The UK’s largest local government pension fund, the Greater Manchester Pension Fund, was among the investors backing the resolution, which will be voted on at Unilever’s next annual meeting. Other backers include the pan-European asset manager Candriam, the Dutch asset manager actiam, the US healthcare provider Trinity Health and the British asset manager CCLA. Ignacio Vazquez, a senior manager of healthy markets at ShareAction, a campaign group which helped to coordinate the resolution, said: “Unilever has long been a sustainability leader. Some even criticise it for being too focused on the environmental, social and governance [ESG] issues. Yet the health profile of the food and drink products it sells remains a blind spot. This is surprising, as the rapid growth of regulation means that health is a critical ESG issue presenting a real financial threat to its business.” In its statement on Wednesday, Unilever said: “We note the recently shared financial assumptions from the current owners of GSK consumer healthcare and have determined that it does not change our view on fundamental value. Accordingly, we will not increase our offer above £50bn.” GSK said on the weekend that the £50bn bid “fundamentally undervalued” the business, suggesting a merger with Unilever would be unlikely. Unilever added that was “committed to maintaining strict financial discipline to ensure that acquisitions create value for our shareholders”, rather than chasing market share at the expense of profitability. Jope on Monday characterised the approach as “improving the quality of Unilever, not necessarily the size of Unilever.”What a difference a day makes. On Tuesday Big Dog had been Hang Dog. Not remorseful exactly, as that would require a level of empathy and self-knowledge that is well beyond him. But certainly abject. Sorry for finding himself in such a mess, if not for causing it. Sorry that he had reached the end of the road. Come prime minister’s questions, the trademark defences were back in place. The desperation of a leader, already on borrowed time, who is having to beg for yet another last chance. It’s a sight with which countless betrayed wives and girlfriends are all too familiar. First there was the surefire tell that Boris Johnson is about to start lying: the smirk (though these days it’s rarer to find a time when he’s telling the truth). Then there were the desperate and petulant displays of temper, masquerading as banter, from someone who hates to be challenged. A man who consistently mistakes arrogance for genuine self-worth. Finally, there was the contempt. Not just for opposition MPs but also for his own. Especially for his own. He has even less respect for those who buy his crap than those who call him out for the chancer he knows himself to be. Mostly, though, the contempt is for himself. Deep down, at a subconscious level, Boris knows better than anyone that he degrades both his position and the country. PMQs opened with Christian Wakeford, the former Conservative MP for Bury South, defecting to Labour by taking his seat behind Keir Starmer on the opposition benches. A few Tories jeered as the Labour leader welcomed Wakeford to the party, and Starmer ad libbed that the chief whip must have told them to bring their own boos. That stung. It was meant to be their man, their Big Dog, who told the best gags. Now they didn’t even have that. This was Starmer at his most relaxed. He wasn’t that bothered if Johnson went that day or in a week or month’s time. The exit was now priced in, so he would make the most of it and just have some fun with the prime minister along the way. He ran through Big Dog’s catalogue of excuses. First there had been no parties. Then he had been sickened and furious that others in Number 10 had had parties. Then he had been at some of the parties. Then he hadn’t realised the party he had been at had actually been a party. And in any case he had spent the 25 minutes at the party in a totally dissociated state, so he hadn’t noticed there were tables laden with food and booze and people getting pissed. Then when he had come to his senses and realised he was at a party, he had no idea such gatherings were illegal as no one had bothered to tell him what the rules were. Even though he had made them up and had spent an hour a day at press conferences telling the country what the rules were. The five stages of coming to grief. Big Dog tugged at the toddler haircut and waved a paw dismissively. It all made perfect sense, only the entire country was too stupid to see it. “You’ll just have to wait for the Sue Gray inquiry to report back,” he said. Though even if Gray doesn’t directly apportion blame, it’s hard to see how Johnson comes out of an inquiry with a shred of credibility. Just imagine. The best Gray could say about the prime minister was that he had either been in a fugue state or that he was incapable of distinguishing between a party and a work meeting. Starmer continued to expose the absurdities of Johnson’s lies and all Big Dog had to offer in return was more and more lies. He claimed the Tories had fixed the cost of living crisis when only that morning inflation had risen to 5.4%. He claimed to be proud of the work his staff at Number 10 had done while boasting about how many he was going to sack to save his skin. Keep it classy. He claimed it had been him alone who had made all the right calls on Covid when in the first year he had got most things wrong. He lied about the UK having the highest booster take-up in Europe. We don’t. The SNP’s Ian Blackford mentioned the record-breaking 175,000 who had died. Big Dog just sniggered, pulled faces and played with his watch. Still keeping it classy. There was a small band of Boris loyalists, but most Tories were as unimpressed with their leader as the opposition MPs. None who spoke showed any flicker of support, preferring to keep things neutral. Though not David Davis. He went nuclear. Enough was enough. Quoting both Oliver Cromwell to parliament and Leo Amery to Neville Chamberlain, he said to a hushed chamber: “You have sat too long here for any good you have been doing. In the name of God, go.” This wasn’t your average Tory malcontent. It was a respected old-timer, an arch Brexiter and longtime Johnson supporter who saw through Big Dog’s pantomime theatrics. Boris tried to shrug off the attack but was visibly shaken. He even said he had no idea where such a famous quotation came from. It makes you wonder if he actually wrote – let alone read – the passages in his book about Churchill that cover the early years of the war. Johnson the Great Pretender. Who can’t even cut it as a pound-shop Churchill. It was telling that after this, only a few Big Dog diehards bothered to stay for his statement declaring that Covid was as good as over. Boris ploughed on regardless. Even though 438 people had died the day before and the NHS was stretched to breaking point, Johnson was removing all remaining restrictions because that was popular with his party. Besides, if you’re incapable of sticking to the rules, you might as well get rid of them.It was fun while it lasted. Unilever says it won’t bump up its £50bn offer for GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer products division, so one has to assume that’s the end of the saga. GSK’s board, after all, can’t credibly have second thoughts about entering a negotiation: it had rejected £50bn as a “fundamental undervaluation”. Yet two big questions remain for Unilever’s board. First, why wasn’t the refusal to improve the offer made on Monday this week? On that day, remember, the chief executive, Alan Jope, emphasised exactly the same commitment to “strict financial discipline” but also declined to rule out a higher bid. The natural explanation is that Unilever’s shareholders lobbied furiously to get the expedition called off. The share price fell 10% in two days, which was a clear sign of little confidence in the plan. At £50bn, investors might have been persuadable, but not at a higher price. In the circumstances, the board had little choice but to retreat. Even so, delivering a minor heart attack to the share price, however temporarily, is not a good look. The out-of-the-blue factor points to the second question: what’s plan B? There has to be one because Jope also said on Monday that there were alternative options to pursue the new goal of being bigger in healthcare. That could mean anything from taking aim at another mega-sized target, such as Johnson &amp; Johnson’s consumer division or Reckitt, or a series of smaller deals. Either way, uncertainty hangs in the air. The shame is that the GSK business looked a good fit. And there’s nothing wrong with the ambition to expand in healthcare while slimming the food side. But after three days of excitement, Unilever has succeeded only in showing how difficult it could be to execute its change of direction. Jope has a trust-building challenge with shareholders. High hopes for Hal Barron’s low-profile successor It’s not plain sailing over at GSK either. Hal Barron’s exit as chief scientific officer is a heavy loss in a critical year. Barron was the first major hire by Emma Walmsley after she became chief executive in 2017 and he arrived with a stellar reputation from the US, injecting credibility into Walmsley’s pitch that her top priority was to reinvigorate GSK’s pipeline of new drugs. Since true reinvigoration at a pharma company can take a decade, Barron’s four years in post don’t qualify as a full innings. That is especially so when “new GSK”, without its consumer division (now destined for demerger in the summer unless somebody other than Unilever wants to take a pop), will stand or fall by results from the labs. Barron is 60, so one can speculate that if he’s minded to do another big job, he thinks this is the moment. He’s off to be chief executive of Altos Labs, one of those San Francisco startups backed by billionaires, including Jeff Bezos, that will probably become enormous. It is targeting the hot scientific field of cell rejuvenation. One can also guess that Barron has sufficient zillions to go where his scientific interest takes him: his 16 years at the hugely successful US firm Genentech will have been rewarding. From GSK’s point of view, the best one can say is that Barron is staying until the end of July and will be a day-a-week nonexecutive director thereafter. It’s an unusual arrangement but probably pragmatic. Barron’s successor is an internal appointment, Tony Wood, 56, who has a low profile in the City but may be a name to watch. The last Brit in the same role at GSK was the pandemic TV star Sir Patrick Vallance, otherwise known as the government’s chief scientific adviser. Bonuses look out of place at WH Smith Last year will not have felt like a bonus year for WH Smith’s shareholders. The retail group made a pretax loss of £116m, mostly for obvious Covid reasons. The share price, having been clobbered at the start of the pandemic, went roughly sideways. There was no dividend. WH Smith’s remuneration committee, on the other hand, preferred to emphasise the “outstanding, inspiring and resourceful leadership” of Carl Cowling, the chief executive, and Robert Moorhead, the chief financial officer. Cue bonuses, justified on the ground that EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation) targets were hit. Seemingly sensing it might all look odd, the committee knocked 22% off the bonuses to recognise, in the cute phrasing, “the experience of shareholders and other stakeholders”. Well, yes, the experience of taxpayers is one of sending furlough payments to WH Smith staff only to see bonuses of £550,000 and £357,500 emerge for the bosses. Almost 46% of votes were cast against the pay report on Wednesday. It is hard to fathom what the other shareholders were thinking.Boris Johnson has announced that England will be moving from plan B to plan A on 26 January to reflect the fact that the Omicron wave has peaked. What does that mean for everyday life? Do I still have to wear a face mask? From 27 January, the government will no longer mandate the wearing of face masks anywhere, which means it will no longer be a criminal offence not to wear one without an exemption. The change will take place slightly earlier, from 20 January, in classrooms. This will be followed by national guidance from the Department for Education on 27 January recommending an end to their use in communal areas in schools. Local directors of public health will be able to recommend the use of face coverings where this is judged to be necessary in individual schools or in the wider local area, although they may do so for a limited time only. However, some businesses and organisations, for example transport operators or shops, may still request that people wear them, which means you may be refused access if you do not comply. The prime minister also said the government “will continue to suggest the use of face coverings in enclosed or crowded places, particularly where you come into contact with people you don’t normally meet”. Do I still need a vaccine certificate? Mandatory Covid status certification will end, although organisations can use the NHS Covid pass voluntarily. At a press conference, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the government was reviewing the definition of fully vaccinated, and may decide to increase this from two jabs to three. Can I still work from home? The work-from-home guidance has been lifted immediately. Workers are instructed to speak to their employers about arrangements for returning to the office, as it is still at their discretion whether to allow staff to work there, meaning some will take a more cautious approach than others. Can I visit a care home? Yes, soon. Further details on how restrictions will be lifted will be set out by Javid in the coming days. Which restrictions remain? Self-isolation is still a legal requirement for people who have tested positive. From 17 January the isolation period was reduced from seven to five days, provided that people obtained two negative tests on the fifth and sixth days. Johnson said he planned to remove the obligation to self-isolate when the regulations expire on 24 March, a date that may be brought forward “if the data allows”. This would mirror the approach to comparable endemic viruses such as the flu. Speaking to the House of Commons, Johnson also said the government would in the coming weeks publish its long-term strategy for living with Covid, which would aim to avoid restrictions and instead take advantage of developments in medical science and offer guidance “urging people with the virus to be careful and considerate of others”. He added that people must remain cautious during the last weeks of winter as the pandemic was not over, with 16,000 people still in hospital in England. Omicron is not necessarily a mild disease, especially for those who are not yet vaccinated. Protective measures include washing hands, letting in fresh air, getting tested, self-isolating if positive and wearing masks in crowded or enclosed spaces. What does it mean for travel? There were no new announcements on travel. Pre-departure tests were scrapped earlier in January, but fully vaccinated travellers must book a PCR or lateral flow test ahead of their trip to England to be taken within 48 hours of arrival. The prime minister’s spokesperson said this was to provide “that extra layer of surveillance” to watch out for the emergence of new variants, but that the government would make an announcement on easing the rules by the end of January. Those who are not vaccinated must test 48 hours in advance and quarantine for 10 days, with tests on days two and eight. Testing is still in place for travel to some other countries but rules vary. Do I still need to socially distance? There are no legal rules on socialising in England, so it is up to businesses to decide whether to socially distance their customers to make them feel more at ease, or for individuals to do so to minimise their risk of catching Covid. • This article was amended on 20 January 2022. The isolation period is reduced to five days provided that people obtain two negative tests on the fifth and sixth days, not the fourth and fifth days as an earlier version said.MPs have voted to approve a one-day suspension for the Conservative MP Daniel Kawczynski after he “undermined” an apology he gave in the Commons for bullying staff. The standards watchdog found that the Shrewsbury MP had indicated in media interviews that he did not fully mean the gesture, and recommended his suspension should be limited to one day as Kawczynski had committed to undertaking further work on his behaviour. Kawczynski initially apologised in the Commons in June last year after an investigation found he had ranted at one senior Commons official, called another a “snowflake” and “useless”, and denigrated a third staff member via WhatsApp. He told the Commons: “I have reflected on my behaviour, I accept it constituted bullying and as such was highly inexcusable.” In an interview with his local BBC radio station earlier that day he said the process was unfair and he had no choice but to apologise, prompting a fresh inquiry. In a personal statement in the Commons on Wednesday, Kawczynski said he acknowledged speaking to the media “undermined the sincerity” of his apology and said: “I am sorry that my conduct will have had a further harmful effect on the complainant and that it may have diminished public confidence in the process.” He added: “I accept that speaking out in the way I did to the media had a detrimental effect on the house’s conduct policy by undermining the integrity of the complaints process and I deeply regret my actions. I am committed to learn from the mistakes I have made and to work on my personal development, especially in my communication with others, in every interaction that I have. “I am conscious that my conduct may have merited suspension from the service of the house for a longer period.” The report by the House of Commons standards committee, published last week, found Kawczynski was “still struggling with a capacity for genuine empathy with others, and as a result still has a tendency, which he may not fully realise, to see himself rather than others as the ‘victim’”. The MP said he appreciated “the committee’s consideration of the difficulties that I was experiencing in my personal life of the time and the mental health issues”, having previously said he was in “an emotional and distressed state” on the day of the interview. “A profoundly emotional and devastating family trauma in 2019, coupled with a series of work-related problems, combined to affect my mental health in an unprecedented way,” he said in a statement after publication of the report, adding that he was receiving “abuse in the street” whenever he went out. “I wish to reiterate that nothing I have said about my own mental health struggle should detract in any way from my full acceptance of the committee’s decision.”A 14-year-old schoolboy from Darlington has become one of the youngest people in the UK to be convicted of terror charges. The boy, who cannot be named because of his age, appeared before Westminster magistrates court on Tuesday charged with possessing a terrorist publication. He pleaded guilty to three offences contrary to section 58 of the Terrorism Act 2000. He admitted possessing a record of information likely to be useful to a person committing or preparing an act of terrorism. Police said the charges related to extreme rightwing terrorism. The boy was arrested in July last year, when he was 13, as part of a pre-planned, intelligence-led operation led by officers from Counter-terrorism North East. He will next appear for sentencing on 1 April. Before this case it is thought the youngest person convicted of a terror offence was a teenager from Blackburn jailed for inciting terrorism. The Blackburn boy, referred to as RXG, was jailed for life in October 2015 for convincing an Australian jihadist, Sevdet Besim, then 18, to plot an attack in Melbourne on Anzac Day. A court heard that RXG, then 14, exchanged from his bedroom more than 3,000 encrypted messages with Besim, encouraging him to behead police officers guarding an Anzac Day event. Australian police foiled the plot. The court heard how RXG had been radicalised by online Islamic State propaganda. Last year the Parole Board ruled that RXG could be freed from prison under strict licence conditions. His identity will remain a secret for the rest of his life after a high court ruling in 2020.A court in Pakistan has sentenced a woman to death over allegedly blasphemous messages sent over WhatsApp and Facebook. Aneeqa Ateeq, 26, was found guilty and given a death sentence by a court in Rawalpindi on Wednesday after a complaint was registered against her under Pakistan’s draconian cybercrime and blasphemy laws According to the charge sheet, Ateeq, 26, met her accuser, a fellow Pakistani, online in 2019 through a mobile gaming app and the pair began corresponding over WhatsApp. He accused her of sending blasphemous caricatures of holy prophets, making remarks about “holy personages” on WhatsApp and using her Facebook account to transmit blasphemous material to other accounts. In doing so, she “deliberately and intentionally defiles sacred righteous personalities and insulted the religious beliefs of Muslims”, according to the charge sheet. Ateeq, who has stated that she is a practising Muslim, denied all the charges. During the trial, Ateeq told the court that she believed the complainant intentionally dragged her into a religious discussion so he could collect evidence and take “revenge” after she refused to be friendly with him. The court found her guilty, gave her to a 20-year sentence and ordered her to be hanged. Ateeq’s lawyer Syeda Rashida Zainab said: “I can’t comment on the judgment as the issue is very sensitive.” Pakistan is an Islamic state and has some of the harshest blasphemy laws in the world, regularly handing down death sentences. In practice executions are not carried out and the accused spend their lives in jail. However, blasphemy trials in Pakistan are highly dangerous, with the accused often killed by vigilantes before courts reach a verdict on their cases, while judges, fearful of the implications, rarely acquit the accused and are often pressured into reaching guilty verdicts. Pakistan has recently asked Facebook and Twitter to help identify its citizens suspected of blasphemy so it can prosecute them or pursue their extradition. While minorities such as Christians and Hindus have largely been targeted by the laws, Pakistani Muslims have also found themselves facing blasphemy charges. The cases often take place quickly, in a closed court, away from public scrutiny. Evidence in many of the cases has been thrown into doubt. Pastor Zafar Bhatti, Pakistan’s longest-serving blasphemy prisoner, who was been accused of sending blasphemous text messages abusing the prophet Muhammad’s mother, has alleged the texts were sent by a number that did not belong to him. Bhatti was recently sentenced to death for the charges. In recent years social media has become the new frontier for blasphemy cases. The Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act (PECA), passed in 2016, gave the government greater powers to control content posted on social media, including content deemed blasphemous. In 2017, Taimoor Raza was the first person sentenced to death for allegedly committing blasphemy on Facebook, one of the first steps towards an intensified crackdown on dissent on social media after the passing of cyber laws. The issue of blasphemy remains highly sensitive in Pakistan. Last month a Sri Lankan national working in a factory in Pakistan was beaten to death and his body was set alight by a mob of hundreds of people after he was accused of committing blasphemy by removing religious posters from the factory walls. According to the US Commission on International Religious Freedom, about 80 people in Pakistan are in prison for blasphemy, with at least half sentenced to death, though there have been no executions.The government has pledged to abolish almost every existing Covid restriction over the coming weeks in England and “get life completely back to normal”, a course popular with Conservative MPs but which immediately prompted stark warnings from health groups. The NHS Confederation said the move would inevitably place renewed pressure on hospitals, while the British Medical Association said the changes planned were “not guided by the data”. After Boris Johnson announced the end of all plan B rules, imposed to cope with the Omicron variant, by next week, Sajid Javid set out the government’s wider vision to go further, with rules on self-isolation expected to be replaced by voluntary guidance in March. “I will come back in the spring and set out how we will live with Covid,” the health secretary told a No 10 press conference. “But the way we are going to do this is that we are going to have to find a way to remove almost all of these restrictions, and get life completely back to normal.” The speed of the plans, even with confirmed daily UK cases above 108,000 on Wednesday, and nearly 19,000 Covid patients in hospital, has brought speculation that a main motivation has been to provide a politically embattled Johnson with some good news for his mutinous MPs. In a hastily arranged Commons statement on Wednesday, Johnson announced the cabinet had agreed an end to all plan B measures. Advice on working from home would change immediately, while compulsory mask-wearing on public transport and in shops and vaccine certificates would cease next week. To cheers from some on the Conservative benches, Johnson announced an immediate end to the need for pupils to wear masks at secondary schools. While Javid has been seen as one of the more cautious cabinet voices on Covid rules in recent months, he expanded on Johnson’s theme, telling the press conference he expected vaccination and testing would be the only measures to remain. “This plan has worked and the data shows that Omicron is in retreat,” he said. While warning of “bumps in the road”, perhaps including new variants, Javid said the UK “must learn to live with Covid in the same way we have to live with flu”. Addressing the press conference alongside Javid, Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser to the UK Health Security Agency, did not take up invitations to openly disagree with the strategy, but was less bullish, stressing that any end to self-isolation would have to be based on evidence. While rules on masks would go, Hopkins urged the public to “take our personal behaviour seriously” and use face coverings when in crowded places among strangers. However, medical and NHS groups expressed alarm, while teaching unions warned that the changes were taking place at a time when many English schools were still seeing widespread disruption because Covid. Dr Chaand Nagpaul, chair of the British Medical Association, said ending plan B measures rapidly could create a rebound in still-high infections and “risks creating a false sense of security” with the NHS still under crippling pressure. “This decision clearly is not guided by the data,” Nagpaul said. “When plan B was introduced in December, there were 7,373 patients in hospital in the UK. The latest data this week shows there are 18,9791. Chaand said ditching mask-wearing mandates “will inevitably increase transmission and place the public at greater risk, especially for those who are vulnerable”. He also said the announcement of plans to end self-isolation rules was “premature”. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents the healthcare system in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, accused ministers of not being honest with the public that the decision to lift restrictions was “a trade-off”. He said: “We will have greater freedoms but the cost – at least in the short term – will be that more people are likely to get sick with Covid, and that the health service will continue to have to deal with the extra burdens that this creates.” Mary Bousted, the joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said that while the trend of secondary school infections was down, it could change: “Such uncertainty could lead to a pronounced risk of increased disruption with children and staff having to isolate.” A director of public health in a city in the north of England said they were also concerned at the move. “This feels like more of a political decision than a decision based on the evidence and the science, and it could be quite London-centric,” they said. “We’re seeing a reduction in cases, but they’re still incredibly high. Taking out all these measures does feel risky.” The changes apply only to England. Covid restrictions, as part of health policy, are a devolved matter.