Motorists across the whole of London could be charged for every journey from 2024 under plans being drawn up to reduce carbon emissions and improve air quality. The mayor, Sadiq Khan, said London should be a global leader in introducing smart road pricing, as a report found car journeys in the capital needed to be cut by more than a quarter to meet net zero emissions targets by 2030. Khan said air pollution and the climate emergency were “an issue of social justice across the globe – and in London as well, it’s the poorest Londoners, the least likely to own a car, who suffer the consequences”. He has asked Transport for London (TfL) to explore road pricing that would charge by distance travelled, time and location. However, with technology to operate a scheme unlikely to be ready soon, he has told TfL to consider other options to make drivers pay for polluting before the end of his second term in office in May 2024. Possible options include: a daily clean air charge for all petrol and diesel cars journeys throughout Greater London; or expansion of the ultra-low emission zone (Ulez) as it currently operates with a daily £12.50 charge for older models throughout all boroughs; or a combination of these. Tfl will also consider introducing a boundary charge to drive into Greater London. Fully electric and other zero-emission cars would be exempt under all options. Khan said he would like to see both the London congestion charge – introduced in 2003 – and the Ulez replaced with road pricing before the end of the decade: “Both schemes are quite blunt and technology has moved on. I want London to be a global leader.” The mayor said he wanted to start “an earnest conversation with Londoners” about ways to reduce car use, ease congestion and cut levels of air pollution – so high last Friday that people were advised not to exercise outdoors. Jemima Hartshorn, of the campaign group Mums for Lungs, said it was “a good day for London’s kids”. However, motoring organisations warned the proposals could “punish” people who relied on their cars and urged the mayor to rethink. The RAC head of roads policy Nicholas Lyes said the proposals “would create massive financial challenges for individuals, families and businesses who run a car in London and even for those who visit the fringes of the capital … and will punish those who simply cannot afford an electric car”. Some proposals would require government backing to extend powers and funding, and consent would be required to enable a boundary charge for drivers entering Greater London, the mayor’s office says. The area covered by the ultra-low emission zone, whose boundary expanded only in October from central London to the north and south circular roads, could be more than doubled. Extending its scope to newer vehicles would also affect far more motorists in the area where it currently applies: about 90% of vehicles in the expanded zone, where 3.8 million live and work, are currently not charged, as most petrol cars less than 15 years old and the newest diesels are exempt. Only 2% of vehicles on London roads are electric. An additional daily charge throughout London – comparable to the price of a single fare on public transport – is another option. Khan said it would be a “nudge” to car owners, “something that make it worthwhile to take a bus rather than jump in a car”. According to TfL, a third of car journeys in the capital can be walked in less than 25 minutes, and two-thirds cycled in less than 20. Achieving net zero by 2030 would need a 27% cut in car journeys – and still require billions to be spent offsetting London’s emissions, according to a report by consultancy Element Energy commissioned by Khan and published on Tuesday. While the ambition to cut London’s emissions will also tackle home insulation and offices, Khan said he was focusing on transport, which had been slow to decarbonise – reducing emissions by just 7% between 2000 and 2018, compared with a 57% reduction from workplaces and 40% from homes. Smart charging could take into account distance travelled, locations, public transport alternatives, the time of day, as well as how polluting a vehicle was, Khan said, with exemptions and discounts for those on low incomes and with disabilities, and support for charities and small businesses. Transport for London is seeking long-term funding support from the government after losing billions in fare revenue as tube journeys in particular fell during the pandemic. Proposals for a boundary charge to raise funds were initially rebuffed by ministers. • This article was amended on 18 January 2022. A policy option earlier said to involve a £12.50 daily charge for all or most petrol and diesel cars in the London ultra-low emission zone (Ulez) – rather than older models only – has been replaced. A new paragraph gives more detailed options for an additional charge, expansion of the area involved, or a combination of these.Social media stars including Jodie Marsh and five ex-Love Islanders including Francesca Allen are to be subjected to a name and shame Instagram campaign by the UK’s advertising watchdog for continuing to flout social media marketing rules. The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), which issued a final warning to 122 UK-based Instagram influencers over repeatedly failing to tell followers when they were paid to promote products in posts, has resorted to using the social media platform to highlight their behaviour to users. The ASA has created personalised ads that name the social influencers – Marsh, Allen, twins Jess and Eve Gale, Belle Hassan and Anna Vakili – stating that they have been sanctioned for not declaring paid posts to followers and pointing to a webpage listing all of those who “break these rules”. On Tuesday, Love Island winner Amber Rose Gill was added to the ASA’s non-compliance webpage, although she is not part of the targeted Instagram ad campaign. “For the minority of influencers that repeatedly fail to disclose their paid-for posts, it’s important their social media followers are told,” said Shahriar Coupal, director of advertising policy and practice at the ASA. “In a new front of enforcement activity, we’re using targeted ads to highlight the breaches of six social media personalities to the very same audience they are seeking to influence.” The ASA, which is running the targeted campaign for an initial two weeks to assess whether the ads have an impact on the behaviour of the influencers, has not ruled out further potential sanctions. “When we see the necessary changes to their disclosure practices, we’ll call off the ads,” said Coupal. “But, where non-compliance persists, we’ll look to more direct forms of enforcement.” Social media influencers who continue to break the non-disclosure rules could be referred to Trading Standards or the Competition and Markets Authority, which has the ability to impose fines. The watchdog has also previously said it could also work with social media companies “to have their content removed”. Under the UK advertising code, promotional posts must clearly indicate they are paid-for endorsements, typically using the hashtag #ad, short for advertising. In 2019, the CMA secured formal commitments from 16 celebrities, including Alexa Chung and Ellie Goulding, to clearly state if they have been paid or receive any gifts when publishing posts on Instagram.Thousands of student gambling addicts are spending an average of £30 a week on betting, racking up debts and missing out on university life to fund their habit, research has found. In a survey of 2,000 students, 80% said they gambled, with 35% of those who did admitting using their student loan, bank overdrafts, borrowing from friends or taking out payday loans. Of those who gambled, 41% said it had led to them missing lectures, assignment deadlines or social activities. There are about 2.5 million students in the UK, indicating that hundreds of thousands are suffering financial or social harm due to gambling. Students reported spending £31.52 on betting in a week on average, while almost 20% admitted to spending more than £50. They were asked how much they spent on gambling, without a distinction being made between deposits and losses. The most popular product was the National Lottery (32%), including casino-style instant win smartphone games, followed by online sports betting (25%) and online bingo (18%). The report, by the YGAM youth gambling charity and Gamstop, the national tool for gamblers who want to bar themselves from online betting and gaming, built on previous research that found that 88,000 students have a problem. Martin Jones’ son, Josh, took his own life in 2015 after becoming addicted to gambling while doing his A-levels and later getting into financial difficulty at university. “He went up to halls of residence and within 10 days he’d blown his first term’s loan, which was about £1,200,” said Jones. Jones and his wife, Kim, ended up having to manage their son’s finances for the duration of his time studying maths at the University of Surrey. He got a job with the accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers shortly after leaving university but was unable to escape the gambling addiction. He took his own life aged 23 after running up debts of £30,000. Bray Ash, 29, who is studying mental health nursing at King’s College London, having previously studied at Leeds University, also blew his student loan. “It took over my life – I wasn’t studying, I was just sitting in my halls gambling,” he said. “[During] my second year of university, I ended up gambling away my student loan in the first 24 hours. “It is important that students have access to organisations, such as YGAM, to educate them about gambling and provide support and that they are aware of essential tools such as self-exclusion if they are experiencing problems with their gambling. I know that it would have benefited me when I was at my lowest point.” A spokesperson for the Betting &amp; Gaming Council (BGC) said the majority of gambling among young people was on scratchcards, the lottery and private betting, not with BGC members. “The BGC also funds the £10m Young People’s Gambling Harm Prevention Programme, delivered by leading charities YGAM and GamCare, which is being delivered to every 11- to 19-year-old in the UK, and those working with them,” said a spokesperson.Magistrates in England and Wales will be given more sentencing powers in an attempt to tackle the backlog of cases waiting to be dealt with by criminal courts. In the latest effort to reduce both the number of outstanding cases and the pressure faced by crown courts during the coronavirus pandemic, magistrates will be able to hand out jail terms of up to a year – double the current maximum. The Ministry of Justice estimates this could free up almost 2,000 extra days of crown court time a year. The move will allow magistrates to sentence more serious cases they hear, such as fraud, theft and assault. At present, crimes warranting a jail term of more than six months have to be sent to a crown court for sentencing. The move was welcomed by magistrates but barristers said it was “distraction politics at its worst” and would “do nothing to unplug the existing massive backlog of trials”. Keeping more cases in magistrates courts, which have been “less severely affected” by Covid, means crown courts can better focus their resources on tackling the backlog, the MoJ said. The changes, which are expected to come into force in the coming months, will only apply to so-called either-way offences, which can be dealt with by magistrates or crown courts. It will mean defendants can still opt to have their case heard by a jury in a crown court if they wish. An amendment to the judicial review and courts bill will enable the government to reverse the change if needed. Bev Higgs, the national chair of the Magistrates Association, which has campaigned for sentencing powers to be extended, said the organisation was delighted with the announcement, adding: “It is absolutely the right time to realign where cases are heard to ensure a safe, effective, and efficient justice system and this demonstrates great confidence in the magistracy. “I know our members and colleagues will take up this new level of responsibility with pride, professionalism, and integrity and will – as always – strive to deliver the highest quality of justice in their courts.” But Jo Sidhu QC, the chair of the Criminal Bar Association, which represents practising criminal barristers in England and Wales, said: “Increasing magistrates’ sentencing powers will do nothing to unplug the existing massive backlog of trials stuck in the crown court pipeline. “This is distraction politics at its worst. The government seems wilfully blind to the stark reality that hundreds of criminal barristers have left the field in despair due to a quarter century of falling real incomes. That is the reason why victims of serious crime are being denied justice in our crown courts.” He added: “Fiddling with magistrates’ sentencing powers is a betrayal of victims of crime. This is a cynical means of depriving those accused of serious crime from being judged by their peers in our long-established jury system. “Keeping back more cases in the magistrates will in any event only trigger more appeals to the crown court, adding to the long list of cases and divert criminal advocates from tackling the existing pile-up of trials.” Mark Fenhalls QC, the chair of the Bar Council, the lead representative body for barristers in England and Wales, said: “We believe that these changes will simply increase the prison population and put further pressure on the Ministry of Justice budget. This will mean less money available to keep the courts running. “It is also quite possible that the changes may prompt more defendants to elect trial in the crown court, increasing the trial backlog. This would damage the interests of complainants and victims and be counterproductive to everything we are trying to achieve to deliver timely and fair justice.” Last year, Whitehall’s spending watchdog, the National Audit Office, said the criminal courts backlog would “remain a problem for many years” after the number of outstanding cases in the crown courts reached record highs of almost 61,000 and more than 364,000 in magistrates courts before beginning to slowly reduce.A government-backed campaign has stepped up the pressure on plans by Mark Zuckerberg’s Facebook Messenger and Instagram apps to introduce end-to-end encryption, warning that millions of cases of child sex abuse could go undetected. The new campaign warns that social media companies are “willingly blindfolding” themselves to abuse if they implement end-to-end encryption for private messaging. Although the No Place to Hide campaign does not refer directly to plans for end-to-end encryption on Messenger and Instagram, they were strongly criticised by the home secretary, Priti Patel, last year, who described them as “not acceptable”. The campaign has been launched by abuse survivors, child safety campaigners and charities including Barnardo’s and is funded by the Home Office. Safety campaigners warn that strongly encrypted messaging prevents law enforcement, and tech platforms providing the services, from seeing messages by ensuring that only the sender and recipient can view their content – a process known as end-to-end encryption. The new campaign calls on tech bosses to make a public commitment that they will not offer end-to-end encryption until they ensure any changes do not make it easier for child sex abusers to commit crimes. Rhiannon-Faye McDonald, an abuse survivor and subject matter expert at the Marie Collins Foundation, which supports victims of online child sexual abuse and is part of the steering group for the campaign, said: “When people say this is about privacy, I couldn’t agree more. I have a right to privacy as a survivor of child sexual abuse. My abuse was recorded with photos and videos which may be out there now, as I speak. We want an assurance that E2EE [end-to-end encryption] will not enable and make it easier for child sex abusers to harm children either directly by finding and grooming them, or indirectly by circulating child sexual abuse material.” Meta, the owner of Messenger and Instagram, announced in November that it would delay its plans and would finish global delivery of end-to-end encryption “sometime in 2023”. Meta already uses end-to-end encryption on its WhatsApp messaging service and had been planning to extend that to messaging on Messenger and Instagram in 2022. It has already encrypted voice and video calls on Messenger. The No Place to Hide campaign refers to 2020 data from the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC), a US-based organisation, which showed that Meta’s platforms accounted for 20.3m referrals of child sexual abuse material – 94% of the total in that year. According to NCMEC, 70% of referrals by Meta platforms could be lost under end-to-end encryption, the equivalent of 14m reports. Responding to the new campaign, the global head of safety at Meta, Antigone Davis, said the “overwhelming majority of Brits” rely on end-to-end encryption to protect them from fraudsters, hackers and criminals. “We agree on the need for strong safety measures that work with encryption and are building these into our plans. We’re focused on preventing harm by banning suspicious profiles, restricting adults from messaging children they’re not connected with and defaulting under-18s to private or ‘friends only’ accounts. We’re also encouraging people to report harmful messages to us so we can see the contents, respond swiftly and make referrals to the authorities.”Perhaps one of the scant benefits of the dearth of A-League Men fixtures being staged at present is that it offers plenty of opportunities for introspection and pontification. Such is in the fluid nature of Australian football the potential topics are legion but, two months into ALM’s latest brave new era and with a nascent sample size to call upon, mayhaps a particular existential question bears examination: just what constitutes a good game of A-Leagues football? And, in determining that, what are the pros and cons of such a lens? Take, for example, the only two games that were able to be staged across the league in what was nominally round nine of the campaign last week: Melbourne Victory against Adelaide United on Saturday evening and Melbourne City against Western Sydney Wanderers on Sunday afternoon. Inevitably, the revelations from United’s Josh Cavallo – that he was subjected to homophobic abuse during the former – casts an inescapable pall but, before their reveal, initial reaction to the game was positive. Nicholas D’Agostino and Craig Goodwin provided two goal-of-the-season candidates, Isaías’s red card and a disallowed goal added a dash of controversy, and its conclusion was marked by chaotic end-to-end football as two rivals played for the badge. That this apotheosis was preceded by nearly 90 minutes of the footballing equivalent of the Ludovico Technique – D’Agostino’s 84th minute-thunderbolt was the first time either side put a shot on target – felt beside the point. In an age of social media clips, rambunctious headlines and an established football media too small to consistently offer in-depth coverage, a chaotic crescendo was seemingly enough to earn a passing grade. Conversely, in City’s 3-3 draw with the Wanderers, storyline factors served to supplement, not supplant, the action on the pitch and their potential ramifications. With Wanderers coach Carl Robinson confined to a hotel, the external narrative of his tenuous tenure was blunted and, perhaps due to this, the thrust and parry of the contest shone through. Be it Steven Ugarkovic pulling the strings, Marco Tilio’s immediate game-changing introduction off the bench, Keijiro Ogawa giving the Wanderers a new dimension at the top of their attack, or both sides being forced to come from behind, the football was the star of the show at AAMI Park. The late VAR drama surrounding a potential handball on Rostyn Griffiths felt like it came to the detriment of the game, rather than finally providing something by which to remember it. Stepping back, both archetypes took vastly different journeys to produce ‘good’ games. But is one better than the other? Not really. What road one prefers is, at its heart, an ideological preference; a battle of perceived style against perceived substance. And while individual predilection will be governed which side of the spectrum one falls upon, the theatregoer or the footballing intransigent, both the yin and the yang have their place in ALM – even if the former has been disproportionately represented thus far in 2021-22. With more technically sound leagues out there, the majority of ALM observers largely do so out of an emotional connection to the league and/or one of its clubs. In this scenario, the narratives, pride, atmosphere or result are what keep them coming back week in and week out. It is Australia’s league, and despite what follows the protection of this uniqueness is still the most important thing facing the game. But much like the perils of staring into the ‘Peak A-League’ abyss, an unquestioning embrace of the boom crash opera risks coming at the expense of a level of expectation for ALM sides to demonstrate some level of innovation and functionality. At what point does the latest round of recycled, horseshoe possession that develops because a team was denied transition become grating? And at what point does the play of the national team and the grassroots begin to suffer by osmosis from a premier domestic league wherein ‘passion’ takes precedence over function (if it hasn’t already happened)? One cannot legislate an improvement in playing style. To do so is to remove player and coach agency and the essence of what makes football, football. Evolution will likely be delivered by a rise in external expectations forcing those whose job it is to ultimately deliver an improved on-field product – predominantly coaches, football departments and club executives – to rise to the challenge lest they alienate those whose eyeballs they covet. At present,advanced statistics and authoritative language are frequently enough to pass as an expert regardless of the validity of one’s conclusions or underlying logic. But because there is a dearth in demand, it is not an aspect of coverage being flooded with enough options that will allow the cream to rise to the top. Further, the act of actively educating its audience is a difficult and thankless task in a market where football is a subservient code, where the cons often outweigh the benefits. Growing the game and potential audience will help with this but, in a crowded market, be initially driven by narrative and storylines providing a hook to get a critical mass of punters through the door. It is easier said than done, but it is a level of introspection which is important for ALM.The House of Lords has voted to make misogyny a hate crime in England and Wales, in a night of several defeats for the government in the upper chamber. The law change would enable judges to impose stronger penalties if prejudice against women is proved to be the motivation, and would also require the police to record whether crimes were motivated by a hatred of someone’s sex or gender. In October, Boris Johnson rejected the idea that misogyny should be a hate crime, saying: “If you simply widen the scope of what you ask the police to do, you’ll just increase the problem.” The justice secretary, Dominic Raab, also dismissed the suggestion while appearing confused about the meaning of misogyny, suggesting it could apply to the abuse of women or men. The Home Office minister Lady Williams pointed to a report by the Law Commission last year which concluded that making misogyny a hate crime would not prevent hostility towards women, but the amendment passed anyway on Monday night, thanks to support from Labour and the Liberal Democrats, with 242 peers backing it versus 185 voting against. The vote came during a debate in the House of Lords on the Police Crime, Sentencing and Courts Bill, in which the government lost 14 divisions, including plans to make people locking themselves on to objects punishable by up to 51 weeks’ imprisonment, suspicion-less stop-and-search and introduction of “serious disruption prevention orders” against protesters. Peers also voted to block proposals to give police new powers to stop noisy and disruptive protests in England and Wales, with Green peer Jenny Jones calling the plans “oppressive” and “plain nasty”. Once the Lords have completed their scrutiny of the bill, which needs the approval of both houses to become law, it will return to the House of Commons. In December, the Law Commission, an independent body that recommends legal changes for England and Wales, decided to reject a proposal to make misogyny a hate crime after it concluded that the move would not solve the “real problem” of hostility or prejudice directed against women because of their sex or gender. Instead, it recommended that the government consider introducing a specific offence to tackle public sexual harassment, which it claimed would be more effective. The drive to amend the bill to make misogyny a hate crime was led by the Conservative peer Lady Newlove, a former victims’ commissioner. Newlove said: “It is perverse that, despite 3 million crimes being committed against women in just three years, our legal and policing systems do not routinely recognise what we all know is blindingly obvious: the deep-rooted hostility towards women that motivates many of these crimes. “As a society we have rightly taken steps to acknowledge the severity of racist or homophobic crimes, but have not yet acted on crimes driven by hatred of women. “Too often when it comes to violence against women, society demands the perfect victim before we act,” she stressed, adding that her amendment was an attempt to “flip the script”. Lady Fox, and independent, argued against the proposal, warning that the collected data would be “almost entirely based on subjective perceptions” of what constituted misogyny. Labour’s Lord Hain called the government’s plan to curb noisy protests via extended police powers “the biggest threat to the right to dissent and the right to protest in my lifetime”. Williams defended the government’s plans, telling peers that the police would only use the powers where “necessary” and “appropriate”, before the amendment won by 261 votes to 166. Adding to a raft of government defeats, peers also supported four other amendments including one aiming to protect Parliament Square as a place to protest, one that would require police officers to tell the truth in public inquiries, and one demanding an inquiry into the prevalence of drink-spiking offences.Until 28 December, Heena Vashisht was a happy bride-to-be. The 28-year-old was pleased her family had put in place early all the arrangements for her wedding on 10 February, right down to the last candle. But her plans have been shredded by India’s Omicron surge. The nuptials can go ahead in New Delhi as planned, but only if she cuts her guest list down from 650 to 20. “My own immediate family is 80. How can I reduce the guests to 20? The tension in my family is unbearable right now. No one knows what to do and my mother’s blood pressure has shot up with all the tension,” says Vashisht. With India’s Omicron-driven third wave firmly under way, the New Delhi government has, along with other restrictions, limited wedding guests to 20, dealing a huge blow to India’s traditional wedding season, which runs from November to March. Thousands of families are in the same agony of uncertainty as Vashisht, with most of the arrangements paid for, either in full or in part. Vashisht’s father has paid for the venue at Tivoli Farms on the outskirts of the city in full. “I wanted to be prepared for every small thing so it has all been decided and advances paid. When I ask about postponing the date, all the vendors say if I do that, they may not be able to do it at the same price,” says Vashisht. In pre-pandemic times, some December weekends could see more than 20,000 weddings taking place in the capital in a single day, choking the roads with traffic. It is in this November-March period that the industry makes the bulk of its money because the weather is more temperate. Before the latest wave, when cases were almost absurdly low, pandemic fatigue had given rise to “revenge weddings” that were even splashier and more luxurious than normal. November was packed with destination weddings: after two years of little or no travel, people wanted to get out to a different city. ‘You can’t celebrate with 20 people’ The industry’s suppliers are also staring at crippling losses. Its revenues have previously been put at about $50bn, and New Delhi is one of the biggest wedding markets. On one “auspicious” day alone – 14 November – around 5,000 weddings took place in the city as the industry sought to recover. Flights to honeymoon destinations such as Goa tinkled with the sound of brides wearing their traditional red wedding bangles on both arms. Rajeev Jain, managing director of event management company Rashi Entertainment, believes the industry is a “soft target” for coronavirus restrictions. Employees at most venues and vendors are fully vaccinated, he says. The industry, he says, had taken all precautions because otherwise it “would die its own death” and all the government has to do is insist that all guests are vaccinated. Abhishek Mishra, co-founder of Seasons Catering, agrees, saying the crowds at airports and railway stations are far bigger than at weddings. “I was at Indore airport the other day and there was barely room to stand. Election rallies are being held attended by tens of thousands of people. The markets are full of crowds, but no, weddings must be cancelled,” says Mishra. Mishra’s phone has been ringing with distraught families asking for refunds. Some have been waiting over 18 months to have a wedding without pandemic restrictions. He intends to give the refunds because of their distress and “for the sake of our reputation”. He also has to pay the salaries of hundreds of employees, permanent and casual. “It’s a total disaster. There are hundreds of small vendors involved in a wedding. They are not in a position to absorb losses,” he said. Another couple, who did not want to be identified, were set to fly into New Delhi from London for the big day on 23 January. More than 500 guests were going to celebrate by the pool of a five-star hotel. Except for the flowers, large advances had been paid for most things – the caterers, the DJ, an entire wing of the hotel, the decorations, the outfits. “Everyone had booked their flights, the hotel rooms, the rented cars, the photographer, the band, everything. We have postponed it indefinitely because you can’t celebrate a wedding with 20 people,” says the bride-to-be. India has enjoyed a halcyon period since June. As late as November, the capital of 20 million people was recording a mere 35-45 fresh infections a day. But with Omicron fuelling a sudden surge the government has re-imposed restrictions. India is recording around 258,000 cases daily nationally, with New Delhi recording 18,286 cases on Sunday. Sahiba Puri, of XO Catering by Design in Delhi, understands the need for the restrictions but has no idea what to do with the cooks who have flown in from different parts of India for a pre-wedding function at the weekend. “The bride’s family wanted to treat guests to all kinds of regional cuisines so these cooks have come and have bought so many of the ingredients. Where do they go? They are paying rent for where they are staying and other expenses,” says Puri. With the industry staring at yet another disaster, Mishra and others plan to ask the government to relax the 20-guest rule. The Confederation of All India Traders has also written to the government asking for a relaxation. However, given the current explosion in cases, any relaxation is unlikely. Wedding card printer Arnav Gupta says: “Everyone is so haunted by the brutal second wave that no politician is going to take any chances.” Vashisht has decided she cannot uninvite 630 guests. She has no choice but to postpone, but planning a later date is proving impossible too. “Who knows when this wave will end? It’s only just got going. Do I tentatively look at a date in March? April? May? I mean, who knows? This limbo is killing me.”The recent anniversary of the Trumpian riot at the Capitol building highlighted a growing anxiety about the state of democracy both in America and around the world. In a widely circulated article, the Canadian professor Thomas Homer-Dixon warned of a rightwing dictatorship in the US by 2030. At the same time, a Quinnipiac University poll found nearly 60% of Americans believed their democracy is “in danger of collapse”. Internationally, the Stockholm based-NGO International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance says more nations than ever before faced “democratic erosion”, while Freedom House argues that “in every region of the world, democracy is under attack by populist leaders and groups that reject pluralism and demand unchecked power”. Unfortunately, in response to that rightwing populist threat, many centrists fall back to the bad arguments of the past. In the wake of the first world war, US journalist Walter Lippmann claimed the mass media and its techniques of persuasion rendered the ordinary voter so susceptible to propaganda as to render democracy unworkable. “The world about which each man is supposed to have opinions,” he complained, “has become so complicated as to defy his powers of understanding.” Lippmann drew explicitly on a critique made by Plato in The Republic, where the philosopher described the Athenian assembly as giving liberty to demagogues. Such men, Plato explained, used rhetoric and emotion to whip up the masses behind power-hungry rogues, rather than allowing competent leaders to rule. Following Trump’s shock election in 2016, a modern-day version of this argument became a kind of centrist common sense, neatly captured in a viral New Yorker cartoon by Will McPhail. The drawing showed an airline passenger addressing others in the plane: “These smug pilots have lost touch with regular passengers like us. Who thinks I should fly the plane?” The gag was widely circulated by liberals aghast at Trump’s policies. Yet, as I’ve argued elsewhere, rather than critiquing his racism and sexism the cartoon implied that the problem lay with a system that allowed ordinary people to opine on matters they weren’t qualified to adjudicate. Running the country, the image suggested, was like flying a plane: a matter best left to the experts. That was pretty much Plato’s argument – the basis on which he advocated a dictatorship by philosopher kings. Yet, contrary to what centrists claim, the real problem with rightwing populism is not that it’s populist but rather that it’s not – and can’t be – populist enough. The evolution of the Republican party into a vehicle for Trumpian populism provides a good illustration. The Washington Post recently noted that at least 163 politicians who accept Trump’s false claims about fraud in the 2020 poll are now running for “statewide positions that would give them authority over the administration of elections’”. That matters because legislatures dominated by Trump supporters have already been cracking down on mail-in ballots, imposing onerous ID requirements and otherwise making voting more difficult, with the nonpartisan Brennan Centre for Justice reporting at least 19 states imposing laws in 2021 that restricted voting access in some way. Why do those associated with Donald Trump seek a restricted franchise? A movement dominated by the super-wealthy and exploiting racial and gender anxieties relies upon exclusion. Despite its “populist” rhetoric, Trumpian demagoguery appeals to a minority: it cannot offer solutions to the population of an increasingly diverse nation. The key to defeating Trump thus lies in mobilising ordinary people to articulate their real needs. But across the United States, the legislative response to the Capitol riot pushed by Democrats has centred not on extending democratic rights but on laws criminalising demonstrations. As Branko Marcetic points out, the aftermath of 6 January saw “a crackdown on dissent: a dramatic increase in anti-protest bills around the country, including at least 88 that have been introduced since the Capitol riot; a massive buildup of the Capitol police into a national force to target ‘terrorism’; as well as the rollout by the Biden administration of a sweeping domestic counter-terror strategy.” The strategy includes on its list of “domestic violent extremists” groups such as environmentalists, anti-capitalists and animal rights activists, all of whom you’d expect to play an important role in a movement against Trump to cultivate. During the Vietnam war, an American commander supposedly explained the necessity of destroying a village in order to save it. In an era of rightwing populism, we need to ensure that the defences of democracy doesn’t follow a similar logic. Instead, progressives require a program that, as Nicholas Tampio puts it, treats “people as citizens – that is, as adults capable of thoughtful decisions and moral actions, rather than as children who need to manipulated”. That means entrusting them “with meaningful opportunities to participate in the political process” rather than simply expecting them to vote for one or another leader on polling day. Democracy isn’t an institution. It’s a practice – and, as such, it becomes stronger through use. That’s the real problem. When’s the last time you felt your opinion actually mattered in your daily life? How often do you take part in democratic debates in your workplace, your neighbourhood, your trade union or your community group? The withering of opportunities for ordinary people to exercise meaningful power over their collective affairs gives the Platonic critique of democracy an unwarranted credibility. Conversely, the more we practise governing ourselves – by debating, by organising, by demonstrating and protesting – the more natural democracy seems and the more isolated demagogues become. Jeff Sparrow is a Guardian Australia columnistThat’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today’s Covid blog. Please join me on our latest live feed here where I’ll be focusing a little more on the coronavirus crisis across Asia, Australia and the Pacific. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. More details have emerged on the arrest of two Cathay Pacific flight attendants for allegedly contravening Covid regulations. Hong Kong police arrested and laid charges against two former Cathay Pacific flight attendants for alleged violations of home isolation rules that coincided with the arrival of the Omicron variant in Hong Kong. The pair – who were believed to have been carrying the highly transmissible variant while allegedly interacting with others in public during what was meant to be a three-day self-isolation period – were released on bail on Monday, and will appear at Tuen Mun Court and Eastern Court, respectively, on 9 February, the South China Morning Post reports. The first flight attendant, a 45-year-old man, returned to the city from New York on 24 December, and went to the other flight attendant’s home in Tuen Mun for lunch on Christmas. The latter, a 44-year-old man, had just flown home from Chicago that day. Neither were required to undergo hotel quarantine, but were instead allowed to self-isolate at home under medical surveillance. It is understood that the second flight attendant was the Cathay employee previously found to have visited the Moon Palace restaurant in the Festival Walk shopping centre in Kowloon Tong on 27 December. A cluster sparked there has since grown to 16 Covid-19 cases. Mexico’s health ministry on Monday reported 59 new deaths from Covid-19, bringing the official death toll in the country since the coronavirus pandemic began to 301,469. Brazil has had 74,134 new cases of Covid-19 reported in the past 24 hours, and 121 deaths from Covid-19, the health ministry said on Monday. The South American country has now registered 23,074,791 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 621,166, according to ministry data. Brazil’s Covid-19 death toll is the world’s third deadliest after the United States and Russia, according to Reuters calculations. Poland is experiencing a fifth wave of Covid-19 infections, the health minister said on Monday, warning that the spread of the Omicron variant could send daily case numbers soaring to levels not yet seen in the country. While daily case numbers have fallen since early December, the European Union’s largest eastern member has had little respite since the fourth wave, regularly reporting over 10,000 new infections per day amid low vaccine take-up and limited restrictions on public life. “We predict that the peak of infections will be in mid-February and that peak is about 60,000 cases a day,” Adam Niedzielski told a news conference, Reuters reports. The highest number of daily cases reported since the pandemic began was 35,251 on 1 April, 2021. Niedzielski said that he expected figures released on Tuesday to show in excess of 20,000 daily cases. Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as my colleague Jedidajah Otte calls it a night in London. I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news from Sydney. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The country’s most populous state of NSW recorded an additional 36 deaths - the state’s deadliest day of the pandemic so far - and 29,830 new cases while Victoria recorded 22 deaths and 20,180 new cases. Novak Djokovic has also landed back in Belgrade after being deported from Australia after his visa was revoked. The surge of infections with the Omicron variant in the US is showing signs of slowing in some states that were affected earlier than others, after weeks of soaring case numbers. The US reported an average of nearly 800,000 cases per day over the past week, according to Johns Hopkins University, more than three times the level seen during last winter’s previous record. But in a handful of states and cities, particularly on the East Coast, cases appear to have plateaued or fallen in recent days, CNBC reports. In New York state, the seven-day average of daily new cases has been declining after a new record of 85,000 new cases per day was reached on 9 January, while in New York City, average daily cases have fallen by 31% over the past week, state health department data shows. New York now ranks 15th out of all states in terms of daily infections, according to a CNBC analysis of population-adjusted case counts, down from the second rank just a few days ago. New Jersey now ranks 20th, after recently being in the top five, as the state has seen a 32% drop in average daily cases over the past week. Average daily infections in Washington, D.C., which had the highest number of Covid infections on a per capita basis in the country at the end of last year, have since dropped by 32%. And in neighboring Maryland, daily infections hit a pandemic high on 8 January, but are down 27% compared to a week ago. Canada’s study into whether to approve Merck &amp; Co Inc’s Covid-19 oral antiviral treatment “is moving more slowly”, federal health minister Jean-Yves Duclos said on Monday. “There are some specific issues for this medication,” Duclos told reporters after Ottawa approved an oral antiviral treatment by Pfizer Inc, but did not give details. In its pivotal clinical trial, Merck’s pill had less impressive results than the one produced by Pfizer, Reuters reports. Japan is considering placing 11 prefectures, including Tokyo and its surrounding area, under a quasi-state of emergency to curb a rapidly accelerating sixth wave of infections, government sources said on Monday. The Japan Times reports: Any declaration of a quasi-emergency hinges on requests made by these prefectures, but the government is preparing to make a decision as early as Wednesday, the sources said, as the highly transmissible omicron variant continues to spread. If declared, Japan would see 14 of its 47 prefectures placed under the anti-virus measure, reinforcing the view that the nation is experiencing what health experts describe as its sixth wave of the pandemic. The prefectures of Tokyo, Chiba, Saitama and Kanagawa have asked the central government to put them under a quasi-emergency after their governors held a virtual meeting to discuss the infection situation in the Tokyo metropolitan area. Separately, Aichi, Gifu and Mie prefectures are also planning to make a request by Tuesday, as they too seek to prevent hospitals being overwhelmed by a spike in Covid-19 cases. [...] Under a quasi-emergency, local governors can request that dining establishments shorten their business hours and stop serving alcohol. Residents in these areas would also be asked to refrain from traveling across prefectural borders. The Tokyo Metropolitan Government said the occupancy rate of hospital beds for Covid-19 patients in the capital has surpassed the 20% threshold required to seek quasi-emergency steps. Tokyo’s daily count of coronavirus cases came to 3,719 on Monday, after topping 4,000 on Friday for the first time since late August. Nationwide, the number of newly confirmed coronavirus cases exceeded 20,000 for the fourth straight day, with community transmission of omicron accelerating in urban areas including Tokyo and Osaka. Japan’s strict border restrictions barring almost all foreign nationals is slated to stay in place until the end of February. Sunday’s 4,172 new cases reported by the Tokyo metropolitan government represent a 3.4-fold increase from a week before, as a number of prefectures nationwide set new single-day records for infections. Over 90% of people infected with the Omicron variant in Okinawa showed no or mild symptoms however, according to a recent analysis. Vaccinations for children between the ages of 5 and 11 against the virus may begin in February in Japan, as debates about worries over effects on the health of children continue, the Japan Times noted. The chairman of Credit Suisse resigned Monday over Covid quarantine violations, leaving the bank’s new risk committee chief in charge and with the task of trying to stabilise the scandal-hit institution. AFP reports: Antonio Horta-Osorio, who joined Switzerland’s second-largest bank less than a year ago, had resigned with immediate effect following an investigation commissioned by the board, Credit Suisse said in a statement. Axel Lehmann, who joined Credit Suisse just three months ago to chair the board’s risk committee, was appointed as his replacement. The resignation adds to the woes of the Swiss banking giant, which was rocked by its links to the multi-billion-dollar meltdowns at financial firms Greensill and Archegos last year. “I regret that a number of my personal actions have led to difficulties for the bank and compromised my ability to represent the bank internally and externally,” Horta-Osorio said in the statement. “I therefore believe that my resignation is in the interest of the bank and its stakeholders at this crucial time.” Crowned with a solid reputation after having successfully turned around the British bank Lloyds, Horta-Osorio was elected chairman in April, pledging to put better risk management at the heart of the bank’s culture. But in December, his image was tarnished by revelations in the Swiss newspaper Blick. Following the tabloid’s report, Credit Suisse confirmed last month that Horta-Osorio had violated quarantine rules. The Portuguese banker apologised but revelations of other quarantine violations followed and the board launched an investigation. Switzerland imposed a 10-day quarantine rule on November 26 for people flying in from countries where the Covid-19 variant Omicron had been detected. Blick reported that Horta-Osorio had travelled back to Switzerland from Britain aboard a private jet, then asked if he could be released from quarantine. Despite a no from the authorities, Horta-Osorio took a plane to the Iberian peninsula before heading to New York for a board meeting, said the tabloid. Michael Foeth, an analyst at Vontobel bank, said breaking quarantine rules had created a “credibility problem” for a chairman who had put the culture of personal accountability at the heart of the bank’s transformation. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for the next few hours. If you want to share anything you think could be relevant for our coverage, you can contact me on Twitter @JedySays or via email. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Moderna is aiming to launch a single booster vaccination that will protect against both Covid-19 and flu within two years, its chief executive said. Stéphane Bancel said that the combined vaccine – which will protect against Covid, influenza and RSV, a common respiratory virus – could be available before the winter infectious season in 2023. Story here. Downing Street said Boris and Carrie Johnson followed Covid guidance when the prime minister was “commuting” from Chequers to No 10 during the first lockdown in 2020 – but declined to answer further questions, including whether the pair held social events. It emerged last week that the prime minister and his then-fiancee travelled between No 10 and the spacious Buckinghamshire mansion between 16 and 27 March 2020, around the start of the first lockdown. On 16 March, the government advised the public to avoid all non-essential travel, and on 22 March, three days before a full lockdown was ordered, specified that essential travel “does not include visits to second homes”. However, the Tortoise website (paywall) reported that Johnson and his partner relocated to Chequers during this period, after which the prime minister continued to travel to Downing Street from Chequers to work for several days. Johnson’s official spokesperson insisted on Monday that they had not broken the rules, saying they “acted in accordance with both the guidance and subsequent legislation at all times”. Story here. Novak Djokovic may not be allowed to defend his French Open title in May after the French government ruled that all athletes will have to be vaccinated in order to attend and compete in sporting events in France. The French sports minister, Roxana Maracineanu, announced that athletes would not be exempt from France’s Covid pass, which will soon come into effect for over 16s. Story here. A fourth shot of Covid vaccine raises antibodies to even higher levels than the third jab but it is not enough to prevent Omicron infections, according to a preliminary study in Israel. The UK reported 84,429 new cases and a further 85 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data on the government’s coronavirus dashboard. US Joint Chiefs chairman, General Mark Milley, tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday and is experiencing very minor symptoms while isolating and working remotely. His most recent contact with president Joe Biden was on 12 January at the funeral of retired General Raymond Odierno, a spokesman said. Milley had tested negative several days prior to and each day following contact with Biden, until yesterday, the spokesman added. Israel’s health ministry said it would shorten the mandatory isolation period for those who tested positive for Covid to five days from seven days, following an initial cut last week, provided they are asymptomatic. Until last week, the isolation period was 10 days.The latest decision, which takes effect on Wednesday, brings Israel in line with recommendations in countries including the United States and England. A negative home antigen test is also required before ending isolation, the ministry said. One in four doctors in the NHS are so tired that their ability to treat patients has become impaired, according to the first survey to reveal the impact of sleep deprivation on medics during the coronavirus pandemic. Growing workloads, longer hours and widespread staff shortages are causing extreme tiredness among medics, leading to memory problems and difficulty concentrating, according to the report by the Medical Defence Union (MDU), which provides legal support to about 200,000 doctors, nurses, dentists and other healthcare workers. The survey of more than 500 doctors across the UK, carried out within the past month and seen by the Guardian, uncovered almost 40 near misses as a direct result of exhaustion. In at least seven cases, patients actually sustained harm. Story here. Moderna Inc’s vaccine candidate specifically for the Omicron variant will enter clinical development in the next few weeks and the company expects to be able to share data with regulators around March, CEO Stéphane Bancel said. “The vaccine is being finished … it should be in the clinic in coming weeks. We are hoping in the March timeframe to be able to have data to share with regulators to figure out next steps,” Bancel said at the World Economic Forum’s virtual Davos Agenda conference. Novak Djokovic landed back in Serbia after a unanimous ruling by a three-judge bench rejected his appeal against the cancellation of his Australian visa on Sunday, halting his chase for a record 21st Grand Slam win at the Australian Open. Greece imposed a vaccination mandate for people over the age of 60, as coverage remains below the EU average and a recent rise in infections has sustained pressure on hospitals. Older people who fail to get vaccinated will face penalties, starting at a €50 ($57) fine in January and followed by a monthly fine of €100 ($114) after that. The health minister, Thanos Plevris, said fines would be collected through the tax office with the money to be used to help fund state hospitals. French teachers’ unions called for a second major strike this week to protest against the government’s Covid testing and isolation protocols, which they say are severely disrupting classes. The move follows a one-day walkout last week during which half of the country’s primary schools closed, according to unions, who accuse authorities of failing to establish clear rules that would keep as many students in school as possible. The unions said the new strike on Thursday would be a prelude to a “massive” nationwide walkout on 27 January. Tickets for the Beijing Winter Olympics, set to begin on 4 February, will be distributed to “targeted” groups of people and will not be sold to the general public, the organising committee said, in the latest setback to the Games inflicted by Covid-19. Story here. The outlook for jobs globally this year has worsened markedly since last spring as new variants of the Covid-19 virus have slowed growth and restricted hiring, according to a report from the International Labour Organisation. In its latest assessment of the state of the labour market, the Geneva-based ILO said unemployment would remain above 2019 levels until at least 2023 and the damage caused by the pandemic would take years to repair. Story here. Moderna is aiming to launch single Covid and flu booster jab in time for the winter infectious season of 2023, my colleague Mark Sweney reports. Moderna is aiming to launch a single booster vaccination that will protect against both Covid-19 and flu within two years, its chief executive has said. Stéphane Bancel said that the combined vaccine – which will protect against Covid-19, influenza and RSV, a common respiratory virus – could be available before the winter infectious season in 2023. “Our goal is to be able to have a single annual booster so that we don’t have compliance issues where people don’t want to get two to three shots a winter,” he said at a panel session at the World Economic Forum in Davos. “The best-case scenario would be the fall of 2023.” Last year, the NHS moved to reassure the public that getting jabs for flu and Covid at the same time did not affect the body’s immune response. The UK government has been encouraging the public to get a third dose of a Covid vaccine, especially those in more vulnerable groups such as older demographics or those with weakened immune systems. Its efforts include launching a nationwide mobile text message campaign on Boxing Day. Read the full story here: Moderna aims to launch single Covid and flu booster jab within two years Hong Kong police have arrested and charged two Cathay Pacific flight attendants for allegedly contravening Covid regulations, after the emergence of the Omicron variant in the territory was traced to their breach of home quarantine, AFP reports. Like China, Hong Kong maintains a strict zero-Covid strategy that has kept cases low, but has largely cut the finance hub off from both the mainland and the rest of the world for the last two years. A recent Omicron outbreak traced to Cathay air crew who breached their quarantine period led to a dramatic tightening of already strict anti-coronavirus controls - including shuttering kindergartens, primary schools, and indoor dining at night. Police announced late on Monday two flight attendants were arrested and charged for violating anti-Covid measures. “They had conducted unnecessary activities” on 25 and 27 December, when they were supposed to be under home quarantine after returning to Hong Kong, the statement said. “They were both subsequently tested positive for Covid-19 Omicron variant, and have been discharged from hospital upon completion of treatment,” it added. The two - who were fired after the quarantine breach - face up to six months in prison and a $640 fine. They have been released on bail and their cases will be heard next month. The revelation of the quarantine breach piles new pressure on the city’s flagship airline, already battered by the pandemic as border restrictions brought travel to a trickle into a city that used to be a transport and logistics hub. Hong Kong’s leader Carrie Lam said last week that authorities were investigating whether Cathay Pacific has complied with regulations, and could face legal action. In the onslaught of criticism, chairman Patrick Healy defended his airline, arguing that a “tiny minority” of rule-breakers should not overshadow Cathay Pacific’s contributions to Hong Kong. In 2021, the airline’s crew spent over 62,000 nights in quarantine hotels, he said, adding that 1,000 of their staff were subjected to more than 11,000 nights in Penny’s Bay, the city’s government quarantine camp. Unlike other carriers, Cathay Pacific has no domestic market to fall back on and a recent tightening of quarantine rules for aircrews has pushed it to scale back cargo flights - the one part of the business that was making money. A Downing Street spokesperson has said that Boris and Carrie Johnson did not break Covid rules by travelling to Buckinghamshire mansion, our political editor Heather Stewart reports. Downing Street has said Boris and Carrie Johnson followed Covid guidance when the prime minister was “commuting” from Chequers to No 10 during the first lockdown in 2020 – but declined to answer further questions, including whether the pair held social events. It emerged last week that the prime minister and his then-fiancee travelled between No 10 and the spacious Buckinghamshire mansion between 16 and 27 March 2020, around the start of the first lockdown. On 16 March, the government advised the public to avoid all non-essential travel, and on 22 March, three days before a full lockdown was ordered, specified that essential travel “does not include visits to second homes”. However, the Tortoise website (paywall) reported that Johnson and his partner relocated to Chequers during this period, after which the prime minister continued to travel to Downing Street from Chequers to work for several days. Johnson’s official spokesperson insisted on Monday that they had not broken the rules, saying they “acted in accordance with both the guidance and subsequent legislation at all times”. “At the time as you know, Mrs Johnson was heavily pregnant, in a vulnerable category, and advised to minimise social contacts. So in line with clinical guidance and to minimise the risk to her, they were based at Chequers during that period, with the prime minister commuting to Downing Street to work,” he said. He said their decision to move was because of the specific nature of No 10, which “unusually, is both a private residence and an office for hundreds of people.” The spokesperson pointed out that by the time the guidance against travelling to second homes came in on 22 March, “the prime minister and his wife were already based in Chequers, acting in line with clinical guidance”. He declined to answer further questions, however, including whether parties or social events were held at Chequers while the pair were there. It has been reported that Carrie Johnson hosted a baby shower for a group of friends on 14 March 2020. By that time a minister, Nadine Dorries, had been diagnosed with Covid. Johnson isolated alone in his Downing Street flat after testing positive for Covid on 27 March, eventually being taken into St Thomas’ hospital and spending time in intensive care. He then returned to Chequers to convalesce. Johnson’s compliance with the strict restrictions in place in the first lockdown has come under intense scrutiny in recent days, since he apologised for attending a “bring your own booze” gathering, telling MPs he believed it was a “work event”. Johnson appears poised to blame a “culture” of drinking in No 10 for a series of rule-breaking parties, including two held on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral. But the prime minister’s critics say he played a key role in encouraging lockdown-busting behaviour. The story is here: No 10 defends PM’s trips between London and Chequers in March 2020 A second Grand Slam could be at stake for Novak Djokovic as the French government ruled all athletes will have to be vaccinated for events, my colleague Tumaini Carayol writes. Novak Djokovic may not be allowed to defend his French Open title in May after the French government ruled that all athletes will have to be vaccinated in order to attend and compete in sporting events in France. The French sports minister, Roxana Maracineanu, has announced that athletes would not be exempt from France’s Covid pass, which will soon come into effect for over 16s. “The vaccination pass has been adopted. As soon as the law is promulgated, it will become mandatory to enter public buildings already subject to the health pass (stadium, theatre or lounge) for all spectators, practitioners, French or foreign professionals,” she wrote on twitter. Earlier in January, Maracineanu had suggested that athletes could be exempt from France’s vaccination requirements through a “bubble” system, but the government have now scrapped any such plans. Stanislas Guerini, the French MP and executive director for En Marche, said Djokovic’s behaviour was “irresponsible” as he discussed the Covid pass in an interview with RTL on Monday morning. “All the big events which will take place in France will also adopt the Covid pass,” he said. “Who would understand if we asked our citizens to make an effort and respect the rules if we authorise some to get out of them?” Djokovic arrived back in Belgrade, Serbia on Monday after being deported from Australia following the cancellation of his visa by the Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke. Under Australia’s visa cancellation rules, Djokovic is currently banned from re-applying for a visa for three years. Read the full story here: Djokovic’s French Open title defence in doubt after Covid pass ruling A fourth shot of Covid vaccine raises antibodies to even higher levels than the third jab but it is not enough to prevent Omicron infections, according to a preliminary study in Israel. Israel’s Sheba Medical Center has given second booster shots in a trial among its staff and is studying the effect of the Pfizer booster in 154 people after two weeks and the Moderna booster in 120 people after one week, said Gili Regev-Yochay, head of the Infectious Diseases Unit. These were compared to a control group that did not receive the fourth shot. Those in the Moderna group had previously received three shots of Pfizer’s vaccine, the hospital said. The vaccines led to a increase in the number of antibodies “even a little bit higher than what we had after the third dose”, said Regev-Yochay. “Yet, this is probably not enough for the Omicron,” she told reporters. “We know by now that the level of antibodies needed to protect and not to got infected from Omicron is probably too high for the vaccine, even if it’s a good vaccine.” The findings, which the hospital said were the first of its kind in the world, were preliminary and not yet published. Israel was the fastest country to roll out initial vaccinations against Covid a year ago and last month started offering a fourth shot, or a second booster, to the most vulnerable and high-risk groups. The UK has reported 84,429 new cases and a further 85 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data on the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares to 75,031 infections and 91 fatalities recorded in the 24 hours prior. Early in the pandemic it emerged that one symptom of Covid was the loss of taste and smell – now researchers have revealed that genetics may play a role in why some people with Covid experience the symptom while others do not. Writing in the journal Nature Genetics, experts report how they studied data from 69,841 individuals aged 18 or over who are taking part in a study with the genetics company 23andMe, and reported having had a Covid positive test. The work found 68% reported loss of smell or taste as a symptom, with the symptom more commonly reported by those of European ancestry compared with those of East Asian or African American ancestry. The study further revealed that the presence of a variant near two genes, UGT2A1 and UGT2A2, was associated with an 11% increase in the likelihood that someone with Covid would experience a loss of smell or taste. These genes give rise to enzymes in the lining of the nose that are involved in the elimination of odour-related chemicals that enter the nasal cavity and bind to olfactory receptors. In other words, the enzymes affect whether odour-related chemicals can be detected by the brain. “These findings provide a genetic link to the biological mechanisms underlying Covid-19-related loss of smell or taste,” the authors write. However it seems other factors are also at play, including the variant involved. According to a recent report from the UK Health Security Agency: “Of symptomatic cases, loss of smell and taste was found to be more common in people who tested positive for Delta than those who had Omicron.” US Joint Chiefs chairman, General Mark Milley, tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday and is experiencing very minor symptoms while isolating and working remotely, a spokesman has said. Milley’s most recent contact with president Joe Biden was on 12 January at the funeral of retired General Raymond Odierno, the spokesman said on Monday. Milley had tested negative several days prior to and each day following contact with Biden, until yesterday, the spokesman added. All other Joint Chiefs of Staff except for one tested negative for Covid-19 yesterday, the spokesman said, without saying who else had tested positive. Milley is vaccinated and has received his booster, the spokesman added. The US defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, tested positive for Covid-19 earlier this month. He tested negative on 9 January and exited isolation to return to work at the Pentagon. Israel’s health ministry has said it would shorten the mandatory isolation period for those who tested positive for Covid to five days from seven days, following an initial cut last week, provided they are asymptomatic. Until last week, the isolation period was 10 days. The latest decision, which takes effect on Wednesday, brings Israel in line with recommendations in countries including the United States and England. A negative home antigen test is also required before ending isolation, the ministry said. The country’s pandemic-response coordinator, Salman Zarka, said the health ministry has found that people are at their most contagious during the first three days after infection. Here four medics reveal to the Guardian’s health editor Andrew Gregory how tiredness, fatigue and sleep deprivation are affecting their ability to provide the best care for patients in the NHS. A report has found patients are suffering harm as a result of NHS doctors being so deprived of sleep during the Covid pandemic, my colleague Andrew Gregory reports. One in four doctors in the NHS are so tired that their ability to treat patients has become impaired, according to the first survey to reveal the impact of sleep deprivation on medics during the coronavirus pandemic. Growing workloads, longer hours and widespread staff shortages are causing extreme tiredness among medics, leading to memory problems and difficulty concentrating, according to the report by the Medical Defence Union (MDU), which provides legal support to about 200,000 doctors, nurses, dentists and other healthcare workers. The survey of more than 500 doctors across the UK, carried out within the past month and seen by the Guardian, uncovered almost 40 near misses as a direct result of exhaustion. In at least seven cases, patients actually sustained harm. Despite encouraging signs the Omicron wave may be fading, doctors admitted the constant pressure of the past 22 months spent fighting coronavirus on the frontline was taking a toll on their technical skills and even their ability to make what should be straightforward medical decisions. Medics admitted for the first time sleep deprivation was causing real harm to patients in the NHS. Almost six in 10 doctors (59%) reported their sleep patterns had worsened during the pandemic. More than a quarter (26%) of medics admitted being so tired that their ability to treat patients was “impaired”. Of these, one in six (18%) said a patient was harmed or a near miss occurred as a result. One described how their patient collapsed after being prescribed penicillin, something they had previously told the same doctor they were allergic to. The doctor blamed a “perfect storm” of “chronic fatigue” and “an unmanageable workload”. Another said widespread staff shortages meant “mistakes are more frequent by the end of the day”. “Doctors and their healthcare colleagues are running on empty,” said Dr Matthew Lee, the chief executive of the MDU. Our members have come through a period of immense pressure caused by the pandemic and it is affecting all aspects of their life, including sleep patterns. Fatigue increased the risk of mistakes and harm to patients’ and doctors’ health, he said. “In our survey, side-effects doctors reported due to sleep deprivation included poor concentration (64%), decision-making difficulties (40%), mood swings, (37%) and mental health problems (30%).” The MDU survey of medics within the last month had 532 respondents including hospital doctors, GPs, consultants, specialists and junior doctors. Nearly one in 10 (9%) medics said they felt sleep deprived at work on a daily basis. A further 28% reported feeling sleep deprived every week. More than one in six (17%) said sleep deprivation was affecting their technical abilities when caring for patients. The full story is here: One in four NHS doctors tired to the point of impairment, survey finds Moderna Inc’s vaccine candidate specifically for the Omicron variant will enter clinical development in the next few weeks and the company expects to be able to share data with regulators around March, CEO Stéphane Bancel said on Monday. “The vaccine is being finished … it should be in the clinic in coming weeks. We are hoping in the March timeframe to be able to have data to share with regulators to figure out next steps,” Bancel said at the World Economic Forum’s virtual Davos Agenda conference. The company is also developing a single vaccine that combines a booster dose against Covid-19 with its experimental flu shot. Bancel said the best case scenario was the combined Covid/flu vaccine would be available by the fall of 2023, at least in some countries. Our goal is to be able to have a single annual booster so that we don’t have compliance issues where people don’t want to get two to three shots a winter. Many countries are already offering a third dose of a Covid jab to their citizens, especially to older individuals and those who are immunocompromised, while Israel and Chile have started offering their citizens a fourth dose. Earlier in January, Moderna’s CEO said people may need a fourth shot in the autumn of 2022 as the efficacy of boosters against Covid was likely to decline over the next few months. However, booster programmes have met with skepticism from some disease experts over whether, and how widely, additional doses should become available, including the European Union’s drug regulator, which has expressed doubts about the need for a fourth booster dose. Speaking at the same event, top US infectious disease expert Dr Anthony Fauci said there was no evidence that repeat booster doses would overwhelm the immune system. Giving boosters at different times, there is really no evidence that’s going to hinder [immune response]. Fauci said the goal should be to have a booster that induces a response against multiple potential variants. And here is a very helpful video explainer of how the Djokovic deportation controversy unfolded. Novak Djokovic landed back in Serbia earlier today, after a unanimous ruling by a three-judge bench rejected his appeal against the cancellation of his Australian visa on Sunday, halting his chase for a record 21st Grand Slam win at the Australian Open. The circus around the world No 1’s deportation case has unleashed a toxic chain reaction of mistrust and resentment, writes Guardian sportswriter Jonathan Liew. Here is an extract: No athlete is obliged to stay in their lane. But anybody who leverages their fame, power and privilege in this way has a responsibility to do so with care, to reckon with the consequences of their choices, to recognise when they have become counter-productive. And perhaps the most disquieting aspect of the last fortnight, as the Djokovic circus rolled out of Melbourne airport and on to our smartphones and television screens, is the way Djokovic’s choices have unleashed forces and currents far larger than him, or indeed tennis: a toxic chain reaction of mistrust and resentment that could lead us into some extremely dark places. You could see it in the seething throngs who gathered outside Djokovic’s hotel to rail against Australia’s vaccine laws. You could see it in the Serbian politicians attempting to redefine this visa paperwork dispute as a parable of liberty versus tyranny. “A symbol of the free world, a beacon of free men,” declared the former prime minister Nebojša Čović. You could see it, too, in the bowels of the internet, where one conspiracy movement has anointed Djokovic as its “unvaxxed sperm hero”. Which, if nothing else, is one way of settling the GOAT debate. Doubtless Djokovic would repudiate many of the causes now attempting to trade on his name. And of course this stuff has always been there in various forms. But thanks to Djokovic and his belligerence, it now has a bigger platform, attention and momentum, lenses and microphones. There is a time to fan the flames and a time to rein things in, and when Nigel Farage is travelling to Serbia to meet your parents and pose for photos in your trophy room, that time has probably passed. You can read the full piece here: Djokovic circus unleashes toxic chain reaction of mistrust and resentment Thailand is considering bringing back a quarantine waiver for vaccinated visitors, its health minister said on Monday, as part of a proposed easing of some Covid measures later this week. Thailand reopened to vaccinated foreign visitors in November last year in a bid to help revive its vital tourism industry that collapsed during nearly 18 months of strict entry policies. It had about 200,000 arrivals last year, compared with nearly 40 million in 2019. The “test and go” policy, which allows visitors to skip the mandatory quarantine if they test negative on arrival, was suspended late in December over concerns about the spread of the Omicron variant. “We will propose measures that can be done safely and are medically sound,” the health minister, Anutin Charnvirakul, told Reuters. “If approved it can start by 1 February,” he said of the quarantine waiver. Thailand recorded 6,929 new Covid infections and 13 deaths on Monday. More than 2.3 million infections and 22,000 deaths have been officially reported overall. Greece on Monday imposed a vaccination mandate for people over the age of 60, as coverage remains below the EU average and a recent rise in infections has sustained pressure on hospitals, the Associated Press reports. Older people who fail to get vaccinated will face penalties, starting at a €50 ($57) fine in January and followed by a monthly fine of €100 ($114) after that. About two-thirds of Greece’s 10.7 million population is fully vaccinated – the EU average is just over 70%. The rate of death and daily hospitalisations has increased following the recent spread of the Omicron variant, though pressure on ICU capacity has eased slightly. The health minister, Thanos Plevris, said fines would be collected through the tax office with the money to be used to help fund state hospitals. “The age factor is important because of its impact on the public health service,” Plevris told private Open TV on Sunday. A vaccination mandate was imposed for health care workers last year. And starting on 1 February, vaccination certificates for adults will expire after seven months unless the holder receives a booster shot. New infections sharply surged in early January, and have eased over the past week. The mandate for over-60s was announced in late December and, according to government data, 41.5% of the 530,000 people targeted by the measure are now fully vaccinated. Greece has the seventh oldest population in the world, as measured by share of residents aged 65 and over, according to the US-based Population Reference Bureau. In the absence of Department for Education guidance, parents’ groups in England have reported instances of schools turning down offers of air purifiers and are instead prioritising cleaning and opening windows, my colleague Georgina Quach reports. Parents who offer to donate air filters that limit Covid transmission in their children’s classrooms are being turned down by some schools, say parents’ groups. As headteachers report disruption caused by soaring staff absences, parents are buying high efficiency particulate air (Hepa) filters to supplement the 7,000 additional units that will be offered to schools in England by the Department for Education (DfE). While some heads have accepted parents’ donations, others are prioritising cleaning regimes and opening windows, as official guidance does not specify the need for air filters and recommends schools use their own risk assessments. Sarah Saul, the co-founder of parents group SafeEdforAll, said some schools were rejecting the free filters because of insufficient government guidance. She said: I’ve encountered tens of schools which are forgoing layers of mitigation – including filters and ventilation improvements – because they have been poorly explained and are not mandated by the government. Rejecting free donations just doesn’t make any sense to us. We’re not blaming school leaders, we’re blaming the guidance that they’re trying to follow, wrongly. The full story is here: Schools rejecting offers of air filters that limit Covid spread, say parents French teachers’ unions have called for a second major strike this week to protest against the government’s Covid testing and isolation protocols, which they say are severely disrupting classes, AFP reports. The move follows a one-day walkout last week during which half of the country’s primary schools closed, according to unions, who accuse authorities of failing to establish clear rules that would keep as many students in school as possible. Teachers say class disruptions have become unmanageable with the spread of the highly contagious Omicron variant, with many parents struggling to get vaccination appointments for their children and long lines for tests forming outside pharmacies. In response, the government pledged to provide 5m high-grade FFP2 face masks for school staff and to hire more than 3,000 substitute teachers to replace those forced to isolate after contracting Covid or coming into contact with an infected person. But that was not enough for unions, who said the new strike on Thursday would be a prelude to a “massive” nationwide walkout on 27 January. “The chaos resulting from the handling of this health crisis requires strong measures, beyond the commitments made by the prime minister and education minister,” a group of four unions said in a statement that was also signed by the FCPE, France’s largest parents’ federation. They want the government to hire enough substitutes to replace all teachers absent as Covid cases spread rapidly throughout schools. Children who test positive for the virus have to remain home for up to 10 days while their classmates are forced to take three tests in four days. Teachers also want more PPE “well beyond the amounts promised” and more fundamental investments in the French education system, where average teacher pay lags behind that of many other European nations. However, the call for a new Thursday strike was not joined by other main union groups, including the Snuipp-FSU, the largest among primary schoolteachers. Tickets for the Beijing Winter Olympics, set to begin on 4 February, will be distributed to “targeted” groups of people and will not be sold to the general public, the organising committee said on Monday, in the latest setback to the Games inflicted by Covid-19. Organisers had said in September that there would not be any international spectators at the Games, under Covid-19 prevention policies that have all but shut China’s borders to international travellers. It cited the “severe and complex” Covid-19 situation and the need to protect the safety of Olympics personnel and spectators in Monday’s announcement. Local spectators who receive tickets must observe strict Covid-19 prevention measures before, during and after attending Olympic events, the committee said. It did not give further details, or further specify how tickets would be distributed. China, which has largely managed to curb local Covid infections, is scrambling to prevent the spread of scattered outbreaks of the highly infections Omicron variant just as the busy lunar new year travel period begins. The Olympics, to be held in the Chinese capital and neighbouring Hebei province, will take place in a “closed loop” that will keep athletes and other Games personnel separated from the general Chinese public. Most participants will arrive on special charter planes. Last month, North America’s National Hockey League said its players would not participate in the Olympic tournament in Beijing due to Covid disruptions of the league schedule. The Covid-19 crisis is continuing to hit jobs hard around the world, the United Nations has said, warning it could take years for employment levels to reach pre-pandemic levels. AFP reports that in a new study, the UN’s International Labour Organization revised its previous forecast that the global employment market will make a nearly full recovery from the virus this year. Blaming the impacts of Covid variants like Delta and Omicron and uncertainty around how the pandemic will evolve, it now projects a significant deficit in working hours in 2022 compared with before the virus emerged. ILO chief Guy Ryder told reporters that the outlook “remains fragile”, adding: Global labour markets are recovering from the crisis much more slowly than we previously expected. We are already seeing potentially lasting damage to labour markets, along with concerning increases in poverty and inequality. Monday’s report predicted that global working hours would be 2% below the numbers seen in 2019, leaving the world short of the equivalent of some 52 million jobs. Last May, the ILO predicted the working hour shortage would be just half that this year. At the same time, the global official unemployment rate remains significantly higher than before the pandemic hit. This year, 5.9% of workers globally, or 207 million people, are expected to be officially registered as jobless, which is better than in 2021 and especially 2020, but still up from 186 million in 2019. The ILO report said the global unemployment rate was projected to remain above the 5.4%-rate seen before the crisis “until at least 2023”. And it cautioned that the overall impact on employment is significantly greater than what these figures would imply, since many people have left the labour force altogether. In 2022, the global labour force participation rate is projected to remain 1.2 percentage points below the level three years ago, it said. That corresponds to a deficit of 40 million workers worldwide, ILO said. Ryder warned that the pandemic had already “weakened the economic, financial and social fabric in almost every country, regardless of development status”. At the same time, the ILO pointed out that differences in vaccine access and in economic recovery measures meant the crisis was impacting groups of workers and countries in vastly different ways. Unsurprisingly perhaps, the report said labour markets in higher-income countries appeared to be recovering faster, although some were now beginning to face problems related to labour shortages, Ryder said. Numerous factors appear to be driving the so-called “Great Resignation” seen in some countries, Ryder said, adding that the crisis clearly “has led a significant number of people in the workforce to reconsider the employment that they have.” Shifts in the way we work meanwhile seem to be deepening various forms of inequality, including exacerbating gender inequity, according to the report. It has been clear from the start that the pandemic was disproportionately impacting women, who have taken on the lion’s share of the additional care work, and also more often work in hard-hit sectors, like services and travel. But Ryder cautioned the impact could last well after the pandemic ends. He said: There are concerns that the long-Covid effect on gender at work would be a negative one. Changes like the move towards greater reliance on informal self-employment, the rise in remote work and shifting trends in temporary work, “all risk impairing the quality of working conditions”, the report said. Ryder insisted that only a “broad-based labour market recovery” would allow the world to truly recover from the pandemic. He added: To be sustainable, this recovery must be based on the principles of decent work - including health and safety, equity, social protection and social dialogue. He cautioned: Without concerted and effective international and domestic policies, it is likely that in many countries it will take years to repair this damage. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ The number of Covid-19 cases across China reached the highest level since March 2020 on Monday, as the country reported a daily rise of 223 new infections. Several cities in China are now on a high Covid alert in preparation for the lunar new year holiday travel season when hundreds of millions of people are expected to travel around the country. Cities such as Luoyang in central China and Jieyang in the south now require residents to report details of their trips in advance. Authorities are urging citizens not to order goods from overseas, claiming a recent Omicron infection detected in Beijing came from an international package sent from Canada. There is not a strong scientific basis to the claim, according to experts. The chief executive of Pfizer, Albert Bourla, has said that while the coronavirus will continue to circulate for many years to come, this current wave should be the last to have to lead to restrictions. Hundreds of people marched in Malta against new measures requiring a Covid certificate to enter entry most venues including restaurants, gyms and bars. France’s parliament has given final approval to the government’s latest measures to tackle Covid-19, including a vaccine pass contested by anti-vaccine protesters. Uzbekistan has reported 1,037 new daily Covid cases, the highest number on record. Kazakhstan reported a record 13,523 cases on Sunday, and the Kazakh government has announced middle and high school students in the country’s three largest cities would study remotely until the end of March. The chairman of Credit Suisse, António Horta-Osório, has resigned after the Swiss bank reportedly found that he had broken Covid-19 quarantine laws. Covid booster shots will be offered to children in England aged 12 to 15 who are most at risk from coronavirus, NHS England has said. People in England are also now able to end their coronavirus isolation after five full days in the latest change to self-isolation guidance. The EU should continue to suspend strict fiscal rules to help debt-mired countries such as Italy until the pandemic is over, the new chairman of the German parliament’s powerful EU affairs committee has said. Travellers to Hawaii may soon need to have supplemented their vaccinations with a booster does in order to visit the islands without having to quarantine. Japan’s prime minister Fumio Kishida has promised that fighting the coronavirus pandemic will be the government’s top priority in a speech to parliament. He called on people to help each other to overcome “the national crisis” of the pandemic, and reiterated his plans to keep the country’s stringent border controls in place. Japan will bring forward its Covid vaccination booster shots by as much as two months Andrew Sparrow has our combined politics and Covid blog for the UK. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to take you through the rest of the day’s Covid news from around the world. A quick snap from Reuters here that Uzbekistan has reported 1,037 new daily Covid cases, the highest number on record, after confirming the presence of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus this month. Neighbouring Kazakhstan reported a record 13,523 cases on Sunday, and this morning, the Kazakh government has said middle and high school students in the country’s three largest cities would study remotely until the end of March. The EU should continue to suspend strict fiscal rules to help debt-mired countries such as Italy until the pandemic is over, the new chairman of the German parliament’s powerful EU affairs committee told Agence France-Presse today. Anton Hofreiter, a senior Green party MP, said Rome in particular deserved leniency as it finds its feet again after the blows levelled by Covid-19. That flexibility should also extend to countries making ambitious expenditures in climate protection, he added. Asked how the EU should help struggling countries, Hofreiter replied: “By continuing to temporarily suspend the Stability Pact because we’re really in a very special crisis.” Lilit Marcus reports for CNN that travellers to Hawaii may soon need to have supplemented their vaccinations with a booster does in order to visit the islands without having to quarantine. She writes: State Governor David Ige told reporters that his office is strongly considering changing its definition of “fully vaccinated” from two doses of an approved Covid vaccine to three. That would mean that travellers who have not had booster shots will have to isolate for five days upon arrival in Hawaii at their own expense. Currently, only American travellers can visit Hawaii with very few exceptions for international tourists. Tourism is regulated through the state’s Safe Travels program, where people can upload their vaccination records to the online portal ahead of their flight. “We know that the community needs time to react to that, so we would have to provide at least two weeks for those who may not be up to date to go to have the opportunity to go and get vaccinated if they need to,” Ige told the Honolulu Star-Advertiser, the state’s largest newspaper. An update on Japan from Reuters, where the governors of Tokyo and surrounding prefectures have agreed to request further measures from the central government, including shorter opening hours for bars and restaurants, to help counter rising Covid-19 infections. The highly infectious Omicron variant is driving a resurgence in coronavirus cases, which are hovering near record levels, after new infections exceeded 25,000 nationwide in the past two days. Tokyo governor Yuriko Koike told an online meeting of governors that the occupancy rate of hospital beds for Covid-19 patients was estimated to have reached 20% on Monday, a key threshold for requesting additional steps. The measures being considered by the government will cover nine prefectures in addition to Tokyo, broadcaster FNN reported earlier. Andrew Sparrow has launched his combined Covid and politics live blog for the UK – leading with that push from Conservative MPs to shore up prime minister Boris Johnson’s position by insisting that Labour’s Keir Starmer owes an apology. You can find that here. I’ll be continuing here with the latest international coronavirus developments. In the UK, the Labour leader Keir Starmer is under some pressure over a picture of him drinking a beer in an office, which is being touted by Conservatives as evidence that everybody in politics was partying during lockdown, just like Downing Street was. Here’s my colleague Peter Walker with his assessment of education secretary Nadhim Zahawi’s appearance on the BBC’s Radio 4 Today programme. Dr David Nabarro, a World Health Organization (WHO) special envoy for Covid-19, has told Sky News this morning that there was “light at the end of the tunnel” for the UK in tackling Covid-19. PA Media quotes him saying: “Looking at it from a UK point of view, there does appear to be light at the end of the tunnel … I think that it’s going to be bumpy before we get to the end. “So even though it’s possible to start imagining that the end of the pandemic is not far away, just everybody be ready for the possibility that there will be more variations and mutations coming along, or that there will be further challenges, other surges of even Omicron coming.” He said children do not get very ill from Covid-19, and “we’re going to have children acting as vectors of the virus for some time to come”. He said there was a need to still be “respectful of this virus”, adding: “Do what you can to stop transmitting it. Do what you can to protect others from being affected by it. It’s not the common cold. “I know people would like it to be but it’s a virus that has still some really unpleasant features. Let’s do our best to protect people from it if we possibly can.” The chairman of Credit Suisse, António Horta-Osório, has resigned after the Swiss bank reportedly found that he had broken Covid-19 quarantine laws, including by attending the Wimbledon tennis tournament. Horta-Osório, the former chief executive of Lloyds Banking Group, said in a statement that his “personal actions” had made it more difficult for him to represent the bank. He had also admitted breaking Swiss quarantine rules. Read more of Jasper Jolly’s report here: Credit Suisse boss António Horta-Osório resigns over Covid breaches Chinese authorities are urging citizens not to order goods from overseas, claiming a recent Omicron infection detected in Beijing came from an international package sent from Canada. China is battling outbreaks across several provinces, including cases of the highly transmissible Omicron variant. Most of the infections so far have been detected in Tianjin – where China’s first case of Omicron was detected on 9 December. However, the discovery of a lone Omicron case in neighbouring Beijing over the weekend has sparked alarm. At a press conference on Monday, officials said tracing had determined the infection came not from another province, but from a package sent from Toronto, via the US and Hong Kong. Liao Linzhu, deputy director of the city’s post administration, urged people “to not buy products from oversea areas”. Authorities said the patient diagnosed with the Omicron variant on Saturday had “self-reported” that they had received a package on 11 January. The package had been sent four days earlier. Authorities have since quarantined the patient’s family, the courier, and more than 60 others as close contacts, and tested more than 16,000 people in the patient’s home district of Haidian. “Omicron virus transmits fast, please pay attention, avoid buying stuff from overseas, make sure you wear gloves, don’t bring the package indoors. If you have to, clean the package outside with alcohol, and wash your hands,” said Pang Xinghuo, deputy director of Beijing’s CDC. China has claimed to identify numerous cases of infection throughout the pandemic as being transmitted via imported products – often cold chain items – but there is not a strong scientific basis to it, according to experts. However, Dr Ian Mackay, a virologist at the University of Queensland, told the Guardian it was “a long bow to draw”, and urging people to clean packages and avoid receiving mail was “a wasted effort”. He said the overwhelmingly likely source of the infection was another person, and blaming packaging seemed more political than scientific. ”We all know this virus can hang around in people who aren’t showing symptoms, especially early on in the disease,” he said. “If you’re looking for a reason for … a virus being introduced into a jurisdiction, the first thing you’d think of is humans coming in from overseas – where the virus is everywhere. “It’s an airborne virus. It’s not about surfaces. Technically, it can happen, sure. There’s a non-zero risk, sure. But is it happening again and again? No,” he said. “If you see and hear horses, don’t think zebras.” Labour’s Lucy Powell, shadow secretary for the DCMS, has been on the airwaves this morning as well. She told viewers on Sky News: I think what we are seeing, what we have seen, in Downing Street, is revelation after revelation of social gatherings on an industrial scale, pre-organised. with invitations going out, with alcohol being ordered, trestle tables being put up and the like, with people seemingly raising concerns about whether that was appropriate or not right, through that initial lockdown and beyond. With then the prime minister and the government lying about it, denying it took place, unable to answer basic questions, over many, many weeks now. That’s why the prime minister has lost authority and has lost trust, and people just perceive him as being a liar about these things. Dr Mike Tildesley, a familiar name on this live blog, has been on the airwaves in the UK this morning. He is from the University of Warwick and a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Modelling group (Spi-M), and he said that the latest Covid-19 case figures were “cautiously good news” which could indicate that the Omicron wave is “turning around”. PA Media quotes him telling BBC Breakfast: We have had very, very high case numbers throughout late December and early January – we peaked about 200,000 at one point. We do now seem to be a little bit beyond that. Hospital admissions are still relatively high albeit there is some evidence that maybe they’re plateauing or possibly going down in London, which is cautiously good news. I would say we probably need about an extra week of data to really see the effect of children going back to school – we’re still only two weeks since children went back to school – but if we still see that over the next week or so, I’d be pretty confident that we are seeing this wave turning around. A while ago I did say probably January is going to be a little bit rocky, if this wave starts to turn around and hopefully as we get towards the warmer weather we can start to see these restrictions removed and we can have more of a discussion about what living with Covid is going to be like and hopefully we won’t see a return to restrictions as we get further through the year. A very quick snap from Reuters here, that on French TV station BFM TV, the chief executive of Pfizer, Albert Bourla, has said that while the coronavirus will continue to circulate for many years to come, this current wave should be the last to have to lead to restrictions. Here’s more from Japan, where Associated Press is reporting on prime minister Fumio Kishida’s speech to parliament, where he has promised that fighting the coronavirus pandemic will be the government’s top priority. They quote him saying: “I will devote my body and soul to win this fight against the coronavirus.” He called on people to help each other to overcome “the national crisis” of the pandemic, and reiterated his plans to keep Japan’s stringent border controls in place, banning most foreign entrants until the end of February. Leaders in the US have struck a pessimistic tone about the Covid-19 pandemic in recent weeks amid rapid spread of the Omicron variant. Janet Woodcock, acting commissioner of the US Food and Drug Administration, recently testified before Congress that “most people are going to get Covid”. Dr Anthony Fauci, chief medical adviser to Joe Biden, has also said that Omicron “will ultimately find just about everybody” in terms of exposure, though vaccines make an important difference in who develops the illness. But Covid-19 is still a very serious disease with unknown outcomes, even for the less severe Omicron variant. Melody Schreiber has spoken for us to experts in the US on whether getting Covid is inevitable. You can read here report here. On Sky News, the education secretary Nadhim Zahawi has given a rather sombre interview about the situation facing prime minister Boris Johnson over No 10 partying during lockdown. He told viewers: This is both for me personal – you will remember I lost my uncle to Covid and we couldn’t visit him in the hospital, he couldn’t have a proper burial phone because of the restrictions. And of course, it is very public ,because I’m secretary of state for education and part of the team that delivered the vaccines of course. And I think the prime minister understands the level of hurt in the country. All I can say to is, I completely understand how people feel angry about this. However, the main takeaway was pretty much exactly the same as we’ve heard the last few days – that Boris Johnson has “apologised” and that we should wait for Sue Gray’s investigation to run its course. He refused to be drawn on whether the prime minister had misled the House of Commons, or whether Johnson should submit himself to a vote of confidence from his MPs. One quote to come back to at a later date perhaps – Zahawi said “I think he’s absolutely right when he says it’s not true” about the prime minister denying reports that he was challenged twice over an email being a party invite. Josh Halliday reports for us that after nearly two years of pandemic, 5,000 inpatients and 1,000 deaths, the staff of one of the largest hospitals in north-west England are frustrated and exhausted: After nearly two years on the Covid frontline, there is one image that haunts Prof Mohammed Munavvar. It is of a visit to Preston cemetery, where a friend had been laid to rest. There he saw a pristine row of gravestones, each planted in the last year. They were all his patients. He knew every single name: “That was terrible, really. It was very traumatic. Even now I think about that image.” Munavvar is a senior respiratory consultant at the Royal Preston hospital in Lancashire. He and his colleagues have treated nearly 5,000 coronavirus patients since 14 March 2020. The vast majority have survived but many have not. The hospital recorded its 904th coronavirus death overnight last week. While ministers talk of encouraging signs that the Omicron wave may be receding in parts of England, staff at the Royal Preston are struggling to keep their heads above water. The hospital has seen a near fourfold increase in Covid patients since Christmas Day, rising to 103 when the Guardian visited last week. It is one of the largest hospitals in a region with the highest infection levels in the UK and two neighbouring NHS trusts have declared critical incidents. Despite a recent slowdown in admissions, the “horrendous” levels of staff absence means the pressure is ratcheting up. Read more of Josh Halliday’s report here: ‘Christmas was awful’ – on the Omicron frontline at the Royal Preston hospital If you are interested in how the self-isolation period works in England now, the government has published the new stay-at-home guidance on its website. You can find them here. This is a sample: The self-isolation advice for people with coronavirus (COVID-19) has changed. It is now possible to end self-isolation after 5 full days if you have 2 negative LFD tests taken on consecutive days. The first LFD test should not be taken before the fifth day after your symptoms started (or the day your test was taken if you did not have symptoms). The self-isolation period remains 10 full days for those without negative results from 2 LFD tests taken a day apart. It hasn’t been receiving universally great reviews for its clarity. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London. With all of the kerfuffle over Westminster parties and the future of prime minister Boris Johnson, you could be forgiven for having lost track of actually what is happening with the coronavirus numbers in the UK. Here’s a snapshot. There were 70,924 new Covid cases recorded in the UK yesterday. Over the last seven days there have been 754,054 new coronavirus cases. Cases have decreased by 38% week-on-week. There have been 1,834 deaths within 28 days of positive test recorded in the last week, with 88 recorded yesterday. Deaths have increased by 41.6% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have decreased by 1.4% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 19,539 people in hospital in total, of whom 777 are in ventilation beds. According to the government’s figures, the peak of hospitalisations during the pandemic was in January 2021, with 39,254 patients in hospital. The education secretary – and former vaccines minister – Nadhim Zahawi is doing the media round for the government today. I’ll bring you the key quotes as they come in. Covid booster shots will be offered to children in England aged 12 to 15 who are most at risk from coronavirus, NHS England has said. From Monday, clinically at-risk children in this age group or those who live with someone who has a weakened immune system are entitled to their booster three months after their two primary doses, and those who are severely immunosuppressed are eligible for a booster after a third primary dose. Meanwhile, all 16- and 17-year-olds in England can get their boosters from Monday. About 40,000 teenagers will be eligible for their top-up dose as the national booking service opens in the latest phase of the vaccine programme. Previously, boosters were only recommended for clinically vulnerable 16- and 17-year-olds who are most at risk from Covid-19. People in England are now able to end their coronavirus isolation after five full days in the latest change to self-isolation guidance, PA Media reports. The changes will take effect from Monday so long as a negative test is confirmed on days five and six. Ministers had been under pressure to reduce the isolation period – which was previously seven days – to help address staff shortages across the economy and public services by allowing people to return to work earlier. The government said research showed that between 20% and 30% of people are still infectious by day six, but the percentage of those released while infectious falls to around 7% if people have two consecutive negative tests and then leave isolation from day six. Health secretary Sajid Javid said: Following a robust review of the evidence, we have reduced the minimum self-isolation period to five full days in England. This is a balanced and proportionate approach to restore extra freedoms and reduce the pressure on essential public services over the winter. It is crucial people only stop self-isolating after two negative tests to ensure you are not infectious.” The Department of Health said the default self-isolation period remains 10 days, and that people can only end it early if they receive two negative results on consecutive days – the earliest being days five and six. Japan will bring forward its Covid vaccination booster shots by as much as two months, prime minister Fumio Kishida said on Monday. From March, booster shots for the elderly will be administered six months after the second shots, rather than the originally planned eight months, and the interval will be shortened by a month or two for other adults, Kishida said in a policy speech to parliament. “The Kishida administration puts the highest priority on its coronavirus response,” the prime minister said in the speech marking the start of a regular session of parliament. It’s Samantha Lock here with you on the blog as we run through all the latest coronavirus developments this Monday. Here’s a brief synopsis of what’s making global Covid headlines today. People in England are now able to end their coronavirus isolation after five full days in the latest change to self-isolation guidance. The changes will take effect from Monday so long as a negative test is provided on days five and six. The department of health said the default self-isolation period will remain at 10 days, and that people can only end it early if they receive two negative results on consecutive days – the earliest being days five and six. On the other side of the world in China, the number of Covid-19 cases across the county reached the highest since March 2020 on Monday, as the country reported a daily rise of 223 new infections. Several cities are now on a high Covid alert in preparation for the lunar new year holiday travel season when hundreds of millions of people are expected to travel around the country. Cities such as Luoyang in central China and Jieyang in the south now require residents to report details of their trips in advance. Here’s everything else you might have missed: Ministers are seeing “encouraging” signs that plan B Covid restrictions in England could be lifted in 10 days’ time, the chair of the Conservative party, Oliver Dowden, has said. People in the UK may no longer be legally required to self-isolate after catching Covid, according to unsourced reports in the Telegraph. UK Labour leader Keir Starmer says Boris Johnson broke the law by attending at least one of the parties. Starmer himself rejected accusations that he had broken Covid restrictions when he was photographed eating and drinking with others in late April 2021, saying “there was no party, no breach of the rules. There is absolutely no comparison with the prime minister.” A total of 70,924 people in England, Wales and Northern Ireland tested positive for coronavirus in the last 24 hours, the government reported on Sunday. Hundreds of people marched in Malta against new measures requiring a Covid certificate to enter entry most venues including restaurants, gyms and bars. Amnesty International has urged Italy to change its strict anti Covid-19 restrictions to avoid discriminating against unvaccinated people. Italian police arrested a nurse in Palermo for allegedly pretending to give Covid vaccines to anti-vaxxer activists so they could benefit from official health certificates to travel and access bars, restaurants and public transport in the country. France’s parliament has given final approval to the government’s latest measures to tackle Covid-19, including a vaccine pass contested by anti-vaccine protesters. Thousands of people have demonstrated in Amsterdam city centre in opposition to Covid-19 measures and the vaccination programme. Novak Djokovic left Australia hours after the federal court rejected a challenge to the decision of the Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to cancel the visa on the basis Djokovic’s presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he is a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. Serbia’s president said Djokovic was “harassed … but not humiliated” and the prime minister called his treatment “scandalous”. New Zealand has begun its vaccine rollout for children aged five to 11. Japan’s government has started discussions to apply a quasi-state of emergency on the capital, Tokyo, and its surrounding areas within the week, broadcaster FNN reports. Hong Kong’s flagship airline, Cathay Pacific, has been singled out as the government looks to shift blame over the spread of Omicron to at least 50 people in the last week. India’s Gennova Biopharmaceuticals is reportedly working on an Omicron-specific Covid-19 vaccine while an mRNA vaccine candidate nears completion, sources say. The Guardian’s Audio Long Read is out with a new episode attempting to unravel what Covid taught us about racism – and what we need to do now. We were told coronavirus didn’t discriminate, but it didn’t need to – society had already done that for us, explains Gary Younge. Listen to the podcast here. India’s Gennova Biopharmaceuticals is reportedly working on an Omicron-specific Covid-19 vaccine while an mRNA vaccine candidate nears completion, sources say. The company is among a few pharmaceutical firms worldwide, including Moderna and Pfizer, to use mRNA technology in its coronavirus vaccine. These vaccines do not use a live virus to generate an immune response but prompt the human body to make a protein that triggers one. Phase 3 clinical trials are currently underway and near completion as the company also develops an Omicron-specific vaccine using the same technology, sources told the Times of India. The vaccine has already started manufacture and could be rolled out once it receives regulatory approval. If given emergency-use approval, it would be the country’s first mRNA Covid-19 vaccine, similar to ones developed by Pfizer and Moderna. The Omicron-targeted vaccine will be tested for human use soon, the publication added, citing sources familiar with the matter. A person with direct knowledge of the matter who did not want to be named as the information was private, also told Reuters that the product might need a small trial in India before it could be rolled out as a booster or standalone vaccine. Taking a quick break from Covid figures for a moment, legal experts say the deportation of Novak Djokovic has exposed Australia’s visa cancellation regime as “dysfunctional and dangerous”, arguing his expulsion is a “terrible precedent” that could lead to “political and populist” deportations. The Djokovic case has drawn public attention to the so-called “God powers” held by Australian immigration ministers, granting them extraordinarily broad powers to summarily cancel visas. Migration law experts say the Djokovic case – his visa was cancelled because the government believed he was a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment” – demonstrates the laws could be used to exclude a person who has previously expressed political views the government did not agree with. Read the full story here. Continuing across Asia, India’s daily Covid infections rose by 258,089 in the past 24 hours, the health ministry said on Monday. Another 385 deaths were also reported, bringing the national death toll to 486,451, the ministry added. There have been 37.38 million infections recorded across India since the beginning of the pandemic. While we’re in the Asia region, Thailand has reported another 6,929 coronavirus cases and 13 deaths. Travelling to the other side of the world now, South Korea is reporting a daily rise of 3,859 confirmed coronavirus cases and 23 deaths, according to the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The latest figures bring the cumulative total of infections to 696,032 and 6,333 coronavirus-related deaths. Critical cases account for 32.3% of those in intensive care. Germany is reporting a daily rise of 34,145 confirmed coronavirus cases and 30 deaths, according to recently released figures from the Robert Koch Institute. The numbers bring the cumulative total of infections to 8,000,122 and 115,649 coronavirus-related deaths. Australian retailers charging “beyond outrageous” prices for rapid antigen tests are being referred to the federal police for investigation, as supply issues continue to hamper Australia’s testing regime. The chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, Rod Sims, said on Monday the consumer watchdog had received many reports of price gouging, which is now illegal under new laws that prevent profit margins of more than 20% on tests. With reports of retailers charging more than $30 for a single hard-to-find rapid testing kit, Sims said the regulator was preparing to take action on the “beyond outrageous” price markups. Read the full story here. Several Chinese cities have gone into high Covid alert as the Lunar New Year holiday travel season began on Monday. Travellers are now required to report their trips days before their arrival, as the Omicron variant reached more areas including Beijing, Reuters reports. Authorities have warned the Omicron variant adds to the increased risk of Covid-19 transmission as hundreds of millions of people travel around China for the Lunar New Year holiday starting at the end of the month. Cities such as Luoyang in central China and Jieyang in the south said on Sunday travellers need to report to communities, employers or hotels their trips three days ahead of arrival. The southwestern city of Yulin said on Saturday those who want to enter should fill in a digital form including their health credentials and trip details one day in advance. Over the weekend, the capital Beijing and the southern technology hub each detected one domestically transmitted Omicron case. So far, at least five provinces and municipalities reported local Omicron infections, while 14 provincial areas found the variant among travellers arriving from overseas. Many local governments have already advised residents not to leave town unnecessarily during the holiday, while dozens of international and domestic flights have been suspended. Hong Kong’s flagship airline, Cathay Pacific, has been singled out as the government looks to shift blame over the spread of Omicron to at least 50 people in the last week Two crew members were accused of breaching their home quarantine, going shopping or meeting friends, and spreading the highly transmissible variant in the city. As numbers rose, infection flow charts were published marking cases with the airline’s brand while the government launched inquiries and threatened legal action. Pro-Beijing figures and state media called for punishment. The airline had just come off a government ban on flying key international routes, a punishment for carrying Covid-positive passengers. Around the same time the ban was imposed in late December, quarantine rules were tightened after a pilot tested positive, and then again just days later after three crew also did, and then again after the latest incidents. On Tuesday, Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, described the airline as “a very big noncompliance case” and accused it of sending some crew back to the territory on empty cargo flights to access shorter quarantine periods. “This has to be put under full investigation, and we will take legal action once we have the full evidence of what wrong they went into,” Lam said. Read the full story here. Japan’s government has started discussions to apply a quasi-state of emergency on the capital Tokyo and its surrounding areas within the week, broadcaster FNN reports. Three districts in the Tokyo metropolitan area are planning to request the national government to take priority measures such as preventing the spread of the disease by the end of tomorrow, according to FNN. Tokyo governor Yuriko Koike said on Thursday the capital would implement such measures if usage of critical care hospital beds climbed to 20%. The bed usage rate in Tokyo as of yesterday was 19.3%, according to the broadcaster. A recent report from Oxfam has revealed the 10 richest men in the world saw their global wealth double to $1.5tn (£1.01tn) since the start of the pandemic following a surge in share and property prices that has widened the gap between rich and poor. Urging governments to impose a one-off 99% wealth tax on Covid-19 windfall gains, the charity said World Bank figures showed 163 million more people had been driven below the poverty line while the super-rich were benefiting from the stimulus provided by governments around the world to mitigate the impact of the virus. Oxfam projects that by 2030, 3.3 billion people will be living on less than $5.50 per day. The charity said the incomes of 99% of the world’s population had reduced from March 2020 to October 2021, when Elon Musk, the founder of the electric car company Tesla, and the other nine richest billionaires had been collectively growing wealthier by $1.3bn a day. Read the full story here. China has reported a daily rise of 223 new confirmed Covid-19 cases for Sunday, up from 119 a day earlier, its health authority said on Monday. Of the new infections, 163 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, up from 65 a day earlier. The new locally transmitted cases were in Tianjin, Henan, Guangdong, Shaanxi and Guangxi, the NHC said. The country reported 28 new asymptomatic cases for 16 January, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, down from 52 infections a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636 and the cumulative total confirmed coronavirus cases at 105,087. Returning briefly to the Djokovic saga. After 11 tumultuous days, world tennis No 1 Novak Djokovic was deported last night (AEST) after the full bench of the federal court upheld the government’s decision to cancel his visa on the grounds of health and good order. As he returns to Serbia, the world tennis No 1’s home country reacted furiously to his deportation from Australia. Serbia’s president said Djokovic was “harassed … but not humiliated” and the prime minister called his treatment “scandalous”. Serbian prime minister, Ana Brnabić, told reporters in Belgrade: I think the court decision is scandalous … I find it unbelievable that we have two completely contradictory court decisions within the span of just a few days. I am disappointed … I think it demonstrated how the rule of law is functioning – or better to say not functioning – in some other countries. In any case, I can hardly wait to see Novak Djokovic in our own country, in Serbia.” The decision by Australia’s immigration minister to cancel Djokovic’s visa was based upon his presence risking ‘civil unrest’ by stoking anti-vaccination sentiment and removes any chance of the tennis player winning a 21st grand slam at the Australian Open. New Zealand will begin vaccinating children aged 5-11 from today, 17 January. Over 120,000 doses of the child Pfizer vaccine have been delivered and is available at 500 sites throughout the country, including walk-ins, drive-throughs, pharmacies, and general practices. A programme of Māori-designed initiatives will ensure all whānau can access vaccination and celebrate tamariki with special events and activities in their neighbourhoods, the ministry of health said in a statement. Auckland’s Covid-19 vaccination programme clinical director Dr Anthony Jordan said communities in Tamaki Makaurau are well prepared. Getting vaccinated now is a great way to help protect tamariki before they go back to school. The evidence shows that while children may have milder symptoms, some will still get very sick and end up in hospital if they do get Covid-19. Getting vaccinated also helps to prevent them from passing it on to more vulnerable members of the whānau, like babies and elderly family members.” However, the first day of the vaccine rollout has reportedly been marred with massive traffic problems and children waiting in cars for up to an hour, according to the New Zealand Herald. New Zealand recently reduced the interval between the second dose and a booster dose from six months to four months. “We are urging everyone to receive their booster dose as soon as four months has passed following their second dose. Even if it’s been less than four months since your second dose, you can still book ahead to ensure you get the date and time you prefer, once you’re eligible,” Director-General of Health, Dr Ashley Bloomfield said. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog today as we unpack all the latest Covid developments from across the world. I’ll be reporting to you from Sydney and my colleagues from London will take over a little later in the day. Let’s jump in with the news that New Zealand has begun its vaccine roll-out for children aged 5-11. Over 120,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccine have been delivered and is available at 500 sites throughout the country, including walk-ins, drive-throughs, pharmacies, and general practices. Those aged 18 years and older who have received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine are also now eligible to book a booster dose. On the other side of the world in France, the French parliament has approved a range of measures including a vaccine passport. The new law, which will come into force in the coming days, will require people to have a certificate of vaccination to enter public places like restaurants, cafes, cinemas and long-distance trains. This comes after President Emmanuel Macron, said he wanted to “piss off” unvaccinated people by making their lives so complicated they would end up getting the Covid vaccine. France is in the grips of its fifth Covid wave with daily new cases regularly hitting record levels over 300,000 though the number of serious cases putting people in ICU wards is much lower than the first wave in March-April 2020. Here is a quick round-up of the latest developments: Europe: Ministers are seeing “encouraging” signs that plan B Covid restrictions in England could be lifted in 10 days’ time, the chair of the Conservative party, Oliver Dowden, has said. People in the UK may no longer be legally required to self-isolate after catching Covid, according to unsourced reports in the Telegraph. UK Labour leader Keir Starmer says Boris Johnson broke the law by attending at least one of the parties. Starmer himself rejected accusations that he had broken Covid restrictions when he was photographed eating and drinking with others in late April 2021, saying “there was no party, no breach of the rules. There is absolutely no comparison with the prime minister.” A total of 70,924 people in England, Wales and Northern Ireland tested positive for coronavirus in the last 24 hours, the government reported on Sunday. Hundreds of people marched in Malta against new measures requiring a Covid certificate to enter entry most venues including restaurants, gyms and bars. Amnesty International has urged Italy to change its strict anti Covid-19 restrictions to avoid discriminating against unvaccinated people. Italian police arrested a nurse in Palermo for allegedly pretending to give Covid vaccines to anti-vaxxer activists so they could benefit from official health certificates to travel and access bars, restaurants and public transport in the country. France’s parliament has given final approval to the government’s latest measures to tackle Covid-19, including a vaccine pass contested by anti-vaccine protesters. Thousands of people have demonstrated in Amsterdam city centre in opposition to Covid-19 measures and the vaccination programme. Australia/NZ: Novak Djokovic left Australia hours after the federal court rejected a challenge to the decision of the Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to cancel the visa on the basis Djokovic’s presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he is a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. Africa: The billionth Covid-19 vaccine as part of the global Covax scheme was delivered in Rwanda on Saturday night. Middle East: A three-week-old baby died from Covid-19 in Qatar, the health ministry said on Sunday.A distress signal has been detected in an isolated, low-lying group of Tongan islands after Saturday’s huge volcanic eruption, even as most external communications remain down, and diaspora families anxiously await news. Reuters reports that the UN detected the distress signal on Monday, prompting particular concern for the inhabitants of Fonoi and Mango. According to the Tonga government, 36 people live on Mango and 69 on Fonoi. The news comes as most communication between Tonga and the outside world is still cut off, after the Pacific nation’s main communication cable was broken by the eruption of Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano and subsequent tsunami. Tongans around the world may be forced to wait weeks for regular contact to resume, after testing confirmed that the cable connecting the islands to the outside world was cut in at least one place. A spokesperson for Southern Cross Cable, which operates other undersea cable networks across the region, said that testing by Fintel and Tonga Cable on Sunday afternoon “seems to confirm a likely cable break around 37km offshore from Tonga”. The offshore nature of the break means it is more difficult and time consuming to repair, with a specialist cable repair ship being dispatched from Papua New Guinea. The spokesperson said reports indicated that “while timing is currently unconfirmed it is likely to be one to two weeks before they have repaired the cable, conditions willing”. There have been no official confirmations of casualties from Tongan authorities, but the family of Angela Glover, a British woman living in Tonga who went missing in the tsunami, reported on Monday that her body had been found. Images from Australian and New Zealand defence force surveillance flights that travelled to the islands on Monday have not been released. But UN analysis of satellite imagery from the island of Nomuku found that almost all visible structures were covered with ash, and about 40% of visible structures were damaged. New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern said on Monday that boulders and boats had washed ashore on Tongatapu, Tonga’s largest island, about 65km south of the volcano. “Seeing some of those waves come in and peeling back fencelines and structures, you can see the force of those surges,” she said. “Everyone just wants to establish how wide scale that impact has been … we want to be in Tonga and on the ground as soon as we are possibly able to be.” The United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said in a briefing on Monday there was significant infrastructural damage around the main island of Tongatapu. “We are particularly concerned about two small low-lying islands – Mango and Fonoi – following New Zealand and Australian surveillance flights confirming substantial property damage,” they said.Hong Kong police have arrested and charged two former Cathay Pacific flight attendants over allegations they broke the city’s coronavirus rules. The statement did not name the airline but the two – reportedly men aged 44 and 45 – were later confirmed by leader Carrie Lam as being former staff of the airline. Lam alleged on Tuesday “there is evidence showing they have violated [epidemic regulations]”. The announcement comes after Cathay Pacific said in January it had fired two aircrew who were suspected of breaching Covid-19 protocols. Police said the pair had returned to Hong Kong from the US on 24 December and 25 December and then “conducted unnecessary activities” during their home isolation period. They both later tested positive for the fast-spreading Omicron strain. They have been released on bail with their case to be heard in separate courts on 9 February. If convicted, they could face up to six months in prison and a fine of up to HK$5,000 ($642). They were discharged from hospital after treatment, according to local media. Hong Kong is following mainland China’s zero-tolerance approach to control Covid-19 as the rest of the world shifts toward living with the coronavirus. However, unlike the mainland, the global financial hub is quite dependent on business travellers and imported goods. Hong Kong’s flagship carrier has faced blame for the initial spread of Omicron into the community, with Lam singling out Cathay and launching two investigations into the company. The Cathay chairman, Patrick Healy, said it was cooperating with the government on the inquiries, which focus on non-compliance with coronavirus rules and rostering of crew on to cargo flights meaning they did not have to undergo hotel quarantine. The two staff members who left their home quarantine were reportedly fired. Healy said the majority of Cathay staff had followed the rules and the strict quarantine under “unparalleled” circumstances. The charges are the latest chapter in a troubled few years for Cathay, as it has navigated Hong Kong’s Covid-19 measures as well as changing politics. The punitive action against the airline has damaged morale as staff face job requirements unheard of just three years ago. Last year, Cathay staff spent a total of 200 years – 76,000 nights – in hotel quarantine or in Hong Kong’s government facility at Penny’s Bay. Hong Kong has continually adjusted its quarantine rules for aircrew, dramatically tightening them after the Omicron outbreak in late December, leading the airline to cancel most of its planned passenger and cargo flights in January. The airline had been struggling to staff many flights even before the rules were tightened, as some destinations relied on pilots volunteering to fly punishing rosters involving five weeks locked in hotel rooms. All staff are fully vaccinated. With ReutersToday is the deadliest day in Australia’s Covid pandemic. So far this year, about 30 Australians a day are dying with Covid. “[These are] someone’s parents, grandparents, community leaders, people who contribute to our society,” the Burnet Institute director and chief executive officer, Prof Brendan Crabb, says. And just because someone has “underlying conditions” doesn’t mean it’s less tragic. “Everyone is special,” he says. Australia reported more than 75 deaths on Wednesday. In Queensland, 16 people died, New South Wales recorded 36 deaths and Victoria had 22 deaths. In the first 18 days of the year, more than 530 people have died – about a fifth of the 2,668 who have died throughout the entire pandemic. That’s despite the now dominant Omicron strain being less severe, despite Australia’s relatively low death rate, and despite claims the virus is peaking. While the death rate is low compared to other countries, there will be a rise in both deaths and hospitalisations, the chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, warned on Monday. “(With) so many cases around, we are going to see a rise, and we’ve been very clear and distinct about that. I’ve spoken about that on many occasions. We will see, and have seen, a rise in deaths,” he said. “We will see, and have seen, a rise in hospitalisations and intensive care.” The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, and the Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, are among those who believe Covid case numbers are peaking. But hospitalisation and death rates lag two to three weeks behind case numbers, so Australia can expect more deaths in the future. Experts say we don’t know enough about who is dying. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The University of South Australia professor of biostatistics and epidemiology, Adrian Esterman, says not only is Australia lacking a national data collection centre for Covid, we don’t even have nationally consistent definitions, which is “simply crazy”. “It’s a total mish-mash and something should have been done about it,” he says, adding that a national data collection centre is needed. “We do not have national data collection for Covid-19, full stop,” he says. “We don’t even have an agreed definition of things for Covid-19, which is simply crazy. This is why we need a (national centre) in Australia. “What is a case? Is it a PCR test only or a RAT, or both? Or someone who’s a probable case or a definite case?” ‘It’s jaw-dropping’ Esterman points out that the states and territories even use different timeframes to capture daily cases, with 24-hour periods starting and then finishing at different times. “They can’t even agree on a date,” he says. The federal health department publishes some age and sex information on deaths. States and territories publish some local government area data. Most deaths are in people aged 70 years and over, although there have been deaths in every age bracket. In most categories, more men are dying. But in the 90-plus bracket that switches to women. The median age of death is 82 years. All the available evidence suggests that the Omicron variant is not as deadly as Delta, but Australia is not doing enough testing to work out the actual breakdown. Meanwhile, people are still dying from Delta even as many more cases are Omicron. The states and territories in some instances keep track of those who are unvaccinated, partially vaccinated, or fully vaccinated when they died, but there is no nationally consistent data. It is also not clear when or if a booster will be needed to be declared “fully vaccinated”. Esterman says another difficulty with death data comes down to the doctor signing the death certificate. “They need to know the cause of death, and often it’s not obvious,” he says. “For example, if someone dies with a severe lung disease and had Covid-19, was it the Covid or was Covid incidental? Some people die from Covid, some die with it.” It is well known that many conditions can increase the risk of being hospitalised or dying. Not being vaccinated creates the greatest risk. A person’s age, whether they smoke, if they suffer from cancer, immunodeficiency, diabetes, severe obesity, heart or liver disease, if they are male, or if they are pregnant all add to risk. People undergoing treatments including many cancer therapies such as chemotherapy or therapies that suppress the immune system also have a greater risk of dying. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are at greater risk, as are people with disabilities. Crabb says the use of the phrase “with underlying conditions” in press conferences is “unwise”. He says it may be that health authorities don’t want people to panic about the deaths but that “we have to be very careful about not saying there are two classes of Australians – the ones we care about and the ones we don’t”. “It’s jaw-dropping … I would rather the people who died are recognised and celebrated in the same way other people are when they die in tragedies. It’s disturbing,” he says. “A very large proportion of us do have an underlying condition – heart conditions, diabetes … even if that wasn’t the case, does it matter? “Just because they had diabetes doesn’t make them any less special, and their death any less tragic.” The prime minister, Scott Morrison, wants changes to how deaths “with” Covid are recorded. “They went there for some other reason and that’s why they were admitted, and they’ve been tested when they’re there and they’ve been found to have Covid,” he said earlier this month. “So we need to get a standard definition on that because these are the key things we have to track now.” ‘We have to get cases down’ There is also a lack of data about people’s vaccination status and the variant they caught. Esterman says in Australia, we rarely know the vaccination status of those who die, or whether they have Delta or Omicron. State leaders sometimes mention the vaccination status of those who die, but there is not a consistent record. “It would be possible to match up vaccination records with death certificates,” Esterman says. “That should be possible (but) they’re struggling at the moment to even do simple statistics, so how will they do more complicated ones? “I’m not saying it can’t be done, but nobody is doing it.” Esterman says a national centre for data collection is needed. The Public Health Association of Australia and the Australian Medical Association have also called for an Australian centre for disease control and prevention, in a similar vein to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Crabb agrees that we need a way to coordinate infectious disease data nationally “in a way that’s useful to the Australian public in real time and for future planning”. “I think we get the second one (future planning) better than the first (real time),” he says. As well as better tracking, Crabb is concerned that Australia has dropped the ball on testing, tracing, isolating and quarantining. Proper ventilation to prevent airborne transmission is also “grossly underdone”, he says. While Morrison and others insist that case numbers no longer matter and we should focus on hospitalisation rates, Crabb says “cases do matter”. “If we want to get deaths down, we have to get cases down,” he says. “Cases are where deaths come from.” If you have a story you would like to share about someone you love dying from Covid, please get in touch on tory.shepherd@theguardian.com.Australia’s consumer sentiment dived this month as worries about the explosion in Omicron Covid cases sent confidence to its lowest January level since 1992, according to the latest ANZ-Roy Morgan survey. Consumer confidence fell 7.6% last week, sinking to its lowest rate since October 2020. Omicron case numbers surged across Australia, straining testing facilities and disrupting everything from supply chains to hairdressing salons. All states fell below the neutral confidence level of 100, and were below the depths of the Delta Covid variant wave. All subindices were also in retreat, including current financial conditions dropping 11.3%. The number of respondents saying now was “the time to buy a major household item” also falling by a similar 11.4%. While the reading for “future financial conditions” was down a relatively modest 4.3%, the proportion of those expecting to be worse off in a year’s time rose to 19%, the most since September 2020. Head of Australian economics at ANZ, David Plank, said “people are spooked by Omicron – obviously, case numbers, deaths unfortunately – and the difficulty of getting tested. All of that has made people apprehensive and nervous.” The low confidence reading, at 97.9, was also notable because it came in January, a time of the year typically associated with upbeat sentiment. Back in January 1992, the last time it was this low in the first month of the year, unemployment was at about 10% and rising towards 11%, Plank said. “What really matters is the labour market conditions were very, very different [from now],” he said. Australia’s November jobless rate was 4.6%, with the ABS scheduled to provide December figures this Thursday. Plank said it remains unclear how long the effects of Omicron will sap consumers’ urge to spend. A separate ANZ report out on Thursday showed there is no sign yet of a reversal in the “Omicron malaise in spending” with a decline of 27% in the first half of January compared with the first half of December. Previous years had seen a decline in the range of 17 to 21% for this period, with dining dropping 26% as people avoided public places. “Weakening consumer confidence through the first half of January is another sign that spending could stay weak for a while longer”, the report said. Offering some solace to businesses – and politicians facing elections soon in New South Wales, South Australia and federally – is that 2021 ended with a significant head of economic steam. “The underlying momentum in the economy at the end of last year, and the stimulus [from governments] mean that I wouldn’t be particularly worried about where the economy will end up if this fear about Omicron and the pandemic starts to ease,” Plank said. “The unknown is, when does it start to ease?” The major banks are beginning to revise their forecasts for GDP growth as they assess Omicron’s disruptive effects. The CBA has been the first to move, disclosing on Tuesday it had chopped its forecast for first-quarter growth to 1% from 2.3%, compared with the December quarter. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The prediction is that hours worked will drop 3-4% because of absenteeism and also supply issues. Damage, though, is expected to be temporary as consumers and businesses “snap back” when the Omicron wave recedes. CBA’s head of Australian economics, Gareth Aird, said the bank has for now left alone its forecasts for the second half of 2022. “For the calendar year as a whole – that is, 2022 v 2021 – [the revision] lowers GDP growth from 5.1% to 4.8% – not a lot in the scheme of things given how big the margin of error is around forecasting at the moment,” Aird said. “Some of the loss of production and spend will be permanent – but it’s not a huge amount.” The fickleness of planning during a pandemic was also underscored in the ABS’s release of international passenger arrivals and departure details for November. Overseas arrivals reached 197,000 in November, while 229,000 people departed for international destinations, the most since Covid restrictions landed in March 2020, according to the ABS. “While the number of border crossings have increased since travel restrictions were eased in November, there are still far fewer crossings than before the Covid-19 pandemic,” ABS director of migration statistics, Jenny Dobak, said. “[I]n December 2019 there were 1.9 million overseas arrivals and 2.2 million overseas departures, 10 times larger than December 2021 volumes.” Qantas last week signalled how much Omicron had dimmed their outlook. It slashed domestic capacity for the March quarter to be at about 70% of pre-Covid levels, down from the 102% it had planned. International capacity was also reduced to about 20% of pre-Covid levels from the 30% level that had been planned, as nations such as Japan, Thailand and Indonesia increased travel restrictions.Joss Whedon, Buffy creator and director of films including The Avengers and Justice League, has responded to multiple allegations of misconduct, denying claims from actors including Gal Gadot and Ray Fisher that he threatened and belittled them on set. In a lengthy interview with New York magazine, Whedon responded to the stream of allegations made against him, which began to gain momentum in 2020 when Fisher detailed his experiences on the set of Justice League. Whedon stepped in to direct the film after the departure of Zack Snyder. Fisher described Whedon as “gross, abusive, unprofessional, and completely unacceptable” and claimed his behaviour was “enabled” by senior executives at Warner Brothers studio. He said he had been told by a source that Whedon had lightened his skin tone in the 2017 film, and criticised Whedon for cutting several actors of colour from the film in rewrites, including reducing his role as Cyborg. When he shared his feedback, Whedon told him: “It feels like I’m taking notes right now, and I don’t like taking notes from anybody – not even Robert Downey Jr.” Whedon denied Fisher’s account at the time, but gave no further statement. But speaking to New York magazine, Whedon said he had brightened the entire film in postproduction, not just Fisher’s skin tone, and that he had cut down Cyborg’s role because he felt Fisher was a bad actor. He claimed viewers at test screenings had reported that Cyborg was “the worst of all the characters in the film”. “We’re talking about a malevolent force,” Whedon said of Fisher in the interview. “We’re talking about a bad actor in both senses.” Fisher did not respond to New York’s request for comment, but wrote on Twitter: “Looks like Joss Whedon got to direct an endgame after all … Rather than address all of the lies and buffoonery today — I will be celebrating the legacy of Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Tomorrow the work continues.” Gadot, who plays Wonder Woman in Justice League, had also claimed Whedon “threatened” her on set and said he would make her “career miserable” during disagreements. A witness told Hollywood Reporter: “Joss was bragging that he’s had it out with Gal. He told her he’s the writer and she’s going to shut up and say the lines and he can make her look incredibly stupid in this movie.” Whedon denied he had threatened Gadot to New York magazine, saying she had misunderstood him when he said she would have to tie him to a railroad track before he’d cut a scene she had requested he take out. “I don’t threaten people. Who does that? English is not her first language, and I tend to be annoyingly flowery in my speech,” Whedon said. In response, Gadot told New York: “I understood perfectly.” In 2020, Warner launched an internal investigation into the Justice League set and announced “remedial action” had been taken. HBO also dropped Whedon as showrunner of The Nevers, a series he created about women with supernatural powers. After Fisher’s claims in 2020, Charisma Carpenter, who played Cordelia on Buffy and the spin-off series Angel, alleged in social media posts that Whedon had a “history of being casually cruel”. She claimed he had called her “fat” to colleagues when she became pregnant while filming Angel, and asked her if she “was going to ‘keep it’”. “He proceeded to attack my character, mock my religious beliefs, accuse me of sabotaging the show, and then unceremoniously fired me the following season once I gave birth,” she wrote. Multiple Buffy actors including Sarah Michelle Gellar, James Marsters and Michelle Trachtenberg supported Carpenter’s account of a “toxic environment”. Whedon denied to New York he had ever called Carpenter fat, but admitted he “was not mannerly” to her, saying: “Most of my experiences with Charisma were delightful and charming. She struggled sometimes with her lines, but nobody could hit a punch line harder than her.” Of the Buffy set, he said: “I yelled, and sometimes you had to yell. This was a very young cast, and it was easy for everything to turn into a cocktail party.” Whedon also spoke about his affairs, which were first revealed in 2017 by his ex-wife, Kai Cole. Then, she called Whedon, famed for creating the feminist icon Buffy, a “hypocrite preaching feminist ideals” in an open letter to his fans about his behaviour towards women. On the matter of sleeping with multiple employees, journalists and fans while married, Whedon said he felt “fucking terrible about them”, but felt he “had” to have sexual relationships with women, especially beautiful and young women who he felt would have ignored him before he became famous, because he would “always regret it” if he hadn’t. He admitted he could be difficult to work with, but lamented that people had used “every weaponisable word of the modern era to make it seem like I was an abusive monster. I think I’m one of the nicer showrunners that’s ever been.”The mission to repair the undersea communications cable that connects Tonga with the rest of the world could take up to a fortnight, the cable operator has warned, due to risks that a subsequent volcanic eruption could endanger a repair ship. Thousands of families remained without word from loved ones across Tonga, four days after the massive eruption of the Hunga-Tonga-Hunga-Ha’apai volcano sent tsunami waves across the archipelago, and blanketed islands in ash. While some telephone networks within the country had been restored and Australia and New Zealand were assisting with satellite calls, communications remained limited, particularly with outer islands. Samiuela Fonua, the chairperson of the state-owned company Tonga Cable, which owns and operates the cable, said continuing volcanic activity was a risk to any repair ship, which would need to enter the Tongatapu waters close to the site of the eruption. “We are just going through our preparations for the repair operation to start possibly next week,” he told the Guardian. “With luck, we can have our cable ready within the next two weeks. “The main concern now is with the volcanic activities because our cables are pretty much on the same zone.” Preliminary testing indicated a break in the 827km-long Tonga cable about 37km offshore of Tonga’s capital, Nuku’alofa. Another cut in a domestic cable was about 47km offshore. Tonga relies on the international cable – part of a network of 19 subsea cables that criss-cross the South Pacific – for its phone and internet connection with the rest of the world. With the cable severed, the country of 105,000 people is dependent on satellite communications, which were being hampered by a massive dust cloud caused by the volcano. The severed Tonga cable runs to Fiji, where it intersects with the trans-Pacific Southern Cross Cable, connecting Tonga to Australia, the US and the rest of the world. The fibre-optic cable sits on the seabed, running 827km at depths of up to 3,500 metres. The country’s domestic communications cable runs from the capital north to Pangai and Neiafu. The $32m Tonga cable, financed by the Asian Development Bank and World Bank, landed in Nuku’alofa in 2013, and carries speeds of 20 gigabits per second. On Sunday, following the Hunga-Tonga-Hunga-Ha’apai eruption, connectivity with the Tonga cable was lost, and the cable went into ‘single-end feed’ mode, meaning it was being powered from the Fijian end, but not from Tonga. It was unclear initially whether this was because of a failed power source in Tonga or a break in the cable. Subsequent testing indicated a likely break offshore of Nuku’alofa, close to the site of the eruption. Repairs to the cable were expected to be carried out by the vessel CS Reliance, which was moored off Papua New Guinea’s capital, Port Moresby, more than 4,000km away. The vessel would need to sail first for Samoa to collect equipment before heading to the site of the break. The United Nations said a distress signal was detected in the isolated, low-lying Ha’apai group of islands, saying it held particular concerns about Fonoi and Mango islands. According to the Tongan government, 36 people live on Mango and 69 on Fonoi. Jenny Salesa, the New Zealand Labour party MP for Panmure-Ōtāhuhu, said she had spoken to a Methodist minister in Ha’apai, who reported there had been no casualties on Ha’apai’s main island, Lifuka, but that communication lines with the outer islands were still down. “Just not knowing is actually really heartbreaking for a lot of our families – it’s good news from Ha’apai, that at least the main island has no casualties. But we’re still waiting to see the effect of the tsunami on those coastal areas,” Salesa said. “There are thousands of people … that live here and they are still waiting to hear whether their own family members are all right,” Salesa said. “We’re waiting very patiently and hoping – everything crossed – that not too many lives have been lost or washed out to sea.” Papatoetoe Tongan Methodist parish reverend Ikilifi Pope, founder of the Tongan Youth Trust, said many in New Zealand’s Tongan diaspora were still struggling to reach family members. “At the moment, it’s really hard to communicate with Tonga, but we’re still trying,” he said. “The Tongan community in New Zealand are really concerned about their families and relatives.” New Zealand telecommunications companies have offered free calls to Tongan mobiles and landlines, but connection is intermittent.Melbourne coffee roaster, St Ali, has been criticised online for offering two free rapid antigen tests with purchase orders over $159.99. In a text message sent out to “special VIP customers,” St Ali offered two free rapid antigen tests if customers bought $159.99 worth of coffee or merchandise from their online store. “We’ve been fortunate to secure a limited number of Rapid Antigen Tests for our staff, families and friends. As a special VIP customer, we’d like to extend these to you too,” they said in the text. The coffee roasters were also offering pulse oximeters, hand sanitiser, and contactless thermometers for sale via their website, alongside bags of coffee, filters and Champagne. But the products seem to have been taken down after an online backlash on both Twitter and Reddit following the release of the initial text messages. St Ali has been contacted for comment. The roasters faced a fierce backlash to the text message, amid national shortages of rapid antigen tests and reports of price gouging and exploitation by some businesses, and have since retracted the offer. In a follow-up text message, the company apologised, saying the offer was “inappropriate” in hindsight. “We recently procured some Rapid Antigen Tests for our staff and their family, we had some surplus supply, so we sent a text message to some of our subscribers offering two free Rapid Antigen Tests with a minimum order value,” it read. “We believed this was a way of supporting our customers who purchased from us regularly, but the message has been lost. We can see in hindsight it was inappropriate. “We are very sorry.” The company has promised to donate any further tests it receives to South Melbourne charity the Father Bob Maguire Foundation. “Our commitment is that once we receive further tests the equivalent amount will be donated to Father Bob (South Melbourne Charity) to distribute them as he sees fit,” St Ali said. “Again please accept our apology.” The offer comes only a day after the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) said it had “significant concerns” about the prices and availability of rapid antigen tests. In a statement released on Monday, the ACCC said it had received more than 1,800 reports of price gouging from the public, saying it has seen some tests offered at nearly $50 above retail prices. ACCC Chair Rod Sims said prices had increased in recent weeks, and that businesses had been asked to explain their prices. “In the middle of a significant outbreak of Covid-19 in a pandemic, the excessive pricing of rapid antigen tests required to diagnose the illness and protect other members of the public, is of significant concern to the ACCC,” he said. “Only a few weeks ago tests were readily available at most chemists and supermarkets for around $10 for a single test.” “Any test costing more than $30, even with supply constraints, is almost certainly too expensive and would seem to be taking advantage of the current circumstances,” he added.Almost immediately on entering St Helen’s churchyard I could see its most wonderful occupant. It’s a yew tree, at least of equal age to the adjacent 12th-century building, but reputed to be as old as Christianity itself. Like all veteran trees I’ve experienced, it is memorable not for its postcard beauty or elegance, and certainly not for its evocation of some Platonic ideal of the tree of life. What assails you is the monumental imperfection. Its trunk appears to have been shorn of the wilder pubic epicormic growth common to this species, but it’s still a bristling hog’s-back of a bole. The thing surges as one muscular rising stem, but it also twists and ripples and buckles back on itself. By head height, any singularity in that eight-metre girth has dissolved into a chaos of lesser branches, some of which are dead or hollowed out with rot. Above, amid the detail of the fretwork foliage, all sense of human order is gone and what ascends there is magnificence entirely on its own terms. Yews, perhaps more than any other trees, possess something that gets to the heart of why we love these ancient veterans. Ironically, it is manifest most completely in a yew that stands just next to this oldest one at St Helen’s. This other monster is but 2.5 metres about its waist, and its upper canopy surges up then swoops down writhing like limbs about an octopus. This illustrates something noted by Richard Williamson in his book The Great Yew Forest: the species’ capacity to flow and sway in liquid shapes. Yews may be celebrated for wood harder than iron, but they often suggest many of the properties of water. They are, of course, like all plants, made largely of water, and we see in the oldest organisms both their obdurate, awkward centuries-long hold on existence, yet also the moment-by-moment green grace by which they capture photons of light and turn water to carbohydrate fuel for new life. They are both alive to the light of each passing second, but they store in those archives of wounded lignin a profound story of their lived past. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryI was lucky enough that the girl sitting next to me on my first day of primary school took the relentless and effective approach of repeatedly asking “Will you be my friend?” until I caved in. To this day she knows that my biannual suggestion that we play a game of tennis is not to be taken seriously and that I can be talked into following a whole season of The Bachelorette or Married at First Sight with no effort whatsoever. But once we no longer have the ease of a classroom filled with people who live close by and are the same age, how are you supposed to make friends? If you move, go through a divorce or simply start feeling lonely, there’s no real way to expedite the process of making new friends. It’s fascinating who we choose to spend our time with, where we find them and why sometimes maintaining our hard-won friendships, which are such a joy, can seem like a chore. During the depths of lockdown, it wasn’t just missing the big stuff that shattered us, it was friends and even acquaintances people longed for. The vibe at the pub, the small thrill of running into an old mate on the street, the friendly exchange at the supermarket. Friends are the people in your life who you choose to be around, tell your secrets to, who you’d risk going to a bad movie with just to be around. Unlike partners, they don’t care about bills or leaving towels on the floor. Being deprived of seeing mates face to face in the pandemic felt like living in black and white rather than in full colour. Before the pandemic, loneliness was already at pandemic levels. Forty percent of people in aged care homes receive no visitors. One in three adults suffer from social isolation. Loneliness is such a severe health risk suffered by so many people that the Australian government is spending tens of millions to combat it. Loneliness wrecks havoc on people’s physical and mental health. But even if you are motivated, making new friends is unpredictable, awkward and requires an uncomfortable vulnerability. I’ve made most of my new friends through work – there’s nothing more essential to surviving the inherent alienation of work under capitalism than a work wife. But so much of the intensity of work friendships is going through the ups and downs of kooky managers and work drama that makes no sense outside of the building. Some of these friendships are forever, some are circumstantial. Some people work on their own. Kids also bring people together at the park or birthdays. There’s something sordid about eyeing off other parents at the playground, sizing them up as potential friend candidates, hoping your kid doesn’t belt their kid, and sussing out if they believe in vaccines. But the process of having kids is also allergic to keeping your existing friends. When I became a mum my friends had to adapt to me as their mate who had to be dragged out of the bar on a weeknight to the person who suggested a 9am Saturday coffee catch-up. I’ll be nominating each of the friends who made this switch for Australian of the Year. Even with the best of circumstances, maintaining friendships can be a task that falls off the to-do list. God invented FaceTime yet most people my age would sooner have a panic attack than pick up the phone. As busy schedules, long distances and the length of time between catch-ups grow, it can be easier to let people drift off. Even if they are fantastic, you found them among the riff-raff and you share a history. Not every friendship is or should be forever, but surely maintaining our hard-earned friendships should be more of a priority? We shouldn’t need the risk of catastrophic health conditions in our future to stop us casually letting our friendships fall by the wayside. But as we get older and further away from the classroom, maybe that could be the nudge we need to pick up the phone, turn up to a mixed netball game with strangers, join a club and survive the agony of putting ourselves out there and asking “Will you be my friend?” Emily Mulligan is head of campaigns at GetUpTerm one is due to start in two weeks – except in Queensland and South Australia where it’s been delayed – but Australia is yet to release a national plan on how the return to school will be managed. This is what we know so far. When will we know what is going on? Hopefully on Thursday. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced a national framework for managing Covid in schools after the national cabinet meeting last week, which set out that education and early childcare centres were essential and should be the first services to open and the last to close in any outbreak situation. Morrison also announced that education and early childcare workers were among those essential workers no longer required to isolate for six days if they were a close contact and could instead return to work after a negative test. The actual plan – or “practical implementation of the framework” – is being developed by state and territory governments and should be finalised at the national cabinet meeting on 20 January. Guardian Australia contacted all state and territory education departments and was told their Covid response frameworks would be released once the national plan was finalised. Is school still starting on schedule? Students in Victoria, Western Australia, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory (for new students only) will return to school on 31 January. Students in NSW, remote schools in the NT and returning students in the ACT will start on 1 February. Queensland and South Australia have both delayed the start of term one in an attempt to avoid the forecast peak of Omicron cases in those states. Students in South Australia in preschool, reception, year 1, year 7, year 8 and year 12 will return to face-to-face learning from 2 February. Students in years 2-6 and 9-11 will begin remote learning from 2 February. The aim is to have all students back on campus on 14 February. In Queensland, year 11 and 12 students will do one week of remote learning from 31 January, then all students will return to campus on 7 February. Will teachers and students have access to RAT tests? This is being finalised but the message from most states is yes – with the exact numbers and use of those tests yet to be determined. NSW will reportedly ask students to take two rapid antigen tests a week under a plan being developed in concert with the Victorian government. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, would not confirm the plan at a press conference on Tuesday but said: “At this stage we see rapid antigen tests playing a role as we open up schools.” South Australia said its education department was working with SA Health on the use of rapid antigen testing for students and staff – and confirmed the tests would be available in schools this year. The Australian Education Union’s Victorian branch president, Meredith Peace, said free and readily available RATs and access to priority PCR testing in the case of outbreaks were a vital part of any return-to-school strategy. “I don’t think we have a clear path to return to school without free and ready access to RAT tests across the country for both staff and students,” she said. “We won’t have an effective national plan unless we have effective testing protocols in place.” What if my child or someone in my household has Covid? Students who have tested positive can’t return to school until they have recovered. Students who are the household contact of someone with Covid must follow the standard protocol – meaning they isolate for seven days and can return to school provided they test negative on day six. What if a teacher has Covid? Teachers and education staff who test positive for Covid are required to stay home until they have recovered. If my child’s classmate has Covid, will I have to isolate? Probably not, but this is for state and territory governments to decide. Classrooms are not listed on the national guidelines for close contacts, meaning the determination lies with the states. NSW and Victoria have suggested they will not require other students to stay home if a classmate tests positive. What happens if a teacher is a close contact? National cabinet last week added education and childcare workers to the list of essential workers who are no longer required to isolate if they are a close contact – if they have tested negative. State and territory governments have indicated they will follow this edict but we will know more about what schools are doing once they release the national plan. The AEU said it was “very concerned” that asking teachers not to isolate could lead to more infections. “We understand this is a difficult time but we don’t believe the health and safety of teachers should be put at risk in that way,” Peace said. “We are not supportive of the idea and we think it results in greater risk to not just teachers, but to students and families.” How will staff shortages be covered? NSW has said it may call upon retired teachers and those in their final year of university to cover furloughed teaching staff. Other states say they will rely on an existing workforce of casual and relief teachers. Western Australia’s education minister, Sue Ellery, said her department had “more than 5,000 vaccinated casual staff in the system who can fill in where there are vacancies due to illness or otherwise”. The AEU said it would be up to individual schools to manage, but allowing some classes or year levels to switch to remote learning in response to an isolation requirement or a positive case could ease the pressure on teachers. But it said teachers should not be expected to deliver a hybrid teaching model – it must either be fully face-to-face or fully remote. Are any states using outdoor classrooms? Victoria has provided $60m in funding for schools to erect shade sails and create other areas that could be used for outdoor classrooms in government-funded and low-fee private schools. They say they will also have installed 51,000 air filters in schools by the start of term. Tasmania has also installed air filters in government schools. NSW said in October 2021 that the education department had bought 19,000 air purifiers, but they would only be distributed in air quality emergencies – such as bushfires over the summer. It’s focusing on “natural ventilation”. South Australia says doors and windows are to be left open to encourage ventilation and outdoor learning is “encouraged where appropriate”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Will students be required to wear masks? Face masks must be worn indoors in Victoria for kids aged eight and over and students in grade three and up. In NSW, masks must be worn indoors by anyone aged 12 and over. In Queensland, face masks must be worn by teachers and all students at high school, unless exemptions apply. In South Australia, face masks are required for students in year 7 and higher, and strongly encouraged for students in grades three to six.This time last year, my husband Luke and I had everything we wanted: each other, a lovely house and two wonderful children. Three months later, this life was shattered. On 22 April 2021, Luke took his own life. About two years before his death, Luke developed a gambling disorder. He started gambling with friends on a Saturday, placing bets at a local bookies while watching Leicester City, his football team. At the time, I didn’t think it was dangerous – I had no idea that gambling kills so many people. Soon, Luke began to bet online. He opened multiple accounts, taking advantage of “free bets” – aggressive marketing offers used by online bookmakers to lure people into gambling. From there, he was encouraged to bet on sports, like horse racing, that he knew little about. It didn’t take long for him to get into a lot of debt and start chasing his losses. If you knew Luke, you’d find it hard to comprehend that he gambled. My husband was sensible and careful with money. He would save whenever he could, and bills were always paid on time. As a warehouse manager at a local family printing firm, he often found ways of saving the company money, something he was held in high regard for. I only became aware he was in trouble after I noticed he was struggling to pay for cinema trips or meals out. Gambling on a phone is very isolated, and it took me a year to understand he was gambling so much. We had just sold our house, so luckily we could pay off the debts he had accumulated and, much to my relief, Luke closed his gambling accounts. This seemed enough. Luke had never had issues with gambling before and I had no reason to think he would again. But in 2020, Luke was furloughed because of the pandemic. He began gambling again in secret, reopening his old accounts. I remember him often commenting on how relentless the marketing emails he was getting were; he was concerned about the impact they would have on people who were already struggling with money. Naively, I thought this meant Luke could stop gambling when he wanted to – like the GambleAware slogan: “When the fun stops, stop.” Three weeks after his suicide, the police gave Luke’s phone back to me. It was then that I realised his gambling disorder had returned. His relapse was so rapid that I still cannot believe it was never picked up by these gambling companies who – at the start of the pandemic – had promised to do more to protect vulnerable customers like Luke. On one account he reopened during the pandemic, the pattern of his gambling was obviously harmful. He took advantage of a free bet offer, deposited money, lost money, was immediately advertised another free bet offer, and the cycle would begin again. It is not in the gambling industry’s interests to stop people developing gambling addictions. It spends £1.5bn a year on advertising to bring in customers to get hooked on its products for profit. Some 60% of its profits come from from 5% of customers who are already problem gamblers, or are at risk of becoming so. And they are huge profits – the UK industry is worth about £14bn. These companies know a staggering amount about their customers – in some cases they will know if someone earning £30k a year has gambled £60k in a few months, and do nothing to stop it. They track their habits and patterns and vulnerabilities online to find out when best to advertise to them and what kind of emails they are most likely to open. They could, if they wanted to, use this information to help people, to block their accounts; but often they use it to drag them further into addiction. When people like my husband try not to gamble, they are targeted more aggressively. One gambler who got his data back from an online gambling company and shared it with the New York Times found that as someone who had given up gambling, he had been profiled as a customer to “win back”. How do these gambling companies get away with it? Because they can. The entire industry is fuelled by a money above all else mentality that is devoid of morality. In a 2021 report, Public Health England estimated that there are more than 409 gambling-related suicides in England every year. That is more than one life lost every single day. That is why I am campaigning for “Luke’s law” – to ban gambling incentives such as “free bets”. Luke found that being bombarded with ads from that 24-hour bookies and casino in his pocket made it a problem that became impossible to escape. Banning these incentives may go some way to alleviating the misery that gambling companies cause families like ours with their predatory actions. The gambling lobby is very powerful – just look at all the MPs who get paid off with tickets to sports games to speak in its favour. But unlike so many who caution against change to gambling regulation, I am not on anyone’s payroll. I would give anything for this catastrophe to not have happened to me and my family. It has been traumatic and the fight is draining, but I do not feel I have a choice. The government is currently reviewing gambling legislation – laws that were drawn up before smartphones. This is a real chance to make changes that could benefit everyone – not just the few who are making money from misery. We banned tobacco marketing; we can do the same for gambling. My children will never see their father again. But I hope that by getting Luke’s law passed, he may have saved others from falling for the same fate. It gives me some small solace, and I hope it gives our children that too among their grief. Annie Ashton campaigns to raise awareness of gambling addiction If you’ve been affected by gambling-related suicide, contact Gambling with Lives on support@gamblingwithlives.org. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.orgHere’s a good pub quiz question: what do David Shrigley, Tracey Emin and, er, Prince Charles have in common? The answer is they’ve all painted works of art you can order in a restaurant. Because while a wine bottle may provide only the slenderest of canvases, that hasn’t stopped some of the biggest names in the world of art from daubing something onto the label’s few square inches. The latest to do so is Olafur Eliasson, the revered Icelandic–Danish environmental artist who created a work for the 2019 vintage of Château Mouton Rothschild – a series of ellipses that form a ring charting the path of the sun in relation to the chateau’s location in Pauillac, south-west France. If you really want to understand the bond between fine art and fine wine, there is no better chateau to start with. Since its first artistic collaboration in 1924, the roll-call of names to grace its bottles is astonishing: Salvador Dalí doodled the winery’s ram emblem for the 1958 vintage, Jeff Koons modified a first-century Roman fresco in 2010 and, four years later, David Hockney provided an empty and full glass. Other names to have graced its grape vestibule include – and you really need to take a deep breath here – Georges Braque (1955), Henry Moore (1964), Dorothea Tanning (1965), Joan Miró (1969), Wassily Kandinsky (1971), Pablo Picasso (1973), Andy Warhol (1975), Keith Haring (1988), Francis Bacon (1990), Lucian Freud (2006), Anish Kapoor (2009) and Gerhard Richter (2015). Prince Charles too, his watercolour landscape gracing the 2004 vintage, which celebrated 100 years of the Entente Cordiale. Wine labels have existed for centuries – the jars buried with King Tutankhamun are said to have been etched with details about their vintage, region and even quality (the Vivino app was still in the pipeline at this point). But Mouton was the first to truly embrace the art, when a 22-year-old Baron Philippe de Rothschild decided to break with tradition and invite the designer of a Parisian theatre to create something new. That idea lay dormant while the Rothchilds were forced to flee France during the Nazi occupation. After restoring the vineyards damaged by German troops, Philippe revived the idea of artist-drawn labels, starting with a Churchill-inspired V for victory by the illustrator, novelist and dandy Philippe Jullian. A tradition was born and, should you visit the chateau, you can see all of the works in its Paintings for the Labels Room and visit its Museum of Wine too. These days, Julien de Beaumarchais de Rothschild is in charge of commissioning the artworks, alongside his brother and sister. The criteria are simple: the art-loving family simply have to like someone’s work, although they “also consider their eminent position in the art world, which must be comparable to that of Château Mouton Rothschild in the wine world. The artists agree disinterestedly, because they do not need Mouton Rothschild to enhance their reputation.” While the artists are given complete creative freedom, tracking them down isn’t always easy. For the 1982 vintage, Baron Philippe was determined to recruit the film director John Huston. His wife, Baroness Philippine, discovered he was filming Under the Volcano in an isolated part of Mexico accessible only by boat and, undeterred, she set off on her own. “She arrived,” says Julien, “in a place described as ‘unknown to men or gods’. But after three days there, she returned with a watercolour of a ram leaping in Dionysiac joy.” Julien’s decision to involve Eliasson began, unsurprisingly, over a bottle of wine after the two met at an exhibition in Versailles. Eliasson’s willingness arose from his love of food and drink, which also have professional uses. “The kitchen at my studio,” he says, “plays a very important role with my team, acting as a kind of social glue, bringing people together around a table to exchange ideas. The prospect of turning a wine bottle into an artwork seemed an extension of that.” His path-of-the sun-label reflected a desire to focus on the winemaking process. “I find it fascinating that every plant stores a bit of sunlight and soil in its leaves and fruit,” he says. “The environment is transformed into a liquid that you take into your body. This is worth reflecting on when you hold the bottle or take a sip.” Mixing alcohol with art can, of course, have its pitfalls. “I started work by having a glass,” says Eliasson, “but that produced nothing but silliness and fun. I decided not to have another – until I was done with the first sketch.” Mouton Rothschild may have been the pioneer but, since the turn of the century, artists and wine have become a pairing as reliable as oysters and Chablis. Tracey Emin sketched a solo drinker for Mark Hix’s Portuguese Tonnix range; Rebecca Horn created a 3D kinetic sculpture of copper wire and mirrors around a nine-litre salmanazar of Ornellaia’s 2008 Super Tuscan; Yoko Ono’s design for Chianti Classico by Nittardi paid tribute to both the Renaissance artist Michelangelo, who once owned the winery, and to John Lennon, with the words “Imagine You” underneath various vessels. Some estates, such as Leeuwin in Australia, follow Mouton Rothschild’s lead with their own artist series. Contributions have included John Olsen’s Frogs in Riesling and an intoxicating abstract by aboriginal artist Jimmy Nerrimah for a 2013 Shiraz. Ruinart also has an artist series. You might not think David Shrigley, with his strange childlike drawings and blunt wordings, was a great fit for the world’s oldest champagne house. But it let him loose on its range last year, allowing him to cartoonify the font and add some offbeat statements around the label that, he says, “they just about accepted”. His messages for the range included: “You can judge a bottle by the label”, “Worms work harder than us” and “Keep your filthy hands off our grapes”. For Shrigley, designing a wine label was an opportunity for self-improvement. “I thought, ‘I’m never going to get to go to Reims and meet a cellar-master and develop a deep understanding of how champagne is made otherwise.’ You end up learning an awful lot about stuff.” While not unaware of other, er, motivations (“We got to eat lots of nice food and drink lots of very good champagne”) Shrigley saw the project as a necessary step for himself as an artist. “If you’re just left to your own devices then, after a certain point, you have much less to make art about. Left to your own devices, you’re never going to go out and make art about grapes. It was an opportunity to change a little bit.” While it was a nice career interval for Shrigley, for others it’s an all-consuming part of their life. Dave Phinney is the winemaker at Orin Swift, producing deep Californian reds and elegant whites. He grew up around galleries but was also immersed in the LA skateboard/punk scene in the late 80s and early 90s. So when it came to releasing his first wine, an inventive zinfandel blend called The Prisoner, he wanted to make a statement by using a modified version of The Little Prisoner by Goya. The Spanish painter’s etching of a crouched figure in shackles is not, it’s fair to say, the most immediately commercial image that springs to mind. “Everyone told me it was a horrible idea,” says Phinney, laughing. “My father-in-law is in the wine business and he almost forbade me. ‘You can’t do that!’” But his take on this unsettling look at human brutality was a success. “That gave us the confidence – and artistic licence – to continue.” Since then, says Phinney, Orin Swift has treated label-making as seriously as wine-making. And he’s not joking. Phinney knows of three Orin Swift drinkers who have tattoos of the company’s labels, a fact that reflects the amount of work that goes into them. For its red blend Machete, a photography shoot that was supposed to be over in a matter of minutes ended up taking three days. Creating the artwork for the winery’s Abstract wine was an even bigger labour of love. Inspired by a collage he saw in an Italian fashion magazine, Phinney decided to make his own from all the pages of magazines and books he’d torn out over the years. “I thought, ‘How hard can it be? I’ve got the photos and an idea.’ But it was way more difficult than I thought – how the colours interact, how the images interact, was a real puzzle.” By the end of the first day, he’d only completed a tiny fraction of the collage, so he emailed all his staff telling them to work from home until he was done. By the time the collage reached its finished size, around 5ft by 12ft, he had to build a scaffold just to photograph it. Then there were the potential issues with intellectual property rights: his lawyer advised him to sign the finished collage and sell it to his wife for $1 so it was considered an artwork and therefore allowed more leeway with all the photographs it contained. That wasn’t the end of the story: Phinney has since pieced it all back together, fixing things that bothered him, then placed it between two huge pieces of transparent lucite. And now he’s looking for a metal-worker to frame it, so the work can be displayed. “It will need a base of about half a ton to offset the weight,” he says. Having the artwork in this form has unexpected benefits: when Phinney saw the reverse side, he used that as a label for one of Orin Swift’s members-only wines called Inside Out. If this sounds obsessive, that’s because it is: obsession is what makes good wine and good art. But it’s not just about obsession. Both endeavours require patience, an understanding of the world and its rhythms, an ability to express something in a new a way. After speaking to Phinney, I wondered if he was just as much an artist as a wine-maker. Then I realised that maybe they’re the same thing.A senior academic who says she was sacked from her post in a university’s physics department because of her loud voice has been awarded more than £100,000 after winning a claim for unfair dismissal. Dr Annette Plaut told the Guardian she had a “naturally loud voice” that came from her middle European Jewish background and claimed it was the combination of her being “female and loud” that had led to her dismissal from the University of Exeter. Plaut, who had worked at the physics department for 29 years, accused the university of being “institutionally unconsciously biased” and said she was taking medication for stress brought on by her former employer’s treatment of her. During a tribunal last year, Plaut was described as a “Marmite” character, valued by many but considered “overbearing” by others who disliked her “boisterous” style. The university argued during the tribunal that she had been dismissed over the way she dealt with two PhD students and insists it had nothing to do with her background or her sex. Speaking on Monday after the university was ordered to pay her just under £101,000, Plaut said: “I have a naturally loud voice. As such I have no ability to sense when I am speaking loudly. “The loud voice comes from my family background and is a perfectly normal and acceptable way to speak amongst people of middle and eastern European Jewish background. In New York or Germany where I have lived and worked for years at a time, the loudness of my voice was never mentioned even once. “Only in Exeter have I been put under pressure to change this inherent characteristic that is fundamentally integral to me and who I am. I believe that it is the combination of being female and loud that some senior members of the university and HR [human resources] persist in condemning, as this combination contradicts their stereotypical assumptions of how a woman should behave. “I have been consistently treated unfairly by the university over decades to the extent that I was targeted for dismissal, and that that targeting was tainted by sex, in a male-orientated department, and race as it was unconscious bias against my inherent characteristics, which were an integral part of my race.” Both Plaut’s parents were born into Jewish families in Germany and fled to the UK as children. Her maternal grandfather was interned in a concentration camp while her paternal grandfather went into hiding. Plaut, 59, joined the university in 1990 as the first female academic in the physics department. She said: “I enjoyed my job – I liked teaching and was especially keen on experimental physics research in a laboratory that I had built up over the years from scratch.” She was twice suspended before she was dismissed and was told she could not speak to fellow workers or students while she was being investigated, leaving her feel humiliated and isolated. Plaut said she still felt anxiety, particularly as the university has said it will appeal against the tribunal’s decision. “I have never previously ever suffered from any mental health condition. I still continue to take daily medication to reduce my ongoing stress.” She said she would have liked to get her job back but the tribunal’s remedy judgment concluded that this was not practical as there was “entrenched bias against Dr Plaut in the human resources department and in the senior echelons of the university”. The judgment added: “Her life was centred on the university where she had worked for 30 years. Her social circle was almost totally linked to the university. Academics customarily retain access to university email accounts and facilities even when retired. All this is removed from her by her unfair dismissal.” The remedy judgment said it was “difficult to imagine the depth of humiliation, hurt, stress and worry” for Plaut after she was suspended, adding: “Every aspect of her life and future was at risk, and for no good reason, and unfairly.” Plaut said she had spoken out not out of any vindictiveness towards the university but as an attempt to prevent anyone else in future being similarly mistreated. A University of Exeter spokesperson said: “We continue to believe there are serious inaccuracies in these judgments and we are appealing the decision to the employment appeals tribunal.”Four inmates at an Arkansas jail have filed a lawsuit against the facility and its doctor after they said they were unknowingly prescribed ivermectin to treat Covid-19 as a form of “medical experimentation” despite US health officials warning that the anti-parasitic drug should not be used for that purpose. The Arkansas chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union filed the lawsuit on behalf of the men last week against Washington county jail, the Washington county sheriff, Tim Helder, and jail physician Dr Robert Karas. Last August, Helder revealed that the drug had been prescribed to patients with Covid-19. “The lawsuit charges the defendants for administering ivermectin to incarcerated individuals without prior informed consent as to the nature, contents, or potential side effects of the drug,” the ACLU said in a statement last week. Gary Sullivan, legal director of the ACLU of Arkansas, condemned Helder’s actions, saying: “No one – including incarcerated individuals – should be deceived and subject to medical experimentation. Sheriff Helder has a responsibility to provide food, shelter, and safe, appropriate care to incarcerated individuals.” “Plaintiffs ingested incredibly high doses of a drug that credible medical professionals, the FDA, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), all agree is not an effective treatment against Covid-19, and that if given in large doses is dangerous for humans,” the lawsuit said. The lawsuit went on to allege that Karas told the inmates that the prescribed drugs “consisted of mere ‘vitamins’, ‘antibiotics,’ and/or ‘steroids’”. It added, “Had plaintiffs been informed that the drugs they were given included the dewormer ivermectin and informed of its nature and potential side-effects, they would have refused to take it.” According to the lawsuit, the inmates suffered from side-effects that included vision issues, diarrhea, bloody stools and stomach cramps. The inmates were also subject to payment of fees for medical examinations that they sought after experiencing the side-effects from the drug. Karas has said he began administering ivermectin at the jail in November 2020. The four inmates were prescribed ivermectin after testing positive for Covid-19 in August, the lawsuit said, In a letter sent by his attorney last September, Karas told a state medical board examiner that 254 inmates at the jail had been treated with the drug. The medical board has been investigating complaints against Karas over the jail’s use of ivermectin and is expected to discuss the investigation’s findings at its February meeting. Ivermectin has been touted worldwide. But last July, a major study that supported the medication as a Covid treatment was withdrawn over ethical concerns. As reports of ivermectin use continue, the federal Food and Drug Administration warned against using animal-strength forms of the drug as a treatment for Covid-19. “Taking large doses of this drug is dangerous and can cause serious harm,” it said, adding that the drug can cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, seizures, delirium and death.Soaring energy bills could eat up more than half of some UK households’ incomes, a leading poverty charity has said, amid warnings that vulnerable people will be left unable to eat regularly or could even be at risk of death from the cold. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation (JRF) said that while households across the board faced bill increases of 40% to 47% from April, there would be huge variations in the ability of families to cope. Energy bills would amount to 6% of the average income of a middle-income family but 18% for a low-income family. This would rise to 25% for lone parents and couples without children, while single-adult households on low incomes could be forced to spend 54% of their income on gas and electricity when the new energy price cap comes in on 1 April, the JRF found. “Rising energy prices will affect us all but our analysis shows they have the potential to devastate the budgets of families on the lowest incomes. The government cannot stand by and allow the rising cost of living to knock people off their feet,” said Katie Schmuecker, the deputy director of policy and partnerships at the JRF. The warning came as one of the UK’s most respected consumer campaigners, Martin Lewis, said ministers must intervene urgently to help vulnerable people whose lives could be at risk. Lewis, a journalist and founder of the consumer advice website MoneySavingExpert, said the government must provide billions of pounds in support to millions of poorer households who faced major financial stress and “heat or eat” decisions. “We absolutely know we need a substantial increase in the billions of pounds funding to vulnerable people, and people on low incomes, or it is not an exaggeration to say some will have to choose between heating or eating, and that is not appropriate in one of the world’s richest economies and a civilised nation,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “What we can’t get away from is we are going to need to put money into the system or we are going to have an absolute, not a relative, an absolute poverty crisis in this country, with people really being unable to eat or dying because of the cold.” JRF said the impact of energy costs would be especially harsh on families that have been trapped in “deep poverty” in recent years. About one in five children were in families classed as being on low incomes for three of the four years between 2016 and 2019, meaning for many, poverty was “all they have ever known”. “Broadly speaking, there seems little prospect of reversing the trends since around 2012/13 of rising child poverty (which rose by four percentage points to almost a third of children by 2019/20) and rising pensioner poverty (which has risen by five percentage points to almost a fifth of pensioners by 2019/20),” the JRF report said. A government spokesperson said: “We recognise the pressures people are facing on their household bills, which is why we have taken decisive steps to support them. The energy price cap has been protecting around 15m households from high global gas prices. We are also supporting vulnerable and low-income households with the cost of fuel bills through schemes such as the warm home discount and our £500m household support fund. “Working families on universal credit are already seeing more money in their pockets, with an average of £1,000 more a year, and we’re increasing the living wage again in April. We will continue to look closely at the pressures facing people and what further measures might be needed on abating high energy costs.” • This article was amended on 19 January 2022. An earlier version misdescribed Martin Lewis as a financial adviser, which is a regulated term in the UK.I was sent to Brussels early in my ill-fated career as a City solicitor, to an office in a stunning Belle Époque building with a murky colonial past and beautiful stained-glass windows. It was thrillingly foreign, with office lunches that put Boots’ meal deals to shame and sparkling wine at the weekly “tea time”. I was delighted, but convinced it was a clerical error. Foreign postings were supposed to reward the best; I devoted most of my time and energy to evading work. I was also irrationally terrified of the fabled “all-nighter”, a corporate law rite of passage. I think I believed that, gremlin-like, something terrible would happen if I was exposed to spreadsheets after midnight – I would reveal I didn’t actually understand them, perhaps. I had developed hacks to ensure this never happened: dodging notorious taskmasters, fibbing about my workload, and leaving my computer on when I went home. This kind of subterfuge was impossible in Brussels. The antique tiles echoed when I tried to sneak out and I was sharing an office with my new boss, J, an ultra-ambitious workaholic. Shortly after arrival, I was caught muttering: “Fucking hell, Sharon,” on a call to a lawyer who made me stay late: I had to pretend I was swearing at the printer. I needed to step up and prove my after-hours mettle. The opportunity arose rapidly. J said yes to yet another job – an urgent regulatory filing for a chemical manufacturer – and scheduled an all-day client meeting to finalise it with me, another junior lawyer and our brilliant paralegal. Usually, our clients were sleek and terrifying, like sharks, but these two, straight from a chemical plant in rural Germany, had a different vibe. They were as jolly as a two-man oompah band, and in no apparent hurry, firing off dubious jokes and asking for beers as we settled in to crunch the numbers. We knew it would be a long meeting, but it was surreally, incomprehensibly long. We made no progress over the duration of several meals, many hours and many more spreadsheets, as every sentence or figure was chewed over by the double act. About 7pm, J had to leave to fly to another meeting, leaving the rest of us to wrap things up. Without any “grownups” around, we were powerless to stop the chemical brothers from diving off on numerous tangents, changing their minds continuously and trying to type on our laptops with their arms around our shoulders. The hours spun out, shapeless and full of percentages I didn’t understand. Midnight came and went. At one point, the paralegal, undoubtedly the calmest and most competent woman I knew, walked out, quietly. Curious, I followed her. She was standing shaking with hysterical laughter in the corridor. I think that was the moment I finally relaxed and started to enjoy the absolute anarchy of it all. I had not gone gremlin: I was bewildered and resentful and had definitely messed up some exchange rate calculations, yes, but that was my normal state. Actually, it was getting so silly, it was almost … fun? The meeting eventually fizzled out. We went home, exhausted and semi-hysterical, in the small hours; the chemical brothers ended up in a hotel that, they claimed gleefully, turned out to be a brothel. Months later, their boss complained about the bill and our “needless physical presence” at the meeting. J stood up for us all, even me and my dodgy exchange rates. Forged in the fire of our ridiculous nearly all-nighter, I was properly one of the team now.The Azores – the name supposedly has its origins in the word “hawk” or “blue” – is an archipelago of 10 main islands, situated in the eastern Atlantic, roughly 1,300km (800 miles) west of this autonomous region’s mother country, Portugal. Entirely surrounded by sea, and with the ameliorating influence of the Gulf Stream, the islands have a very mild, at times subtropical, climate. There are few extremes of temperature and moderate rainfall, especially in the autumn and winter months, totalling about 1,200mm (48in) annually. During the summer and early autumn, maximum temperatures are usually in the low-to-mid 20Cs, with seven or eight hours of sunshine a day, making the islands the ideal holiday destination for those who prefer conditions to be pleasant, but not too hot. In winter and spring these drop to the high teens – still mild, though from time to time Atlantic depressions can bring high winds and storms. When these strong westerlies occur in autumn, they sometimes bring rare land and waterbirds from North America, which have been swept off course on their southward migration, until they are able to make a safe landfall on the islands. Snow and frost are unknown at sea level, though occasionally occur in the mountainous interior of the larger islands, with snow settling on the mountain of Pico, which, at 2,351 metres (7,713ft) above sea level, is the highest point in Portugal.Rebel Tories are raising pressure on Boris Johnson to quit over the Downing Street parties scandal, with one naming the plan “Operation Rinka” in reference to the dog killed in the Jeremy Thorpe affair in the 1970s. While Downing Street insiders have reportedly devised a plan to sack officials and save Johnson, referred to as “Operation Save Big Dog”, some Tory MPs are stepping up pressure on colleagues to submit letters of no confidence in the prime minister. One backbencher nicknamed the campaign to oust Johnson Operation Rinka after the great dane shot dead on Exmoor in 1975 – an incident that eventually led to the Liberal leader Jeremy Thorpe standing trial for conspiracy to murder. Another backbencher recalled a phrase favoured by the former US president Ronald Reagan – “dance with the one that brung ya”. Suggesting Johnson had failed to deliver on the policies he pledged at the last election, the MP said: “He’s not dancing with the people that brung him into Downing Street.” Among the groups being lobbied to submit no confidence letters was the 2019 new intake of Tory MPs, many of whom felt they owed their electoral success to Johnson. However, some are similarly frustrated that attention on the parties during lockdown has distracted from delivery on key policies. Two MPs elected in 2019 said they knew of about a dozen colleagues in the same intake who had put letters in. Johnson faced further fury from MPs as they arrived back at Westminster on Monday, having been pilloried by Conservative associations and constituents. Some reported receiving nearly 1,000 emails from angry voters, though others suggested they were pleasantly surprised at hearing few mentions of “partygate” during constituency surgeries or over the weekend. A senior government source said Johnson’s problem was different from the days of Theresa May’s turbulence when there was then just one group – Brexiters – whose anger had to be quelled. The source said multiple groups were angry with Johnson: lockdown sceptics, disgruntled ex-ministers and MPs from former Labour red wall seats who judged him to be failing to deliver on the levelling-up agenda. “It only takes a dozen letters from each group to get you close to the 54 you need [to trigger a no confidence vote in the prime minister], so it’s harder to keep them all down at once,” the source said. Steve Baker, a longtime thorn in the side of Conservative governments who helped bring down May, refused to say whether he had submitted a no confidence letter but said: “People are very upset and angry.” He said MPs were “mostly waiting for Sue Gray’s report” before deciding Johnson’s fate, referring to the investigation by the senior civil servant into the multiple alleged breaches of Covid rules inside Downing Street and Whitehall over the past 18 months. But asked whether Johnson would lead the Conservatives into the next election, Baker said: “In a situation as volatile as this, I think it’s impossible to say and I regret that very much. I would still prefer that Boris Johnson were a roaring success. But right now, listening to the public who remember very well all the sacrifices they made, I think people may well be too angry to forgive – but it remains to be seen.” Other MPs said their inbox was “off the scale” with complaints about Johnson, particularly from local Conservatives who hoped he would be replaced before local elections on 5 May. Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereGhislaine, Prince Andrew &amp; the Paedophile 9pm, ITV Jeffrey Epstein died in a prison cell in 2019 before he could face federal sex trafficking and conspiracy charges – but the details of how he and his circle used wealth and power to abuse girls for years are still coming to light. In this documentary, Ranvir Singh pulls the many threads of the story together, including the truth about Ghislaine Maxwell’s involvement (ahead of her sentencing) and the disputed allegations against Prince Andrew. Singh also gives a platform to the voices of the survivors, and speaks with some of the people listed in Maxwell’s “little black book”. It promises to be a comprehensive examination of the story behind the tangled web of endless headlines. Hollie Richardson Rules of the Game 9pm, BBC One “We’re whores if we like it and frigid if we don’t, and when we’re not desirable any more – that’s it, we’re invisible.” This challenging drama about sexual politics in the workplace continues, with Sam (Maxine Peake) recalling HR director Maya’s (Rakhee Thakrar’s) discovery of evidence that threatened the flotation of the company. HR Junior Bake Off 5pm, Channel 4 Harry Hill delivers more wholesome teatime goodness from the Bake Off tent. This time, the young bakers are tasked with making fashion-conscious wearable biscuits, plus they need to create an edible “About Me” biscuit box that illustrates different aspects of their lives. They’ll have to impress judges Liam Charles and Ravneet Gill. HR PEN15 9pm, Sky Comedy Cancer, coercion and stranger danger all feature in the latest double bill of the Y2K-set coming-of-age comedy with a visual twist (grownup creators Anna Konkle and Maya Erskine play teen versions of themselves). If that sounds pretty heavy, the show continues to be adept at balancing emotional rawness with warmth and wit. Graeme Virtue Memory Box: Echoes of 9/11 9pm, Sky Documentaries After 9/11, a recording booth was set up for survivors and eyewitnesses to recall memories of the day’s events. Twenty years on, this remarkable documentary uncovers that footage and catches up with participants. Film-makers David Belton and Bjørn Johnson are careful to balance the inevitable horror with hope and resilience. Henry Wong Toast of Tinseltown 10pm, BBC Two Matt Berry’s magnificently tactless, rude and self-regarding thesp Steven Toast continues on his unlikely mission to break America. Tonight, his wildly declamatory performance style seems to have found a natural home in a film by director Weech Beacon. But will his embryonic relationship with sexologist Shepherd Gerbil get in the way? Phil Harrison Live sport International Netball: England v Australia 7.30pm, BBC Four. Coverage of the Quad Series fixture at the Copper Box Arena, London.Scanning the shelves and internet for fish oil is a dizzying task. There are dozens of brands available and, although the typical consideration for the popular supplement is that quality matters most, it is not the only factor. These prized products travel a long way before being labelled as “pure” and “fresh” – starting with the industrial-scale grinding down of a tiny fish that is crucial for healthy ocean and food systems. While some fish oil is made from cod, mackerel or sardines, most comes from Peruvian anchovetas, a type of anchovy. These silvery fish are an important source of nutrition for the wildlife in the Humboldt Current, one of the most productive marine ecosystems on Earth. “I think people should know where the fish in their fish oil is coming from. It’s always good to have a face to the product they’re consuming,” says Katrina Nakamura, founder of the Sustainability Incubator, which screens labour conditions inside food supply chains. As the world’s largest fishery, the anchoveta catch in Peru is enormous – exceeding 4m tonnes a year. Some of the haul is frozen and canned for human consumption, but it is mainly used to feed pigs, poultry and farmed fish. Aquaculture is an expanding global industry, valued at more than £146bn in 2020, with China topping the list as the largest fish-producing country, at 58.8m tonnes a year. Aquaculture now provides half of all the seafood that humans eat – a figure expected to grow to 62% by 2030. Now, large industry players in Peru want to scale up fish oil operations for dietary supplements, too. Though there is still debate among scientists about the benefits of the golden-coloured supplements, there is some evidence that omega-3 fatty acids, including EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid), and DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), can aid in heart and brain function, lower the risk of cognitive function disorders, and may help to reduce inflammation. Anchovetas are rich in EPA and DHA. According to the Global Organization for EPA and DHA Omega-3 (GOED), the industry body of omega-3 producers, an estimated 38,000 tonnes of anchovy oil are extracted for dietary supplements each year. “It’s mind-boggling. What we can catch in a week is what many countries catch in more than one year,” says Patricia Majluf, vice-president of Oceana Peru, part of the international conservation organisation that campaigns to protect and restore the world’s oceans. “And the processing capacity of the factories is even bigger.” Despite being highly regulated, the fishery has recently been condemned for misreporting catches, and for putting workers’ health at risk throughout the Covid-19 pandemic by failing to isolate infected crew members, leading to large outbreaks, according to a report by the Changing Markets Foundation, which in 2020 investigated harmful and unsustainable practices in Peru’s fishmeal and fish oil industry. The fishery is also reportedly catching too many juvenile anchovetas – if the fish are caught before they reproduce, the population cannot sustain itself. Oceana has reported that some factories in southern Peru are operating illegally without appropriate permits or licences, and producing fishmeal in unsanitary conditions, while also skewing catch quotas. Although Peru’s anchovetas are at risk of being overfished, and the fishery was on the verge of collapse in the early 1970s, the companies responsible face few sanctions. Regulations do impose temporary closures in areas where juvenile catches exceed 10%, but seven large companies in the sector flouted this rule between 2016 and 2019 and continued operating in areas already identified as having excess juvenile fish. In one case, 80 fishermen were threatened with dismissal for refusing to catch juvenile fish. “We’re extracting millions of tonnes from an ecosystem that depends on that fish. The ecosystem is being impoverished and losing its resilience to big changes brought about by El Niños and climate change,” says Majluf. “That fish could be used to feed our people. An industry that’s paying almost nothing for that fish is taking it all away.” Major fish oil brands including Nature’s Bounty, Nature Made, Sundown and Kirkland tout their products as sustainably sourced from Peru; some list anchovies as an ingredient. For example, Nature’s Bounty claims: “We go to Peru because the Peruvian government has strict standards and governance on their surrounding waterways, to properly ensure the protection of the fish … all catches in Peru are carefully reviewed to meet rigorous quality checks.” But what ends up on the shelves can still be a rotten batch: independent tests show that an alarming amount of fish oil supplements, at least 10%, are rancid. Some products reached 11 times higher than international voluntary limits for rancidity. “It’s quite a long path that fish oils take to get to you,” says Dr Ben Albert, a fellow at the University of Auckland and a researcher into the oils’ health effects. “[Rancidity] is unlikely to be from the fish that’s caught.” Oxidation is a normal and usually harmless process, but rancidity arises when a product is highly oxidised. In fish oil, it happens when the oil is exposed to light, air or heat – all of which tend to occur within the long and complex supply chain involved in refining the crude product. Trade data is limited, but what is available shows that vessels can pick up a cargo of crude fish oil in Peru and ship it to China for extraction and distillation. From there, the oil moves to North America or Europe to be packaged. It’s difficult to protect the product as it moves through the production process. Time spent in the open air or in hot conditions increases the likelihood of oxidation. “That’s part of the problem: we don’t know who these companies are exporting to. There are so many chains along the way,” says Alfonso Daniels, a researcher on the Changing Markets report. In general, fish oil supplements are difficult to trust, says Albert. Though it should not just be left up to the consumer, his recommendation is to buy smaller amounts and store fish oils in darker, cooler places to avoid further oxidation. None of the companies or the Peruvian authorities responded to the Guardian’s request for comment. Alternatives such as krill or algae oil also contain unsaturated fats that allow oxidation to occur. Although both products are usually sold as a more “ecologically viable” option to overfishing critical fish populations, concerns remain: krill is often caught using harmful fishing practices, and further research is needed to develop efficient production from algae. Meanwhile, fish oil continues to be the supplement of choice. “I think fish oil is a good product. I’m not mad at the fish oil industry for existing. But they have to respect the people in the supply chain, and they have to respect the fish and the ecosystem the fish come from,” says Nakamura.Top story: Cummings would ‘swear under oath’ about party Good morning, I’m Warren Murray and this is your briefing – none shall be turned away. Rebel Tories are upping pressure on Boris Johnson to quit over the Downing Street parties scandal, with one naming their plan “Operation Rinka” in reference to the dog killed in the Jeremy Thorpe affair in the 1970s. It comes in answer to Downing Street insiders reportedly devising a plan to sack officials and save Johnson, referred to as “Operation Save Big Dog”, and its sibling “Operation Red Meat” to divert pubic attention on to other issues. A senior government source said multiple groups were angry with Johnson: lockdown sceptics, disgruntled ex-ministers, and MPs from former Labour red wall seats. “It only takes a dozen letters from each group to get you close to the 54 you need [to trigger a no-confidence vote in the prime minister].” Outside parliament, 40% of grassroots Tories want Johnson to resign. Dominic Cummings has accused Johnson of lying after No 10 denied the prime minister was warned against allowing a “bring your own booze” party. Cummings said he personally told the principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, who organised it that the invitation broke the rules, and that Reynolds replied: “So long as it’s socially distanced I think it’s OK, I’ll check with the PM if he’s happy for it to go ahead.” Cummings said in a blogpost: “Not only me but other eyewitnesses who discussed this at the time would swear under oath this is what happened.” John Griffin, the taxi firm tycoon who has given £4m to the Tories since 2013, has joined calls for Boris Johnson to resign. Peter Hargreaves, the Brexit-backing billionaire who gave £1m to the Tories for the 2019 general elections campaign, said of Johnson: “He doesn’t want to do good – he just wants to be prime minister. That’s his only agenda.” * * * Covid latest – Speaking of Operation Red Meat: No 10 has signalled plans to phase out England’s remaining pandemic restrictions from as early as March. Some scientists have warned against downgrading laws that reduce the spread of Covid, while others have said it is a logical next step. In the US, four jail inmates have filed a lawsuit saying they were unknowingly given ivermectin by a prison doctor as a form of medical experimentation despite US health officials warning it should not be used to treat Covid-19. Australia has reported its highest ever Covid daily death toll – more on this and other developments at our global live blog. * * * Tonga under veil of ash – Some of the first images have emerged from Tonga’s volcano and tsunami-hit islands, after a New Zealand defence force surveillance flight returned from the cut-off country, as two deaths from the disaster on Saturday have been confirmed. Land and trees are shown coated with ash and other damage. The Fua’amotu international airport runway appears inundated. Other satellite images show that flooding came in several blocks from the coastline. On Tuesday, New Zealand’s ministry of foreign affairs and trade said there had been two confirmed deaths, one of them a British national as previously reported. Australia and New Zealand are sending planes and ships to assist. The islands’ undersea communications cable is believed to be cut about 37km offshore and could take weeks to repair. * * * ‘Heat or eat’ – Energy bills could eat up more than half of some UK households’ incomes, poverty charity the Joseph Rowntree Foundation (JRF) has said. Households across the board faced bill increases of 40% to 47% from April and there would be huge variations in their ability to cope: single-adult households on low incomes could be forced to spend 54% of their income on gas and electricity when the energy price cap changes on 1 April, the JRF found. Martin Lewis from MoneySavingExpert, said the government must provide billions in support to poorer households facing “heat or eat” decisions. A government spokesperson said: We will continue to look closely at the pressures facing people and what further measures might be needed on abating high energy costs.” * * * Lords rebuke – The House of Lords has voted to make misogyny a hate crime in England and Wales – an idea rejected by both Boris Johnson and Dominic Raab – in a night of several defeats for the government in the upper chamber. The vote came during debate over the crime, sentencing and courts bill. The government lost 14 divisions, including plans to make people locking themselves on to objects punishable by up to 51 weeks’ imprisonment, suspicion-less stop-and-search and introduction of “serious disruption prevention orders” against protesters. Peers also voted to block proposals to give police new powers to stop noisy and disruptive protests in England and Wales. Once the Lords have completed their scrutiny, the bill will return to the House of Commons. It needs both houses’ approval. * * * ‘Loud’ lecturer wins sacking case – A senior academic who says she was sacked from her University of Exeter physics post because of her loud voice has been awarded more than £100,000 after winning a claim for unfair dismissal. Dr Annette Plaut told the Guardian she had a “naturally loud voice” that came from her middle European Jewish background and it was the combination of her being “female and loud” that led to her dismissal. Plaut, who worked there for 29 years, said she was taking medication for stress since her sacking. The university argued during a tribunal that she was dismissed over the way she dealt with two PhD students and insists it had nothing to do with her background or her sex. The university has said it will appeal against the tribunal’s decision. Today in Focus podcast: Liz Truss bigger than cheeses As Boris Johnson faces questions over his future, Conservative members and MPs are looking at their options for who might replace him – and one name keeps coming up. Lunchtime read: ‘Surreal experience’ “We knew it would be a long meeting, but it was surreally, incomprehensibly long. We made no progress over the duration of several meals, many hours and many more spreadsheets … but as the hours spun out I began to enjoy the surreal experience.” Emma Beddington kicks off a Memories of Office Life special. Sport Novak Djokovic may not be allowed to defend his French Open title in May after the French government ruled that all athletes will have to be vaccinated in order to attend and compete in sporting events in France. At the Australian Open, Andy Murray has opened his campaign against Nikoloz Basilashvili, with Nick Kyrgios and Emma Raducanu also due on court. Follow it all at our live blog. Everton’s attempt to rehire Roberto Martínez has hit an immediate problem with the Royal Belgian Football Association rejecting a proposal for their head coach to combine his role with managing the Premier League club. Eddie Jones is free to select unvaccinated players in a bumper 36-man rugby Six Nations squad despite strict travel rules that look set to rule them out of two of England’s three away fixtures, including a potential decider against France on Super Saturday. Ali Martin writes that excuses can be made for England’s Ashes shambles, but the status quo cannot hold, and England’s muddled selections, fitness issues and abject batting suggest a deeper malaise. The International Olympic Committee’s new transgender framework has come under fire from medical experts who work for multiple sports federations, who say it opens the door to unfair competition in female sport. In a notable intervention, the scientists warn that the IOC’s new guidance – which states there is no need for trans women to lower their testosterone to compete against natal women – ignores the science on sex, gender and performance and focuses mostly on inclusion. Business Asian shares have mostly been higher in the absence of big market-moving news following the Martin Luther King Day holiday in the US. The Bank of Japan wrapped up a two-day policy meeting with no major changes, keeping the benchmark interest rate at a longstanding -0.1%. Benchmarks in Japan, China and Australia rose in early trading but shares fell in South Korea. Futures trading predicts the FTSE opening about 10-15 points lower. The pound is worth $1.363 and €1.196 at time of writing. The papers The splash in the Times today is “Cummings: PM lied to parliament about party” while the Mirror calls this a “New bombshell claim” saying Johnson “gave the go-ahead”. Metro’s top story is “I’ll swear PM lied to house”, paraphrasing Cummings – readers might recall that on a previous occasion, when testifying did not suit his ends, the same individual was found in contempt of parliament for refusing to appear. The Guardian’s front page leads with “Cummings accuses PM of lying over No 10 party”, and also featured are “UK sending anti-tank weapons to Ukraine”, as well as “Inquiry launched into Mone over ‘VIP lane’ deal”. The i is more general: “Tory angst at Johnson leadership growing”. The Express would prefer we look over there at something else, while still appearing to chastise the PM, telling him to “sort energy bills crisis” . The Financial Times has that one too: “Ministers explore paying energy suppliers to ease household bills”. The Mail says “British troops sent to Ukraine”; the Telegraph leads with “Tougher powers for magistrates to clear trial backlog”; while the Sun has a totally bizarre lead story about Prince Andrew and plush toys. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendAerial images prepared by the New Zealand defence force for the Tongan government have been leaked online and show some areas have had “catastrophic” devastation inflicted by the tsunami and volcanic eruption while others were relatively unscathed. The 40 aerial pictures show some areas blanketed with ash, with damaged buildings, while others show parts of the country that appear unscathed. They were taken by the New Zealand defence force during a reconnaissance flight on Monday and put together in a report for the Tongan government. The photos were then leaked online. The Guardian has confirmed the provenance of the photos. After the reconnaissance flight, the New Zealand defence force shared a handful of photos with media, most of them showing defence personnel at work, rather than shots of the islands. The 40 leaked images paint a much fuller picture of the damage to the country, and include annotations about the severity of damage. Many areas were assessed as having limited damage, such as ash on building roofs, pools of surface flooding or debris. But others were judged to have sustained “catastrophic” damage, according to notes on the images. Atata island was noted to have “a large number of buildings missing. Remaining structures probably had flood damage. Multiple trees were uprooted, with debris throughout.” Fonoifua Island was said to have sustained “extensive damage … with all but the largest buildings destroyed or severely damaged”. Mango Island, a remote low-lying island home to 69 people, was assessed as having “catastrophic damage”. A distress sign was detected from Mango Island on Monday by the UN prompting concern for inhabitants. “Catastrophic damage was observed with the entire village destroyed. Temporary tarpaulin shelters had been erected on the island’s higher areas. Debris was observed throughout the village,” said the annotated image. The images also gave a sense of the damage to Tonga’s infrastructure sustained during the tsunami and volcani eruption. The defence force said there had been “limited” damage to the Fua’amotu International Airport’s south-eastern runway, but that it was currently “unserviceable” due to ash covering the runway. However, the defence force noted that an operation to clear ash from the runway was under way, with vehicles and people visible from the air. “Clearance operations by shovel and wheelbarrow were under way on the SE end of the runway. No heavy excavation machinery was observed,” a note on the image said. The defence force also noted that airport buildings appear intact, though there was a layer of ash on the surfaces. The report noted that Nuku’alofa port in the capital had “limited to moderate damage” with some surface flooding and road access to the wharf obstructed by fallen containers, ash and other debris. The Faleniu gas station on Uiha Island was assessed as “serviceable”, as was the Pangai ferry terminal, the wharf at Ha’ano and the bridge between Koulo and Fangale’ounga. Little has been heard from Tonga since the eruption of Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano and subsequent tsunami on Saturday, after the Pacific nation’s main communication cable was broken. It may be weeks before the cable can be repaired, due to difficulty getting the repair ship from Papua New Guinea to Tonga, and safety concerns for the crew of the ship, who would be operating in waters not far from the volcano, meaning Tongans around the world may be forced to wait weeks for regular contact to resume. On Tuesday, New Zealand’s ministry of foreign affairs and trade said there had been two confirmed deaths in Tonga from the disaster, one of which was a British national. There have been no official confirmations of casualties from Tongan authorities, but the family of Angela Glover, a British woman living in Tonga who went missing in the tsunami, reported on Monday that her body had been found. The 50-year-old, who had been living in Tonga since about 2015, was swept away by the tsunami. The Australian defence force also sent a surveillance plane on Monday, to assess damage to critical infrastructure such as roads, ports and power lines. Australia and New Zealand have each pledged $1m in initial aid to Tonga. New Zealand has dispatched two naval ships carrying water and other aid supplies.Indonesia plans to name its new capital Nusantara, which translates as “archipelago”, when government offices are relocated to the province of East Kalimantan from Jakarta, on the island of Java. President Joko Widodo first announced the plan to move Indonesia’s capital in 2019, in an effort to relieve the huge environmental challenges facing Jakarta, and to redistribute wealth. The move has been delayed due to the pandemic, but could go ahead in 2024. The government hopes it will reduce the burden on Jakarta, a city of 10 million, which is notoriously congested, suffers regular flooding, and is one of the fastest sinking cities in the world due to the over extraction of groundwater. Parts of north Jakarta are falling at an estimated 25cm a year, due to subsidence – including even the seawall designed as a buffer for communities. The new name had been selected from more than 80 options by Widodo and was chosen because it reflected Indonesia’s geography, and was iconic internationally, said Suharso Monoarfa, the national development planning minister. Some have pointed out that the choice could prove confusing since Nusantara is also used to refer to the archipelago nation as a whole. Others have questioned why Nusantara, an old Javanese term, was selected when the new capital was being built in Kalimantan. Construction could start this year, after a bill on the new capital was approved by parliament on Tuesday. By relocating the capital, the government also hopes to redistribute wealth. Java is home to 60% of the country’s population and more than half of its economic activity - even though Kalimantan is almost four times bigger. Under the project, Jakarta will remain the country’s commercial and financial centre, but government administrative functions will move to East Kalimantan, about 2,000km (1,250 miles) north-east of Jakarta. The new capital will be based in the regions of North Penajam Paser and Kutai Kartanegara. Environmentalists have warned the move risks accelerating pollution in East Kalimantan, and contributing to the destruction of rainforests that are home to orangutans, sun bears and long-nosed monkeys.On 21 December we completed the purchase of a home but were unaware that SSE had, a few days earlier, gone into the house and installed a prepayment meter because the previous occupier had not paid their bills. On the same day as the sale went through, I was assured by SSE that, despite all appearances, my meter was a normal one, and that it would not cut out over the Christmas holiday. Needless to say it wasn’t a standard meter, and soon cut out due to a lack of credit. I was forced to spend hours and hours over Christmas trying to get our gas supply to work so we could have heating and hot water. I was offered a prepayment card issued at PayPoint shops as a way to get my supply turned back on. The shop I was sent to couldn’t issue me with one – another did, but the card wouldn’t load. SSE insists that it cannot help unless I am present, forcing me to remain in an unheated house with no hot water and no way of cooking. MG, Evesham We are getting a lot of complaints about Ovo, which bought SSE’s retail customers last year, and famously advised customers this week to do star jumps, eat porridge and cuddle pets to keep warm. It seems its administration is not what it should be. It’s completely unacceptable for the company to leave a customer for almost two weeks without heating in winter. Had the situation been different, someone could have come to serious harm. After I sent your case to Ovo’s head office, it swiftly sent out an emergency engineer who cleared the meter and added enough credit to get the heating on. It has apologised, and agreed to change the meter back to pay-monthly billing.We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsThe time to be alive, if you wanted to drink hard liquor at work, was the 60s, but it actually is not possible to drink spirits all day without something terrible happening. Not “rude remark” terrible, not “accounting mistake” terrible, but “falling out of a window” terrible. To drink like this, you would have to be both in the 60s and in a film. Nevertheless, a couple of pints at lunchtime, even in reputable careers such as teaching, was still commonplace in the 80s. By the 90s, it had mainly been phased out – except if you were a journalist. When I got my first job on a paper in 1994, it was routine to arrive at 10am, go to lunch at 12.30pm, come back to the office at 2pm to leave your jacket on the chair (the universal camouflage of the presentee), go back to the pub, then regroup in the office at 4.30pm to collect your jacket. When the nation decided to put in charge of the country a bunch of men whose formative professional years were 80s and 90s Fleet Street, the obvious risks were that they would run the place like a newspaper column, with tiny amounts of knowledge parlayed into huge statements that, unlike a column, would turn into concrete acts, and have consequences for millions of lives. That turned out to be devastatingly true, but what, weirdly, none of us predicted was that it would also turn Downing Street into a year-round Oktoberfest. Picking over the finer details of the Downing Street drinking culture, though, there are bits that I just do not recognise. Never, in the most outlandish excesses, did I ever see anyone sleeping overnight at work; playing Pictionary until midnight; or leaving drink dregs at their desk for the cleaner to deal with. The government is apparently run by people who don’t have other lives: they have nobody they want to rush back to, nobody waiting at home who cares where they are; they can’t even wrap their heads around the dignity of the cleaners, the people they see every day. The problem runs a bit deeper than a wheelie suitcase full of prosecco. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistJoe Biden ends his first year in office at a particularly bleak moment for a US president who promised competency and normalcy. Much of his domestic agenda is stalled on Capitol Hill, impeded by members of his own party. The virus is once again raging out of control: daily infections of Covid-19 have soared to record levels, hospitalizing more Americans than at any previous point during the pandemic. The administration’s vaccine-or-testing mandate for large employers was blocked by the supreme court’s conservative supermajority. Inflation is at a nearly 40-year high. Diplomatic talks have so far failed to pull Russia back from the brink of war with Ukraine. After winning more votes than any presidential candidate in American history, Biden is now – just 12 months later – one of the country’s most unpopular presidents. For months, Biden’s approval ratings have languished in the mid to low 40s, with an average approval rating of 42%. A Quinnipiac poll released last week found him at a dire 33%, which the White House has dismissed as an outlier. Nevertheless, among his modern predecessors, only Donald Trump fared worse at this point in their presidencies. The puzzle of Biden’s unpopularity has many pieces, pollsters and political analysts say. How much of it is within his control is difficult to say. Biden came to office with lofty ambitions: he promised to lift the threat of deadly virus and to usher in a new era of responsive governance and bipartisanship in Washington. One year into his presidency, Biden remains confronted by an unabating pandemic, a nation still very much divided and a Republican party that continues to embrace the “big lie” that Donald Trump won the 2020 election. “Whenever a president disappoints expectations, that’s a problem,” said Bill Galston, a senior fellow of governance studies at the Brookings Institution who also served as a White House policy adviser to former President Clinton. Galston said the administration had “not done a good job of managing expectations” around Covid. In July, Biden came just shy of declaring “independence” from the virus, only to be proven wrong by the arrival of the fast-spreading Delta variant. Now, amid a surge caused by the Omicron variant, the president and his team are recalibrating. Dr Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease specialist, recently said that Omicron would “find just about everybody”. Biden recently conceded that eradicating the virus was unlikely, but that it was possible to “control” it. It is the case for swing voters who believed Biden would govern as a centrist bridge-builder in an age of deep division, Galston continued, and for Democrats to whom Biden promised an ambitious legislative agenda despite holding wafer-thin margins in Congress. Sarah Longwell, a prominent anti-Trump Republican strategist, has observed support for the president decline among voters in the focus groups she has convened over the past year. When asked to grade Biden’s first year, many voters she spoke to, including Democrats, gave him Cs, Ds and Fs. The grades, Longwell said, were not a reflection of Biden, who she said many are still “rooting for”, but of a shared discontent as the pandemic enters its third year and inflation continues to rise. “There’s an element of it that has nothing to do with Joe Biden,” she said. “It’s just a tough time.” Asked about Biden’s gloomy reviews, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, offered a similar explanation. “People are fatigued across the country. It’s impacting how they live, how they work. There are worries about their kids, their ability to experience joyful things in life like concerts and going to restaurants and seeing friends,” Psaki said. “We understand that.” “The president knows that the best, most important step he can take is to continue to fight to get the pandemic under control and also to lower costs for Americans across the country,” she added. Biden’s popularity began to slip as the Delta variant of Covid-19 spread across the country, then falling sharply after the US’s chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan, during which 13 service members were killed by a suicide bombing at the Kabul airport. Though a majority of Americans favored withdrawing troops from Afghanistan, the desperate scenes from Kabul as the Taliban took control undercut perceptions of Biden as a seasoned foreign policy expert who would restore America’s standing on the world stage. “The way in which we left Afghanistan inflicted a blow on the president’s general image of experience and competence, which had a lingering effect,” Galston said. Historically, voters tend to punish the president’s party in the first midterm elections after a new administration takes power. But the defeats tend to be steeper when a president is unpopular. According to Gallup polling, presidents with job approval ratings below 50% have seen their parties lose an average of 37 House seats during the midterm elections. Already Republicans’ unexpected strength last year in off-cycle elections in states Biden won by wide margins in 2020 – like Virginia and New Jersey – has delivered a stark warning of a dangerous future to Democrats. The results suggested that the resistance-driven passion that drove Democratic victories during the Trump era had fizzled. Perhaps most alarming for Democrats was the electorate’s deep sense of malaise. Despite a mass vaccination campaign and trillions of dollars in relief money, voters feel worse now about the state of the pandemic and the economy than they did earlier in Biden’s presidency, according to a CBS News/YouGov survey. Few voters give Biden credit for muscling through a trillion-dollar investment in the nation’s infrastructure or passing the American Rescue Plan, which sent checks to most Americans and slashed poverty rates. “It’s an ironic situation where the policies are more popular than the politicians, which is very rare,” said Celinda Lake, a veteran Democratic pollster. “Usually it’s the other way around.” Further capturing that frustration, a Gallup poll released on Monday found a dramatic shift in party preference over the last year, swinging from a nine-point Democratic advantage at the beginning of 2021 to a five-point Republican advantage by the end of the year. The change follows the collapse of Biden’s presidential approval ratings. This augurs poorly for Democrats, leaving a narrowing window to deliver on their campaign promises, from Build Back Better to voting rights and immigration reform. Messy intra-party negotiations over Biden’s sprawling climate and social policy bill overshadowed the policy, leaving the public with a shallow understanding of its contents and concern over its cost. The legislation remains in limbo after Senator Joe Manchin, a conservative Democrat from West Virginia, announced he could not support the measure in its current form. Amid the stalemate over his agenda, Democrats have become disenchanted with Biden. For months, Democratic lawmakers and activists have been sounding the alarm that the president is losing support among key segments of party’s coalition. He is bleeding support among young voters angry over inaction on climate change, health care and student debt forgiveness. Hispanic voters have lost confidence in Biden’s handling of the pandemic and the economy, a red flag for Democrats after they shifted toward Trump and the Republican party in 2020. And support has been sliding among Black voters, who were critical to Biden’s victory but have been disappointed by the lack of progress on voting rights and police reform. In an attempt to reset, Biden recently delivered a pair of searing speeches, during which he implored the Senate to pass federal voting rights legislation and assailed Republicans – or any senator – who stood in the way of siding with Bull Connor and Jefferson Davis. Many Democrats cheered Biden’s rhetorical shift, but some civil rights leaders and voting rights advocates boycotted the speech in Atlanta to express disapproval of what they view as a belated push on an issue that is paramount for their communities and the functioning of democracy itself. In a statement, the president of the NAACP, Derrick Johnson, said it was past time for the administration to “match their words with actions”. Two days later, Biden’s efforts to push voting rights protections through Congress foundered amid Democratic opposition to scrapping the filibuster. Though not all the variables are within Biden’s control, Lake said there is still plenty of time – and opportunities – to improve his standing before the midterms in November. She said the president’s newly emboldened tone was a good start, that would help to “energize” Democrats while signalling “strength” to wary independents. “He’s in leadership mode now,” she said. Lorella Praeli, co-president of the progressive group Community Change Action said voters need to see Biden fighting on their behalf. She urged the president to use every executive tool at his disposal to ease the financial pressures facing millions of Americans, like canceling student debt, as he continues to push for a path forward on Build Back Better, voting rights and immigration reform. Part of the challenge for Biden, she said, is to convince a demoralized public that “the future is still up for grabs”. “Fight for people, deliver for people and then make sure they know what has happened,” she said. “It’s really that simple.”New York City and some north-eastern US states appear to be seeing rapid decreases in their numbers of Covid-19 cases in recent days, raising the possibility that the Omicron wave has now already peaked in some parts of America. In New York City the rolling seven-day average of new cases was less than 28,000 a day on 16 January, down from an average of more than 40,000 on 9 January. Similar patterns were being observed in the state as a whole and other nearby regions. “The Covid forecast is improving … the Covid clouds are parting,” said Kathy Hochul, the New York governor, in a statement Sunday after releasing figures that showed positivity rates in the state are falling sharply. “Overall, the prognosis, the forecast, for Covid is much brighter than it had been before.” Some 400,000 tests were conducted in New York on Saturday, with a positivity rate of 12.9%. Just one week ago, on a similar number of tests, the positivity rate was almost 20%. The state reported 51,264 new cases on Saturday, down from the peak of more than 90,000 a week earlier, according to a New York Times database. The number of people hospitalized fell for a fourth straight day. Several other north-east states – including New Jersey, Massachusetts, Connecticut and Rhode Island – may be heading in a similar, down-trending direction. But in certain areas, including the Bronx in New York City, staff at hospital facilities have issued calls for help, saying they were struggling to treat a surging patient load. “Patients are lying in the hallway on stretchers that are touching each other,” said Karen Lam, an emergency room nurse in the Bronx. President Joe Biden and Hochul said military medical and National Guard teams would be dispatched to help. Over the weekend US surgeon general Vivek Murthy, warned that despite its rapid spread, Omicron had not yet peaked in the US as a whole. On a national level, the seven-day rolling average of new cases was still around 800,000 cases a day on 16 January, as it had been for the previous two days. Murthy warned that infections are set to continue to increase in much of the country and the “next few weeks will be tough”. The rates of infection and levels of hospitalization are set to be much higher in unvaccinated populations. “The challenge is that the entire country is not moving at the same pace,” Murthy said on CNN’s State of the Union. “The Omicron wave started later in other parts of the country. We shouldn’t expect a national peak in the coming days.” The Biden administration has been battered by accusations that it failed to anticipate demand for testing after a national vaccine and re-vaccination or booster drive showed clear signs of faltering. The administration has also faced criticism that it failed to anticipate demand for therapeutic antiviral treatments. The CDC, too, has faced criticism. With little available data on Omicron, the agency has attempted to move faster with recommendations, including by cutting the isolation periods and drop a negative test result as a requirement for leaving isolation. But that was offset by employers requiring a negative test before infected Americans could return to work, creating pressure on testing capacity that authorities have struggled to meet. CDC director Rochelle Walensky told the Wall Street Journal in an interview published Monday that she was committed to communicating CDC policy more clearly. “I think what I have not conveyed is the uncertainty in a lot of these situations,” Walensky said. “We felt the need to take action before we had Omicron-specific data,” she added. In a statement last week, the White House said it would purchase $1bn tests to distribute free. A half-billion would be available for order on 19 January and mailed directly on request, with up to four free tests per residential address. “This program will ensure that Americans have at-home, rapid COVID-19 tests available in the weeks and months ahead—in addition to the number of other ways they can get tested,” the White House said.Getting better is rarely something that happens all the time. Whether we’ve been seriously ill or injured, everyone has to experience the complexities of recovery as the aftermath. Aftermath is an old agricultural term meaning “a second crop” growing unexpectedly in the space left by the main harvest and it can entail difficult decisions about what should be done with these remnants. Recovery can feel like a second crop, something to be welcomed because we have survived, but an unpredictable and strange new phase in our healing. The medical professionals who have guided us through the harvest of treatment have usually moved on, replaced by different kinds of responders to the changes in our health. We find our questions about what is happening to us are answered more slowly, with what seems like a lower priority than before. More of the work that is needed, it turns out, is up to us and it is likely to be slow going. Often, the field in which we have been left alone is vast and the ground is churned and the few green shoots growing there stand far apart and hardly seem worth gathering. Francis’s book explains recovery as a discrete therapeutic entity that deserves our full attention and why we should never give up trying to get better, even when it seems we couldn’t get much worse. Recovery is a difficult but essential part of what makes us human. In his characteristically deft case studies, he shows how it’s the time that recovery takes that is, over and over again, the greatest challenge to patient and care-giver. GPs might be allocated a certain number of minutes (or Zoom calls) with each of their recovering patients in which they might prescribe painkillers, talks with the physiotherapist, nature walks or participation in a group activity. Although focused on the individual, each time a doctor has a conversation with a patient about the time their recovery is taking, they are also addressing all of us, asking us to reset our expectations of medicine that have grown unrealistic. Not everything can be fixed quickly or easily and sometimes never quite completely. To show this, Francis recalls the rich history of slow-paced recovery and of the places and people who enabled it. Not all of it was effective (the milk cures that confined patients to bed for weeks did much harm and no good) but the underlying recognition of taking our time to rebuild ourselves is a profound insight into human regenerative capabilities. We used to know this, but somewhere in the white heat of changing medical technologies, we forgot and came instead to expect the instant and the effortless. Where Francis’s book is particularly strong is in delineating the different forms of recovery that humans are required to undertake. He looks at recovery from long Covid, from profound stress and unhappiness, from misfortune. Most powerfully of all, he describes how recovery is possible even if the biological causes of illness cannot be fixed. Recovery in the context of terminal illness is about resolution and the achievement of a kind of equilibrium in the remaining time left to a life-limited human. Francis draws on both the writings of Oliver Sacks and from his own patient list to relate the experiences of how it is to be both dying and, in truly remarkable ways, recovering new forms of humanity, even if only for a short while. This is a short and informative book for those involved in their own recovery and those who support them as they do so. It contains fascinating and useful tips to supplement standard medical resources available to patients (the absolute therapeutic importance of nature, achieving moments of grace, pets and why bathrobes are generally more useful than towels). For all of us managing our way through complicated lives that have yet to deliver the harvests we were expecting, Francis offers hope and a rare and precious form of quiet consolation. Emily Mayhew is historian in residence at the department of bioengineering, Imperial College London • Recovery: The Lost Art of Convalescence by Dr Gavin Francis is published by Profile (£4.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe House select committee investigating the Capitol attack is weighing whether to subpoena some of Donald Trump’s top allies on Capitol Hill as it considers its options on how aggressively it should pursue testimony to move forward its inquiry into the January 6 insurrection. The Republican House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, and Republican members of Congress Jim Jordan and Scott Perry may have inside knowledge about Trump’s plan to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election and whether it was coordinated with the Capitol attack. But the outright refusal of McCarthy and the other Republican lawmakers to testify voluntarily with the investigation has intensified discussions among the panel’s members and investigators about whether to force their cooperation. The select committee is undecided on whether to take that near-unprecedented step, in part because of one major concern that has emerged in recent days, according to two sources familiar with the matter: Republican retaliation against Biden and Democrats in future inquiries. In private conversations, some members and investigators on the select committee have expressed how appalled they are at the refusal of McCarthy and the Republican lawmakers to help the investigation, and feel prepared to subpoena for their testimony, the sources said. But the one major recurring worry raised in discussions, the sources said, is that subpoenas might create moral hazard of Republicans plotting an onslaught of partisan investigations into the Biden administration should they retake the House after the 2022 midterms – as many observers think likely. Republicans in Congress have openly floated the prospect in recent days of launching political investigations into the Biden administration’s coronavirus response, the withdrawal from Afghanistan, the personal life of Biden’s son Hunter, as well as an impeachment inquiry. In response, some members and investigators on the select committee have quietly raised the possibility that if the panel declines to subpoena Republicans now, then a Republican majority might not subpoena Democrats in the future, the sources said. The issue has proved a difficult conundrum for the select committee, which started serious discussions about subpoenas to Republicans after Jordan and Perry refused to cooperate, and escalated the urgency of talks after McCarthy also declined to help the inquiry. The panel was particularly outraged by McCarthy’s refusal and his statement attacking their request for an interview as “abuse of power” and intensified its research into parliamentary rules governing their ability to authorize subpoenas, the sources said. Even in the absence of any formal decision, the possibility of subpoenas has become a touch point as the select committee grapples with the so-called speech and debate clause in the constitution that shields lawmakers while they perform their official duties. The clause says lawmakers “shall not be questioned in any other place” about speech or debate, and is generally interpreted to cover all legislative actions – which Republicans argue precludes them from having to answer the select committee’s investigation. But the members on the panel believe the law does not extend to protect lawmakers from Congress’s own investigations, rejecting the idea that McCarthy, Jordan and Perry have any claim to immunity as the panel investigates whether Trump oversaw a criminal conspiracy. There is also precedent for the House to subpoena its own members. The House ethics committee, which investigates allegations of wrongdoing by members of Congress, for instance has the authority under House rules to subpoena lawmakers – orders they cannot refuse. A spokesperson for the select committee declined to comment on internal discussions about how aggressively the panel might act to secure cooperation from McCarthy, or whether counsel for the panel has reached a determination on the matter. Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, previously said in his request for cooperation to McCarthy that the panel was interested in details about McCarthy’s conversations with Trump before, during and after the Capitol attack. But it is also not immediately clear whether McCarthy would have substantially new information to share with House investigators beyond what is already public – meaning the marginal benefit to getting his testimony may not outweigh the potential political consequences. There remains a possibility that McCarthy, Perry and Jordan might cooperate with the select committee in the event of a subpoena, using the potential legal threat to justify their reversals to Trump, who the Guardian reported last month is agitated by the investigation. If the select committee decides it has the authority and resolve to issue subpoenas, the sources said, then the primary remaining question would probably be a matter of timing, and when best in the investigation the panel should force their cooperation. But the worry about Republican retaliation reflects the select committee’s recognition that the stakes of issuing subpoenas to Republican lawmakers and McCarthy, the man poised to become speaker in 2022 should his party retake the House majority, could not be higher. Additional concerns have centered on the ability to enforce subpoenas to Republican lawmakers if the select committee did take that step, and whether a federal judge would countenance becoming mired in what is essentially becoming a partisan fight in Congress. Congressman Adam Schiff, a member of the select committee, suggested on MSNBC the panel, for that reason, would probably not pursue criminal contempt of Congress proceedings with recalcitrant lawmakers as it did with Trump’s former aides Mark Meadows and Steve Bannon. Moving ahead with criminal contempt of Congress against the Republican lawmakers would mark an escalation that tests the limits of congressional subpoenas, threatening to touch off a legal fight the panel might not have time to conclude as it races to finish its report. The former Republican chairman of the House oversight committee, Trey Gowdy – who also oversaw the inquiry into former secretary of state Hillary Clinton’s emails – demurred on subpoenaing Democrats over concerns about enforceability, a source close to Gowdy said. Gowdy faced internal pressure from the House Republican conference for his reluctance to subpoena Democrats, the source said, but that was in part to make sure lawmakers would not defang the power of congressional subpoenas if they simply refused to comply. That leaves the select committee with only a handful of options, which appear to rest on a gamble over whether it can shame Republicans into cooperating, including a formal resolution on the House floor censuring or admonishing the lawmakers.You can clearly see Clarion House from high up on the ridge between Barrowford and Roughlee. Not only because it stands alone on a green slope, nor because it is handsome and proud, though it absolutely is. No, you can see it because of the red – bright, beautiful, luscious scarlet, the glowing red of the Red Flag, the Independent Labour Party (ILP) logo, the Lancashire rose and the clenched fist of International Socialism. I saw Clarion House for the first time by chance as I was driving back from Roughlee, after showing my brother and nephew the metal statue of Alice Nutter. She was the one Lancashire “witch” who had more than two ha’pennies to rub together but was nonetheless hanged for her sex, or her stubbornness. There, by the roadside, was a pretty single-storey red-and-white building, with a simple trumpet for its logo and a fascinating information board about the local Labour movement, and about radical rambling and cycling. I didn’t loiter but I was curious. Why hadn’t I been taught about the Clarion Houses before? I got to see a bit more of the place when I joined an activity day organised by the excellent Pendle Hill Partnership. After a short walk and some male bonding and craft-type work in the lovely garden, I took a closer look. The house was built in 1912 by the Nelson branch of the ILP along Arts and Crafts lines. Inside were posters from the Spanish civil war, a photograph of Keir Hardie, a beautiful piece of stained glass, and a banner emblazoned with “Workers of the World Unite”. Soft sunlight streamed in through the many windows. Long benches were laid out for reading the Morning Star or, more likely, for a natter. As one of my crafting comrades remarked: “This place has a special feeling, a warm feeling.” A few weeks later, I joined a Clarion-themed walk with local guide Nick Burton, set up by Mid Pennine Arts as part of its Pendle Radicals programme. This time I had the chance to linger and loiter, enjoy a pint mug of tea served by Charles Jepson – sporting a shiny Clarion Cycling Club jersey and a superb moustache – and learn a bit more. Clarion House is a vestige of a better past and a symbol of a possible future. In essence, it was a meeting and resting place for workers from nearby mills and factories, who had come up into the countryside around Pendle Hill to escape the grime and noise of increasingly congested towns such as Colne and Brierfield. It was the third such house in the area, two previous rented sites (a terrace at Thorneyholme Square and Nabs Farm, which we saw on our walk) having proved unsatisfactory. In late 1911 or early 1912, the Nelson ILP Land Society secured a low-interest loan for £350 from the Nelson Weavers’ Association. It was a significant amount of money at the time, indicative of the strength of commitment to supporting recreation for ordinary people, and of the level of cooperation between local organisations. During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Clarion Houses had popped up in several rural areas. Many were linked to cycling clubs, and some provided accommodation as well as refreshments. In 1897, a Clarion House opened at Bucklow Hill, near Tatton Park in Cheshire. Photographs and documents record further Clarion Houses at Colne, Burnley and the Ribble valley, Halewood in Merseyside and Sheldon in Birmingham. Assiduous researchers Melvyn Hirst and John Boardman provide rich accounts of 10 Clarion Houses on a dedicated website. Sadly, the Clarion House I “discovered” is the only one still standing. There are still a number of Clarion cycling clubs, and keen riders often make pilgrimages to this site – though, as happens with leftwing groups, there has recently been a rupture, with the National Clarion Cycling Club removing the word “socialism” from its constitution. Clarion House is open to the public only on Sundays, though lots of walkers drop by during the week to enjoy their butties and cuppas on the wooden benches – many bearing memorial plaques to past members who were regular visitors. It’s in a great spot, with views down the valley to Blacko Hill, and is easily accessed by footpaths from Barley and Newchurch. It’s close to the Pendle Way and Two Roses Way. The summit of Pendle Hill is about an hour’s walk. Ten miles to the East, Boulsworth Hill looms over the Pennine Way. Up close the house is actually not that red. But the front door, window frames and parts of the exterior wall and chimney are painted bright scarlet, and roof tiles are in a rich terracotta. Or maybe it was just me, searching for a ruddy beacon of hope among the sheep fields and posh villages. All the best ideas have an element of utopianism within them. In my dream future UK, there are Clarion Houses dotted all over our regreened, rewilded nation, serving as waystations and watering holes on Slow Ways that join up all our hamlets and villages, towns and cities. That’s my clarion call for today. Clarion House is on Jinny Lane between Roughlee and Newchurch, and is. open Sundays 10.30am-4pmChinese authorities captured more than 2,500 “fugitives” from overseas and brought them back to China during the pandemic, under a program using methods ranging from family intimidation to “state-sanctioned kidnapping”, according to a new report. Human rights group Safeguard Defenders estimates in its report published on Tuesday that the continued repatriations now total more than 10,000 since Beijing launched operation Fox Hunt in 2014, followed by Sky Net in 2015. During the pandemic, at least 1,421 people were brought back to China in 2020 and 1,114 in 2021, based on government figures, despite international lockdowns and travel restrictions. The figures only include those captured for purported economic crimes or crimes related to their official duties. In December 2021 the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (CCDI) described the year’s operation as “fruitful”. In 2018 Sky Net was moved under the control of the newly formed non-judicial body, the National Supervision Commission. In February 2021 the commission relaunched the program, expanding it to fugitives in the fields of political and legal affairs, and civil affairs. Human rights groups believe activists and dissidents are now often targeted, including Uyghurs and Hongkongers living overseas. In July the Uyghur Human Rights Project documented 395 cases of Uyghurs being deported, extradited, or rendered back to China. “Since Xi Jinping came to power the Chinese government intensified the crackdown on civil society,” said US-based human rights activist Teng Biao. “They have targeted lawyers and dissidents, bloggers, journalists, Tibetans, Uyghurs, Hong Kongers, everything in civil society.” The methods to force someone back to China, outside formal bilateral agreements on extradition and deportation, can range from refusing to renew a passport, to misusing the Interpol red notice system to have international warrants issued, the report said. They also include exit bans and intimidation of targets’ family members in China, and in-person threats by Chinese agents operating on foreign soil. At the more extreme end of the scale are acts which Safeguard Defenders termed state-sanctioned kidnappings, but which Beijing calls “irregular methods”. These sometimes involved covert operations in conjunction with host country forces, the report said, or tricking the target into going to a third country where they could be extradited. Safeguard Defenders mapped 80 cases of attempted apprehension, of which it said about half were successful. It identified targets across dozens of countries, including the US, UK, and Australia. Instances of family intimidation have been widely reported among the Uyghur diaspora, particularly those who are politically active outside China, lobbying for international action on the human rights abuses being committed in Xinjiang. In 2021 reports revealed Mihray Erkin, a young Uyghur woman, was believed to have died in detention in Xinjiang, in 2020. Erkin had been working in Japan as a scientific researcher until she returned to Xinjiang in 2019, allegedly after her parents were pressured to call her home. Also last year, 19-year-old Wang Jingyu, a US permanent resident who was wanted in China over online comments after he criticised the government on Weibo, claimed his parents were repeatedly harassed and detained in an attempt to have him return. Teng said he’d come across many cases of family intimidation, including jailing family members in China to pressure overseas targets. “Sometimes they were arbitrarily arrested or detained, followed by secret police, interrogated, sometimes forced to make a video phone call with their wife or husband or children who live overseas,” he told the Guardian. “Because it’s a totalitarian system the government has the power – not legal power, but power that is above the law – and they can force a company or work unit to fire anyone they want.” Chinese authorities have publicly lauded the program, with a 2015 notice from the CCDI claiming more than 70 “working groups” had been sent to 90 countries and regions, with the special operations “fully supported by overseas law enforcement agencies, Chinese embassies and consulates abroad, and police liaison officers”. Safeguard Defenders called for world governments to end extradition treaties with China, and to evaluate and terminate any bilateral judicial cooperation arrangements with the NSC. “While there are legitimate reasons for, albeit cautiously, engaging in international judicial cooperation with Beijing, China’s violations of other nations’ judicial sovereignty and breaking customs in international judicial cooperation undermines the trust required for entering into such cooperation, or continuing existing cooperation,” it said. Yaqiu Wang, China researcher for Human Rights Watch, said host countries had to be careful about China-requested extraditions. “They should ensure individuals residing in their countries that are wanted by the Chinese government have adequate protection, and investigate possible harassment and other abuses by Chinese officials or their agents against these individuals or their family members,” she said. “Authorities should also provide them with adequate opportunity to contest the extradition, and not return anyone to China if they are likely to face persecution, torture or ill-treatment there.” China has always denied its actions are kidnappings, or that it violates foreign and international laws. “In the process of carrying out its international anti-corruption operations, China has always strictly abided by the domestic laws of the target countries, international laws and international judicial and law enforcement practices,” the CCDI said in a state media report in November 2020.And that’s where we’ll say goodbye for this evening. You can find all the daily Covid statistics in the summary post pinned at the top of the blog. Sadly, it’s been Australia’s deadliest day of the pandemic yet, with 77 people having died from Covid across the country. Here’s what else happened today: • Federal health minister Greg Hunt announced the government was activating its private hospital agreement, which will see up to 57,000 nurses and over 100,000 staff from the private hospital system made available to the public health system to help deal with the Covid-19 surge across the country. • Hunt has also slammed anti-vaccination sentiments – including those from within his own government – saying: “Frankly, the anti-vaxxers aren’t just losing the debate, they’ve lost the debate … Wherever people have said things that are anti-vax, we disagree with them.” • In Victoria, the state government has issued a “code brown” across all public metropolitan and major regional hospitals from midday on Wednesday, which means the hospital system is being pushed to the limit and some logistical changes need to take place to ease the pressure. • Tonga could be cut off for weeks amid efforts to repair an undersea communications cable, after the eruption of the Hunga-Tonga-Hunga-Ha’apai volcano sent tsunami waves across the archipelago and blanketed islands in ash. Leaked New Zealand military photos show the scale of the damage. Thanks for coming along for the ride with me this afternoon. See you tomorrow! Aerial images prepared by the New Zealand defence force for the Tongan government have been leaked online and show some areas have had “catastrophic” devastation inflicted by the tsunami and volcanic eruption, while others were relatively unscathed. When you’ve read that story, here’s a companion piece – a gallery of images of the eruption itself. Another warning for potentially damaging winds, this time for parts of Victoria. The saga of the South Australian meatworks that had many of its 385 staff test positive for Covid – and then got an exemption to keep operating with some of the positive workers – rolls on. As we reported here, the supermarket giant Woolworths stopped sending its cattle to the Teys Australia abattoir near Naracoorte out of concern for the treatment of the staff, and after consulting with ACTU leaders. Well, the suspension looks like lasting only five days, with Woolies today saying: After consultation with Teys, SA Health and Safework SA we are satisfied that the COVID management protocols in place at the Naracoorte site meet the relevant health requirements. Teys’ team members play an important role in helping deliver Australian beef to households across the country and we thank them for their contribution. Guardian Australia has just sought a comment from the meatworkers’ union, but it’s likely they won’t be happy. The company says a bevy of SA authorities oversee the staffing and how many days workers isolate before returning to work. One worker, though, told us yesterday some staff were still coming back after a day’s isolation. The company last week said about 140 of the 385 workers had tested positive, and they also picked up two more positives. That anonymous worker, though, said the majority had now contracted Covid, and some were still working with symptoms. The site has become a bit of a test case, with the unions worried that it might set a precedent for other companies desperate to keep operating amid the wave of Covid-related absenteeism. I suspect this space will be worth watching. Melbourne coffee roaster, St Ali, has been criticised online for offering two free rapid antigen tests with purchase orders over $159.99. In a text message sent out to “special VIP customers,” St Ali offered two free rapid antigen tests if customers bought $159.99 worth of coffee or merchandise from their online store. “We’ve been fortunate to secure a limited number of Rapid Antigen Tests for our staff, families and friends. As a special VIP customer, we’d like to extend these to you too,” they said in the text. The coffee roasters were also offering pulse oximeters, hand sanitiser, and contactless thermometers for sale via their website, alongside bags of coffee, filters and champagne. Read the full story: My colleague Calla Wahlquist has pulled together all the information you might need on children returning to school at the end of the month and plans for their safety in These Covid Times. Just a note on what’s happening in South Australia – SA premier Steven Marshall was saying earlier he’d rejected calls from the education union to delay the start of term by two weeks, but they have actually staggered when students will start in the classroom, and they are starting slightly later than the other states (by a couple of days). More details and everything else we know on the matter is here: The federal government says more than 43,000 international students have arrived in Australia since it reopened the international border to a range of visa holders in December. The reopening included fully vaccinated eligible visa holders, including students and skilled workers, as well as humanitarian, working holiday maker and certain family visa holders. The immigration minister, Alex Hawke, said more than 8,000 skilled workers had arrived in Australia, and 22,000 working holiday maker visas had been granted since November 2021. He said Australia had also welcomed around 60,000 family members of Australians visiting since the November announcement. In a statement issued this afternoon, Hawke also announced some extra flexibility to help visa holders affected by the pandemic, including giving extra time for all current and former Skilled Regional Provisional visa holders to make travel arrangements to start or resume living and working in regional Australia. He said: The government will extend by three years Skilled Regional Provisional (subclass 489, 491 and 494) visas where the visa holder was impacted by Covid-19 international travel restrictions. This will assist around 10,000 skilled regional workers. Hawke said the government would make changes to allow entry of current and former Temporary Graduate (subclass 485) visa holders from 18 February 2022, allowing them to re-enter Australia and apply for a further stay. Visas will be extended for graduates who were outside of Australia at any time between 1 February 2020 and 14 December 2021, while they held a valid Temporary Graduate visa. The extension will take effect on 18 February 2022 and visa holders will be notified directly by the Department of Home Affairs of the extension of their visa and may arrive after this occurs, from 18 February onwards. Hawke said the changes would “support the return to Australia of temporary graduates as soon as possible”. Phew, OK, presser over! Time for a little weather report from Peter Hannam: While it’s not much consolation for sun-seekers whose summer has turned out to be mostly grey and damp, the La Nina pattern in the Pacific is close to or near its peak, the Bureau of Meteorology said today in its fortnightly update. La Nina and its opposite, El Nino, have a big impact on weather across the Pacific and beyond. La Ninas have the usually east-to-west winds strengthening, pushing rainfall to eastern and northern Australia, while El Ninos have the reverse effect. Such patterns tend to decay in the autumn, and this looks likely to be the case for the current event. “Five of the seven international climate models surveyed by the Bureau indicate La Niña thresholds are likely to be met during February,” BoM said. “By April, only two models continue to exceed the threshold, with the other five returning to neutral.” However, the Pacific isn’t the only influence on the island continent (ie Australia). The Southern Annular Mode (SAM) index, which reflects changes in the Southern Ocean, is expected to return to its positive phase during the rest of January and into February. “A positive SAM during summer typically brings above average rainfall to eastern parts of Australia, including eastern Tasmania, but typically has a drying influence on south-westerly exposed coasts such as western Tasmania,” the BoM said. Those trends also feature in BoM’s seasonal outlook, with February to April rainfall likely to be above the median for parts of northern and eastern Australia, while below median rainfall is likely for parts of south-east Australia. Odds favour daytime temperatures being warmer than average for most of the country, except for southern parts of the east coast such around Sydney. Back to the AMA Victoria president Roderick McRae’s comments to the ABC earlier – he says the announcement this afternoon that the federal government has activated the private hospitals agreement will “assist” with the situation in Victoria, but he does sound a couple of notes of caution: Bear in mind many healthcare workers operate between the private and the public system at any rate. There are currently in Victoria several arrangements where important, urgent elective surgery work is currently being undertaken in the private hospital sector. But this has its own opportunity costs. So those workers who are saying only in the private sector, their businesses are being undermined and compromised. Their ability to look after their patients who are probably category one – some of them will be – has also been compromised because the public system is being decanted into the private system. Nobody wants any patient to suffer. Everything has to work together and have their shoulder to the mill, and ultimately the settings are such that’s where we are going. Greg Hunt is being challenged again on his comments that the federal government “went into the market early” on rapid antigen tests. Didn’t the government fail to supply enough tests for at-home use before the end of last year? Hunt responds by shifting the blame for the scarcity to the states, while simultaneously saying the states were following expert advice (including from commonwealth representatives) in focusing on PCR tests: The balance of responsibility has always been that the states had principal responsibility for testing ... That has been very clear, that one of the things that protected Australia is the use of PCR tests. While Hunt and Kelly have been speaking, Dr Roderick McRae, the president of the Australian Medical Association in Victoria, has been speaking to the ABC about the “code brown” declared in that state today: We have been hearing certainly in Victoria for the best part of six weeks how every element of the healthcare system, particularly in the public sector is at crisis ... In Victoria we have the equivalent of three major – the big public hospitals full of nothing but Covid-19 patients, and part of the background to everything is ... the staff are exhausted, they are mentally fatigued because they know they are not able to provide the high level of standard of care they want to and know they could have in ideal circumstances. And we just want to have an opportunity to get a sensible centrally coordinated delivery of services. There is high demand, we have to cover emergencies from all areas of medicine and we need to look after the Covid-19 patients. David Crowe from Nine newspapers asks Greg Hunt what his response is to the proposition that the federal government failed badly by not increasing the supply of rapid antigen tests when the Omicron wave was imminent, and what is his response to those who are calling for free tests now? Hunt responds by characterising this as a Labor party policy question (as opposed to a question legitimately posed by community members who are struggling to find or procure a rapid antigen test and being price-gouged on them). He says the numbers of tests required if you gave them out for free would involve diverting tests from people who most need them. I’m not sure how that maths computes, personally. We might still be in heatwave season but Prof Kelly flashes forward to the coming winter: We’re almost certainly going to have a flu season this year as well in winter, and flu and coronavirus together, as has been seen in several countries in the northern hemisphere, is going to be a challenge, and we’ll have more to say about that in the coming months. Greg Hunt responds to another question on the anti-vaccination elements within the Coalition government: We are pro-vaccination and have helped deliver a 95% vaccination rate. Wherever people have said things that are anti-vax, we disagree with them. Whether it’s people within our own movement, I disagree. ... The anti-vaxxers are losing and have lost the debate ... We disagree and the government makes the policy. Asked about the aged care booster program – following reports from aged care facilities that their residents still haven’t been given their booster shots – Greg Hunt rejects the characterisation that the program is running behind schedule: The aged care booster program is well ahead of the schedule that we set out. We have now had over 1,800 facilities that have been boosted and that’s increasing significantly every day ... We’re on track to ensure that over the course of the coming weeks that all facilities have that program in place. Prof Kelly weighs in: I won’t comment on other people’s comments. If people could listen to the Chief Medical Officer and my colleagues in the states, we’re all of agreement, the ATAGI group, which I would say is amongst the best experts on immunisation in the world, certainly in Australia. We are of one voice. It is very important for children now down to the age of five to be vaccinated. And so please go ahead with that and listen to the experts. Greg Hunt again: Frankly, the anti-vaxxers aren’t just losing the debate, they’ve lost the debate. We’re at a 95% national 16-plus vaccination beyond the perception of almost any commentator or observer through the course of the pandemic and we pushed through and it’s the Australian public, the Australian medical workforce, in partnership with local, state, territory and federal governments that have achieved that. We’ll just keep going and we want that number to go higher. Asked about MP George Christensen’s anti-vaccination comments (he has been saying on social media, contrary to sound medical advice, that people shouldn’t get their children vaccinated), Greg Hunt says: “I haven’t heard those words” but that he would “flatly, plainly disagree with anyone who said that.” Prof Kelly is up now. He is talking about the pressure that’s currently on the health system, suggesting the federal government has been prepared for such pressure: We have been planning for workforce pressure in our healthcare sector for some time, right back to actually the beginning of the pandemic. This is the first time that the health system has come under pressure to the extent that we’re seeing in the last week or two. I said on the weekend and I stand by those statements that we are either at or close to the peak of this in certain states. Some states are lagging a bit further behind. We do know that peaks of the Covid-19 pandemic, they have a cadence to them. They go up, they get to a peak, and then they go down. And that is happening. It will happen. His third announcement is about provision of PPE to the aged care sector. The third thing we’re doing is providing 10 million units of PPE and related products to the aged care sector and facilities around the country. We have already provided 5.6m rapid antigen tests, another 100,000 today which will take to 5.7m and a further 3m to come. Out of those 10m units, there are 3m rapid antigen tests, 2m N95 masks, 2m surgical masks and up to a million each of gloves, gowns and goggles. And so that’s an important additional protection to be made available to our aged care sector so far. Hunt says that the federal government is also “activating the national medical stockpile to support any states or territories that have shortages of PPE” – though they don’t seem to think shortages are likely. The national medical stockpile is well supplied, well supported and if there are any shortages – which at this stage we don’t foresee – but we are making this available, then that’s an important thing that includes of course the 10m rapid antigen tests to states and territories. Greg Hunt continues: The private hospitals agreement will see up to 57,000 nurses and over 100,000 staff made available to Omicron affected areas around the country. So it’s a workforce which is skilled, planned, appropriate and available. The states and territories will where necessary work directly with the staff and with the hospitals themselves, whether it’s the large part of the private hospital networks and it will be up to the states and territories to activate those. We have activated them at the Commonwealth end. And any aged care facilities that will require that additional workforce. It’s one of five actions that are available for workforce support. Federal health minister Greg Hunt is speaking in Canberra, on videolink from Victoria. He says that Australia’s vaccination program has reached almost 2 million vaccinations a week, but he’s here to announce the next stage in the federal Omicron response plan. There are three actions that we’re announcing today. Firstly, we are activating the private hospitals agreement. This agreement was established over the course of late March and early April in 2020. And it was designed for supporting state hospital systems add any time where they may have significant [case] numbers. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, is going to give a press conference shortly along with chief medical officer Prof Paul Kelly. Stick with us – they’re due up at 3.30pm. Australia’s consumer sentiment dived this month as worries about the explosion in Omicron Covid cases sent confidence to its lowest January level since 1992, according to the latest ANZ-Roy Morgan survey. Consumer confidence fell 7.6% last week, sinking to its lowest rate since October 2020. Omicron case numbers surged across Australia, straining testing facilities and disrupting everything from supply chains to hairdressing salons. Read more from Peter Hannam: WA Health has reported two local Covid cases and 12 travel-related cases to 8pm last night, making 14 cases in total. There is one person in hospital. You can read the full rundown from WA Health on their website. There are 63 people in hospital, with six in intensive care and two on ventilators. The Daily Telegraph is reporting that a huge branch has fallen outside Sydney’s Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Camperdown, crushing a car and blocking the emergency department driveway, which is definitely what they need in these Covid outbreak times, argh. Marshall says he’s refused the request from the education union to delay the start of the school term by two weeks. I’m quite sure that the advice we’ve received from SA Health and the Education Department is the advice we need to be listening to. It’s going to be a distruptive start to term one, there is no doubt about that, but I do genuinely believe we’ve got the middle course here in South Australia. SA premier Steven Marshall is speaking now. He says he is optimistic that the state is reaching its Covid peak. The case numbers today have dropped a bit – they were at 3,829 yesterday – but if history is any guide, perhaps we should take that with a rather big grain of salt. 285 people are in hospital, and 24 people are in intensive care, with five on ventilators. Covid has thrown many industries out of whack, perhaps few as much as the airline industry. Figures out today from the ABS show arrivals in November rose almost five-fold and departures roughly tripled compared with the previous month. Mind you, that was from a very low base and reflected an easing of some restrictions that month. The 72,250 arrivals for the month were less than one-20th of the level in November 2019. Departures, at 91,110, were slightly above the 5% proportion of two years earlier but pretty much of the same magnitude smaller. Singapore supplied the most visitors, at 3,170, ahead of the UK’s 2,790 and India’s 2,310. In October, Vanuatu – perhaps reflecting short-term visas for farm workers – was the biggest single source of visitors at 440 trips, ahead of the UK’s 350 and the Philippines’ 340. Qantas last week signalled how much Omicron had dimmed their outlook. It slashed domestic capacity for the March quarter to be at about 70% of pre-Covid levels, down from the 102% it had planned. International capacity was also reduced to about 20% of pre-Covid levels from the 30% level that had been planned, as nations such as Japan, Thailand and Indonesia increased travel restrictions. There are 43 patients in hospital with Covid-19 in the Northern Territory and 27 of those people are acute hospital admissions. 534 of these new cases were identified by rapid antigen tests, with 1,474 PCR tests conducted in the reporting period. This is a big jump on yesterday, when the Territory reported 284 new Covid cases. We’re still yet to hear the daily Covid news from the Northern Territory, South Australia, ACT and Western Australia, but we’re expecting the NT authorities to speak soon. Stay tuned – we’ll bring you all that information when it comes to hand. Noelle Martin, a lawyer and activist against image-based abuse, has labelled the government’s proposed anti-trolling legislation as an “assisting well-resourced defamation claimants bill.” When Martin was a teenager, anonymous trolls digitally fabricated pornographic images of her by lifting images of her from social media and photoshopping them onto pornographic images and videos. A decade later, she told a parliamentary inquiry on social media and online safety, she is still fighting to have the images removed from some websites. Australia already has laws in place to force the removal of image-based abuse online, but has also brought in the Online Safety Act from next week targeting online abuse of adults, and has flagged new anti-trolling legislation that will prevent social media companies being found liable for anonymous defamatory comments if they make it easier to unmask those making the comments. Martin told the committee the proposed legislation would not help everyday Australians: This bill contains fundamental flaws ... The major one that makes this bill not worthy of its name is that it is utterly inaccessible to those who suffer the most profound harms facilitated by the internet – women, people of colour and other marginalised communities. Without major renovations to the bill, it is a narrowly targeted reform that will only strengthen the hand of already powerful individuals. It is not built for the safety of everyday Australians. Martin said the bill was a “slap in the face” to survivors: I confidently tell you as a reformer, who has spent years advocating publicly in Australia and globally against anonymous online sexual predators, and the measurable personal and professional costs that will continue for the rest of my life. It feels like a slap in the face to those who have suffered a devastating sexist and racist abuse to be completely overlooked and unassisted by this bill. Martin said more action needed to be taken by governments to make those at the very top of the platforms hosting the content be liable for what is posted on those platforms. I think the principle is that what’s happening right now isn’t working, and the penalties that governments and regulators use to hold them accountable are not working. And so I think we really need to consider what is going to be the fear that actually pushes them to ensure that the platforms are not facilitating hate speech abuse, you know, the non-consensual sharing of intimate images, defamatory comments. And I think that’s what’s going to have to happen. Some of the first images have emerged from Tonga’s volcano and tsunami-hit islands after a New Zealand defence force surveillance flight returned from the cut-off country, as two deaths from the disaster have been confirmed. Tess McClure has more here: Women’s safety advocates have welcomed a move to make it easier to provide input into a domestic violence plan spanning the next decade, Dominic Giannini reports for AAP. Brittany Higgins called out the federal government for being “breathtakingly disrespectful” after it set a two-week consultation period in the middle of January. The national plan to end violence against women and children will span from 2022 to 2032. “Two weeks to map out the next 10 years of the fight against gendered violence in Australia,” Higgins wrote in a Twitter post, which triggered a backlash over the timetable. An open letter signed by prominent women’s rights advocates, community leaders and union heads, called for the consultation period to run at least six weeks. The letter reads: The tiny window of consultation diminishes this issue to our society and is shallow and disrespectful to our country. We need this plan to succeed ... We are in the midst of a pandemic, and school holidays will not have ended prior to the consultation closing. We need the consultation period extended ... in order to give women and families affected by violence a time to meaningfully respond. The consultation period will now run until 25 February. For context, human rights advocates have criticised the prime minister, Scott Morrison, after he wrongly claimed those held in detention in Australia for as long as eight years had not been recognised as refugees. Morrison’s comments were made in the wake of the detention of tennis star Novak Djokovic at the notorious Park hotel in Melbourne, where dozens of asylum seekers and refugees are detained indefinitely. For more background, here’s our story from last night on the issue: The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation in Victoria (ANMF) have issued a statement saying it understands the state government’s decision to call a “code brown” across hospitals. The ANMF said it will provide an important centralised response to what is now a statewide crisis in public hospitals: The dire situation has been caused by the simultaneous increase in Covid positive admissions and the thousands of nurses and midwives required to furlough each day ... Covid hospitalisations are expected to continue to rise until February. Refined furloughing guidelines released on 15 January and improved access to rapid antigen tests (RAT) over coming days will alleviate some of the shortages as more staff will be able to return after a negative RAT. Victorian branch acting secretary Paul Gilbert said: Nurses and midwives have had the week from hell, on top of two years of intense difficulty. These coming weeks will only be worse. Staffing a 24-hour, seven-day-a-week roster is impossible when you are missing up to 7000 members of your workforce. Nurses and midwives are working short staffed under emergency surge team models that include students and allied health. They’re exhausted and making incredibly stressful decisions about how they prioritise and ration patient care to maintain safety. Here’s a brief, soothing reprieve from Covid news from my colleague Donna Lu, Guardian Australia’s science reporter: “A pod of orcas – including a calf – has been spotted in recent days off the back beaches of Victoria’s Mornington Peninsula. Though killer whales are most abundant in cold waters, such as near Antarctica, they can be found in all oceans, including tropical and subtropical waters as well as coastal areas.” I highly, highly recommend watching this video for 12 seconds of pure joy. Labor’s national disability insurance scheme spokesman, Bill Shorten, has responded to an exclusive Guardian Australia story at the weekend that revealed disability vaccination rates were as low as 50% in some areas of the country. You can read that story here. Shorten told a media conference on Tuesday: Alarming statistics revealed from leaked Health Department documents reveal that 17% of people on the NDIS are not double vaxxed. These documents reveal that in some parts of Australia, the double vaccination rate for people with disability is as low as 50 per cent. Alarmingly, only 20% of the people who live in disability group homes funded by the NDIS have been boosted, have had their booster shot. This is a roll call of failure by the Morrison government. Shorten said the government needed to put “people living with intellectual disabilities and people diagnosed with autism” [...] “from the back of the queue to the front of the queue”. “The Morrison Government has forgotten that people with autism and that people with intellectual disabilities are not getting the same access to vaccinations, to booster shots and to rapid antigen tests that even other people in the Australian community are getting,” he said. “It’s not good enough when the most vulnerable in Australia are at the back of the queue under Scott Morrison’s mishandling of the Covid disaster.” Court hearings in New South Wales have been suspended thanks to the Covid surge. The statement linked in the tweet below says: The Local Court of NSW continues to be severely affected by COVID cases. Accordingly, the Chief Magistrate, His Honour Judge Peter Johnstone, in consultation with stakeholders, has made the decision to vacate all defended hearings (including hearings where the defendant is in custody) statewide up until and including Friday 4 February 2022. Back to Queensland for a moment: Thanks Matilda Boseley for your inimitable blogging this morning! Hello everyone, hope the first half of your Tuesday has been a good one. With that, I shall leave you for the day. But never fear, the fantastic Stephanie Convery is here to bring you all the afternoon’s news. Australia has marked its deadliest day of the pandemic, with 77 Covid-19 deaths recorded so far on Tuesday. Here is a summary of the numbers we know so far: NSW Deaths – 36 Cases – 29,830 Hospitalisations – 2,850 (209 in ICU, 63 ventilated) Victoria Deaths – 22 Cases – 20,180 Hospitalisations – 1,152 (127 in ICU, 43 ventilated) Queensland Deaths – 16 Cases – 15,962 Hospitalisations – 819 (50 in ICU, 18 ventilated) Tasmania Deaths – 0 Cases – 1,310 Hospitalisations – 25 (two in ICU) Northern Territory Deaths – 0 Cases – 625 Hospitalisations – 43 (27 acute) South Australia Deaths – 2 Cases – 3,079 Hospitalisations – 285 (24 in ICU, 5 ventilated) ACT Deaths – 1 Cases – 1,860 Hospitalisations – 63 (6 in ICU, 2 ventilated) Western Australia Deaths – 0 Cases – 14 Hospitalisations – 1 Tasmanian travel restrictions are relaxing from midnight with the requirements of a negative Covid-19 test and travel registration removed. Journalist and anti-online bullying advocate Erin Molan, told a parliamentary inquiry into social media and online safety she has never considered using defamation law to pursue people who targeted her online, stating it is difficult to pursue even for the wealthy. Molan, who had sued the Daily Mail over an article and two tweets she said portrayed her as racist, campaigned for the law that would become the Online Safety Act, targeting the bullying of adults online. Molan had advocated for the law after detailing her experience of harassment and bullying online. Despite that law not coming into effect until 23 January this year, the government has already flagged more draft legislation to target people making defamatory comments online, requiring social media companies to attempt to reveal anonymous posters or face being held liable for their comments. Molan told the inquiry on Tuesday she had not considered suing any of the people who made comments online about her because the bar to launch defamation action was so high: I haven’t, but that doesn’t mean that I don’t think that that mechanism should exist for people, but I know first hand how difficult it is to take legal action in that way ... But I think it would also create a great deterrent for people in my mind because some of the most damaging things are written by anonymous people online. But anyone will tell you it is the process of trying to take action legally. When it comes to something you consider to be defamatory. It is almost impossible even for [the] wealthy ... it is so, so difficult to do, so no one ever considers doing it. I would have liked to probably on occasion. There’s been thousands of things about me online that are just completely untrue and in my opinion, quite damaging. But I just didn’t feel like it was a realistic or viable option for me and still probably wouldn’t. And I think that probably would be the experience of most people because it is just so hard. It’s so expensive to do. Molan said she was “never going to say no” to more legislation targeting online bullying but as a first step it would be worth seeing how the Online Safety Act works in practice when it comes into effect next week. OK so here is a graph of all of the Covid deaths in Australia across the pandemic so far. The previous highest daily death toll was technically 59 in September 2020, but this is slightly misleading as it was the result of a large number of historical deaths (from the preceding months) being included in the official tally. Today’s number also appears to have some historical deaths included as Victorian deputy premier James Merlino confirmed that only 11 of the 22 deaths recorded in the state were from the last two days. However, even excluding those, it still appears that today marks a new record. Okay so while all of that has been going on, Queensland health minister Yevette D’Ath has been slamming the federal government’s failure to ensure all aged care residents have received their booster shots. She has criticised the Morrison government for running ads that incorrectly state that RATs are now available in state clinics. That’s a bit rich that the Commonwealth are spending money, taxpayers dollars, running ads about what the state public testing clinics are providing... [Vaccinating those in aged care and disability homes] is their job and they need to get on with that job and look after those most vulnerable in our community. Horsburgh says there is no plan to allow asymptomatic Covid-19 positive healthcare workers to return to work. Last week, changes were made to the furlough guidance so staff who were a close contact of a positive case can now, in negotiation with those individual staff members return to work if that’s the appropriate thing for them to do. At the moment we have no plans for asymptomatic positive staff to return to the workplace. Reporter: How do you think staff will react to this? They’ve worked so hard and been through it in the last 20 months and now some of them have had leave planned and they’ll be prevented from taking it. Chief executive of Austin Health, Adam Horsburgh, will be heading up this new central response centre, he answered: Overall, I think staff will welcome this. I can talk about that from my own experience at Austin Health. Our emergency physicians, intensivists, medical staff and support staff on Covid wards will welcome this because it recognises and validates the work that they’re doing and the pressure that they’re facing every day. When I mentioned before that an option under the code brown is that some services may need to get to the point where they defer some leave, that’s a decision to be taken at an individual hospital level and it will be a decision that’s only taken if it’s absolutely necessary. We’re all conscious of how tired and fatigued our workforce are and this situation will be facing us for several weeks ahead. Victoria’s deputy premier, James Merlino, says staff being forced into isolation is the single biggest stress on the state’s health system, although high Covid hospitalisation numbers are also taking a toll. The real challenge of the impact of staff who have to furlough, staff who are in isolation ... it’s averaging around 5,000 healthcare workers every single day alongside the surge in hospitalisation as a result of the Omicron variant wave ... We may well be at the peak or reaching the peak, that impact will be felt in our hospitals, in our ICU beds, over the next 2, 3, 4 weeks, with an already exhausted workforce. But it’s really the combination of staff absences as well as the highest hospitalisation numbers that we have seen throughout this pandemic that means that now is the right time to implement this system-wide code brown. I want to make the point, and stress the point, that this is something that we have been planning for. The nurse unit manager at the Royal Melbourne Hospital, Susan Harding, says people have been abusing the health system to access Covid-19 testing, including someone who claimed to have severe chest pains in order to be admitted to hospital and receive a PCR test. We had a patient last week that was desperate for a PCR. They called 000, called an ambulance under the guise of having chest pain, they presented to the emergency department and were fast-tracked down to a resuscitation room at which point they declared they didn’t have chest pain and that they really wanted a PCR and wanted it quickly. That is an unbelievable misuse of resources. Australia has recorded its deadliest day of the Covid-19 pandemic, with 74 deaths in the latest reporting period so far across NSW, Victoria and Queensland. Queensland’s health minister Yvette D’Ath has confirmed that the state has recorded 16 Covid deaths today. The state also recorded 15,962 cases with 819 people now in hospital, 50 of those in intensive care. Eighteen people in Queensland are now on ventilators. Merlino confirms this is the first time Victoria has ever had a statewide “code brown” declaration, and as such the government will establish a new and improved central response centre to coordinate the whole operation. So we’ve had code browns in the past. We’ve had it with individual hospitals with the thunderstorm asthma event. We’ve had hospitals implement code brown during the Black Saturday emergency. This is the first time we’re having a system-wide pandemic code brown and why we need this response centre. So the centre will have to be an overview of what is happening in all of our hospitals to help coordinate patient flow and distribute patients across the hospital network. The centre will also support decisions around service reconfiguration such as suspending particular activity or moving to home-based care, helping to make those calls when all other options have been exhausted. Additionally, we’re expanding the amount of Covid streaming sites to increase the number of hospitals caring for coronavirus patients. This will mean more hospitals sharing the load as we deal with this extraordinary demand. So what does a statewide code brown health system look like, Merlino asks, and then helpfully answers. It will look like things such as redeploying staff to work in areas of highest clinical priority. It means prioritising the offload of ambulance patients at emergency departments to get paramedics back on the road as soon as possible. It means things like changing services to free up staff, including the delivery of outpatient services outside of the hospital. For health care workers, this means they might be performing different roles than usual. They might be working in different parts of the hospital on different rosters and it might mean consultation with staff about some of their leave arrangements. For example, a nurse or doctor who normally works in elective surgery, which has been scaled back significantly, can now be redeployed to an emergency department where the caseload is much higher. So the compounding pressures on our health system means there may be changes to the way services are delivered but, importantly, these decisions - in fact all clinical decisions, remain with the clinicians. There also may be changes to the frequency with which patients can access certain services. This may give greater flexibility to prioritise services and free up additional staff to care for those with greatest need. They will continue to have responsibility for services that impact patients and the sickest patients, as has always been the case, will be treated first. So what this means is that from midday tomorrow, hospitals will activate their individual code brown plan so every hospital already has one in place and they’re ready to go. Merlino: We’re taking the next step of announcing a coordinated pandemic code brown across all public metropolitan and major regional hospitals from midday tomorrow and as I said, it is the right time to do it now, not wait for a code brown until two or three weeks down the track when we’re seeing the impact of the peak of Omicron in hospitalisations and ICU patients. We’ve got to act now. In terms of regional health services, we’re talking about Barwon Health, Grampians Health, Bendigo Health, Goulburn Valley Health, Albury Wodonga Health and La Trobe Regional Hospital. So this coordinated approach will help ease the pressure on individual hospitals by better sharing the load across our system through prioritising resources, redistributing patient demand across the system and managing workforce shortages. Here is Merlino on why a code brown declaration is needed across all metro hospitals and six regional hospitals. We’ve been saying for some time that our hospital system is under extreme pressure and the risks we’re seeing now in hospitalisations are testament to that. We’ve reached a point in our health system where it’s juggling severe workforce shortages. We’ve got more than 4,000 health care workers unavailable right now. Alongside a vast amount of patients with Covid-19 who require hospitalisation. Alongside that an extraordinary workforce that are absolutely exhausted ... We will see the peak in hospitalisations and ICU over the next 2 to 4 weeks. Hospitalisations lag a few weeks behind the peak of the numbers and then ICU follows on from that. So if we see what we’ve been seeing in New South Wales at 100 a day, we could well get to over 2,500 hospitalisations and more over the next few weeks, so now is the right time to implement this plan and now is the right time to act. I’ll just try to confirm this but it seems Merlino says that only 11 people out of the day’s death toll of 22 died in the last two days. That’s a fall from yesterday’s number of 1,229. 127 people are in ICU. It was 129 yesterday. 43 are on a ventilator and it was 38 yesterday. Sadly, 22 people with Covid passed away. 11 of those people died in the last two days. Victoria’s deputy premier James Merlino is up now and is going through vaccination numbers before getting to the nitty-gritty code brown news. In terms of vaccinations, 24.8% of Victorians 18 and over have had three doses, an increase from 24.4% yesterday. The number of Victorians 12 and over who have had two doses remains at 93.2%. 20,562 doses were delivered yesterday at state sites with 5.3m in total. 5,211 were children aged 5 to 11. In terms of bookings, 115,000 bookings have been made in the last seven days. 77,000 of those were for the booster. 36,000 were for first dose for children 5 to 11. There are currently 175,000 appointments available in the system over the next 30 days for people aged 12 and over and 44,000 appointments are available for children 5 to 11. Yesterday, there were 33,000 appointments available. More on the Victorian code brown hospital declaration: Ten news is reporting that Victoria will call code brown for all metro hospitals and six regional health hubs. This basically means that the hospital system is being pushed to the limit and some logistical changes need to take place to ease the pressure - generally, more at-home services, asking staff to defer leave, changes to which hospitals urgent care cases are sent to. This will likely be confirmed at the upcoming press conference. We are also about to hear from the Victorian authorities. It’s like July 2021 all over again! (Only this time I’ve only been recovered from Covid for one day and absolutely do not have the mental capacity to listen to four press conferences at once.) But don’t worry! By hook or by crook I will bring you all the updates! FYI we should also be hearing from the Queensland health minister for a Covid-19 update in about half an hour as well. There’s another indicator out today pointing to how Omicron is dimming the optimism that seemed so widespread and strong at the end of the lockdowns late last year. The ANZ-Roy Morgan survey has found consumer confidence dived 7.6% last week, sinking to its lowest level since October 2020 – that is about 15 months ago. Every sub-group reported a drop, such as 11.3% for current financial conditions and 4.3% for future ones. And 19% of respondents expect to be worse off financially this time next year, the highest proportion since September 2020. Those thinking of buying “a major household item” declined 11.4% to the lowest since August 2020. It seems confidence is a seasonal thing, which might explain that chatter about Scott Morrison planning to call an election after January when we were all supposed to be relaxed, smiling and a little suntanned - rather than anxious, grimacing and sodden from the La Nina’d summer. Anyway, consumer confidence is typically positive in January, so ANZ-RM tell us. Instead, the 97.9 point reading is the weakest January result since 1992 (when jobless rates were soaring and the RBA cash rate was 7.5%). Confidence is below the 100-point mark for all states (though not our terrific territories) which suggests the malaise is widespread – and perhaps why Morrison is going to call the election as late as he can. May 21 is that final date, so let’s see how close he gets to that as a sign of his own confidence. Covid-19 outbreaks in aged care facilities continue to grow, with providers suggesting more than half will soon be impacted, reports Alex Mitchell from AAP. Data released late last week showed there were more than 7000 active cases among residents, spread across about 1100 facilities. But Aged and Community Services Australia chief executive Paul Sadler told ABC that number was only rising. I believe there is now a risk we will have over half of all the aged care homes in Australia with outbreaks. That number is likely to continue to increase. With around three-in-four residents boosted as the Omicron variant sweeps the nation, Director of Australian Health Services Research Institute, professor Kathy Eagar, said the federal government’s planning had been “completely incompetent”. 40% of all homes in Australia have an outbreak of COVID. That is really appalling ... I think every family should be really concerned about what’s happening in aged care. Eagar suggested all residents should have received booster shots before Christmas. Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath on Monday said boosting aged care residents with urgency was critical. I am concerned that not all aged care facilities have their boosters yet. And I am concerned that people in the disability sector as well [do not have boosters]. Meanwhile, the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners’ election statement identified improving support for groups including aged care residents as a priority. The RACGP is calling for “improved support for continuous and preventive care for vulnerable Australians, particularly for aged care, mental health, and disability”. Perrottet: You don’t provide financial support before a business closes. You provide financial support following that period and you assess the situation. That is exactly what the New South Wales treasurer is doing. Reporter: You are asking people to stay home and limit their movements, work from home, the settings are similar to lockdown settings, why haven’t you reinstated some of the measures like job saver, the business grant? Perrottet: In relation to the first point, there is no doubt that more of society is open than we had last year during lot down. That does not mean that there are no issues that businesses are facing with challenges with staff. We accept that. That is part of the transitional phase that we are moving through. As we work through this there will be different challenges and difficulties that come our way but the worst case scenario is that if you have an across-the-board lock down at a time when we have a population that is highly vaccinated ... This is a very different situation to where we were last year when we had a highly unvaccinated population. We had, as a country, to make difficult decisions. We are in a different phase and that transition can be challenging for people, I’ll accept that. It’s a new message, it’s an approach that differs from when we had a highly unvaccinated population. We have seen over the last two years a high unemployment rate. We have a duty as a government to ensure that people remain in work, and talk about the economy and having a strong economy. Reporter: What about daycare’s and preschools, will they be included? Perrottet: We are looking at that and that is been a discussion at national cabinet ... We are looking at furloughed work staff at the moment. If childcare and early childhood education centres are closed, that adds an additional 5% of the workforce that will not be in a position to go to work. As we have the health challenges, we have the economic challenges to balance. We have seen over the last two years a high unemployment rate. We have a duty as a government to ensure that people remain in work, and talk about the economy and having a strong economy. Perrottet has confirmed that RATs being distributed to schools will play a large part in the state’s plan to keep educational facilities operating throughout 2022. We will see a rollout of rapid antigen tests and that’s why we procured here in New South Wales tens of millions of them. And we’ve already seen the first tranche arrive and many more will arrive over this period. Perrottet has been asked about the government’s new plan to deal with Covid-19 outbreaks at school. The long and short of it seems to be - fewer total school shutdowns, but wait till Thursday to find out more. Last year, if we had a case in the school ... it was very likely that that school closed for cleaning, and many students were affected and had to learn from home during that period. As we move through this phase there will also be learning from home as we move through, but there is a comprehensive plan that we are working through. We’ve agreed at the national cabinet level that we will provide those operational plans for every state and territory across the board, we will be doing that on Thursday and we will release it after that, but it will be different to last year. To [combat] the different variant, there are different challenges facing the state, as you say a highly [infectious variant] but in addition to that one that is also less severe. So our hope is to ensure schools are open, kids are in the classroom with as least disruption as possible. But there will be issues as we move through but that is the better path to take than to simply not have schools open. Perrottet is back to chatting about schools resuming as scheduled: There will be inconveniences, they will be challenges as we go through the reopening of schools. There is no doubt about that. But we are determined to make it as smooth as possible. That will mean at times, teachers who are positive will need to isolated. It will mean at times at kids who are positive will need to isolate but that is a better issue to be dealing with than having our schools closed. We need kids back in the classrooms. It’s best for them, it’s best for the educational outcomes, the mental health and the social outcomes. Particularly disadvantaged groups across the state. In NSW, we have seen certain students lose a quarter of their schooling because of lockdowns and because of not being able to access education. Heads up – we will be getting a health update from the Tasmanian premier at 11.30am. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard says there have been a number of false RAT reports made, including someone claiming Hazzard himself was Covid-19 positive. He has slammed these pranks as irresponsible and illegal. I am aware of some instances of some people thinking it’s a joke, perhaps maliciously, to put in false reports to NSW Health about somebody being positive. I can now speak from personal experience. I received notification yesterday and again today from NSW Health that apparently somebody has put my name in there as being a positive rapid antigen test. Can I just say, first of all, it is extremely irresponsible. You are undermining what the public health team is trying to do here to keep the entire community safe. It is juvenile, it is moronic but it’s also so disappointing to think that you would actually undermine an incredibly hardworking public health team here in NSW. And I want to remind those who do that there is a $5,000 fine for anybody who misrepresents any facts to the New South Wales Health people who are trying to keep us safe. The police will come hunting and if you’re caught, you will [receive a] $5,000 fine. But worse still, when you’re telling your friends about that, they will probably tell you how stupid you are. It’s quite moronic. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard is using his time to drive home the health benefits of vaccination. Unvaccinated people – total population, 5%. Total numbers in the ICU, between 50 and a 100%. There is no question that getting vaccinated is a crucial step forward and I would ask the community, those remaining people who are still reluctant or have not got around to it, get around to it because it may save your life. NSW health official Susan Pearce is giving an update on vaccination rates for primary school-aged children: The vaccination rates for five- to 11-year-olds is going very well across our clinics. Last week, we did have 20,000 five- to 11-year-olds in the New South Wales Health clinics. We have the capacity to do many more than that. And again yesterday over 3,000 children in that age group came forward so it’s very pleasing to see that going up. Every single day, we are seeing people come forward for their first and second dose. And the adult population, is not too late. While obviously we are talking a lot about boosters at the moment, please don’t think that it’s too late for you to be vaccinated. We are ready, willing and able to assist you. NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant has given some additional details on the 36 people who died in the latest Covid reporting period. Today, sadly, we are reporting the deaths of 36 people – 22 men and 14 women and can I just pass on my condolences to those for the loss. One person was aged in their 40s, two were aged in their 50s, one was in their 60s, 11 people aged in 70s, 12 people were in the 80s, nine people were in the 90s. And of the 36 people, 33 were vaccinated against Covid. Generally, they had had two doses, three people were not vaccinated. Of the three people who died, under 65, one was vaccinated against Covid and had two doses, and two people were not vaccinated. All three of those under 65 had underlying serious health conditions and of the older people only a handful had had the boosters. I remember how jarring it was when the public messaging from politicians changed from “look how good Australia is doing” to “well everywhere else in the world is doing worse than us.” Now it looks like we are going one step further, with Perrottet making the point that other countries around the world are also doing it equally as tough. Perrottet: Lastly, I say, despite the challenges, they are not unique to the rest of the world. As a state, we will get through this. And stronger [on] the other side. We have done that over the last two years. Many people have made extraordinary efforts, many people have made extraordinary sacrifices. But that effort, that sustained sacrifice, the patience in continuing to keep and treat people with kindness and respect. Speaking of the school year, Perrottet has once again affirmed his intention to have all government schools begin the year on schedule, despite many primary school students still remaining unvaccinated. The premier says the government can’t “let perfection be the enemy of the good”: It’s incredibly important for our children, education outcomes for their health, for the social understanding, that we are able to get kids back as quickly as possible and that’s why we are committed [to] doing that on day one, term one. As a parent, I appreciate that many parents across the state are anxious about kids going back to school. We are working day and night with our health teams, education teams here in NSW to ensure that we have a safe environment for parents, teachers and for students. In saying that, I know, as you move to this period of time, just like we had last year, they will be further inconveniences, they will be bumps and hurdles along the way. We can’t let perfection be the enemy of the good and our focus is to ensure that we have kids back at school on day one. It’s incredibly important, not just for their health but for their educational outcomes. We will continue to work through that process ... alongside other states. [We] are working very closely with the Victorian government to ensure that we provide this operational plans and national cabinet on Thursday and will release those plans following that. Perrottet has heralded the arrival of “millions” of rapid antigen tests in the coming weeks in NSW. We had over a million rapid antigen tests here in NSW by our government arrive yesterday, we will have millions more arrive over the course of this week. They will be crucial, in ensuring that we provide support for our health workers at this time, to get schools open on the first day of term one this year. The NSW premier says the state has nearly reached 50% of the eligible population having received a booster shot of Covid-19 vaccine. Perrottet: It’s very pleasing today that we nearly hit 50% of the eligible population here NSW receiving a booster shot. The evidence is very clear – booster shots and vaccination makes a real difference in protecting you, your friends and your family. We [have] close to ... 70,000 booster shots available to be administered a week, just in our hubs alone. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is speaking now, starting the press conference by addressing the state’s record day of 36 Covid-19 deaths. In the last 24 hours, 36 people have died of Covid-19 and can I extend ... our condolences. And our thoughts and prayers and hearts go out to all those families who have lost a loved one at this time. Often over the last two years we can get focused on reporting the numbers. We shouldn’t forget that behind every one of those numbers is a loved one who passed away ... [or] somebody who is in hospital ICU and going through a very difficult time. I extend my gratitude and thanks to the people of NSW and to health workers. Tasmania has recorded 1,310 new cases of Covid-19, and there are now two people in ICU with the virus in the state. A Hobart man has died in what police say was a targeted shooting. Police were called to a home on Douglas Drive at Bridgewater shortly before 1am on Tuesday after receiving a report a man had been shot, reports AAP. The man died a short time after they arrived. “Police believe it to be a targeted incident between two people known to each other and an investigation is underway to locate the alleged offender,” police say. Anyone with information is asked to contact Tasmania police or Crimestoppers. Douglas Drive remains closed and people have been asked to avoid the area. A distress signal has been detected in an isolated, low-lying group of Tongan islands after Saturday’s huge volcanic eruption, even as most external communications remain down, and diaspora families anxiously await news. Reuters reports that the UN detected the distress signal on Monday, prompting particular concern for the inhabitants of Fonoi and Mango. According to the Tonga government, 36 people live on Mango and 69 on Fonoi. The news comes as most communication between Tonga and the outside world is still cut off, after the Pacific nation’s main communication cable was broken by the eruption of Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano and subsequent tsunami. Tongans around the world may be forced to wait weeks for regular contact to resume, after testing confirmed that the cable connecting the islands to the outside world was cut in at least one place. You can read the full report below: By the way, we are still waiting to hear from the federal treasurer this morning. I assume he will be starting his press conference soon. A bit more context on the movements of the HMAS Adelaide from the ABC: Australians who recover from a bout of Covid-19 will only need to wait seven days to give blood under a new policy change amid the Omicron wave, reports AAP’s Callum Godde. With more than 700,000 active cases isolating around the country – and many more close contacts and people awaiting PCR test results – Red Cross Lifeblood is slashing the recovery wait time to donate blood from 28 days. The change will be implemented from Friday, while donors started being tipped off on Monday afternoon. Lifeblood said the 28-day postponement was an important protective measure in the early phase of the pandemic when there was limited knowledge about Covid-19. But with high appointment cancellation rates and no reports of Covid-19 transmission from blood transfusions after 300m confirmed cases globally, it has swung into action. A Lifeblood spokesperson told AAP in a statement: Following advice from our expert medical teams and with the approval of the Australian regulator, we will be reducing the 28-day postponement for donors who have fully recovered from COVID to seven days... The seven-day postponement aligns with public health guidelines. A one-week recovery after mild respiratory illnesses such as a cold and runny nose is already our standard postponement. There are 4,500 appointments going unattended each day at present and the Red Cross is urging more donors to come forward, with an additional 5,500 needed every week between now and Australia Day. Economists are starting to polish their crystal balls and come up with their first guesses on what all this disruption to our lives might do to our economy. The Commonwealth Bank, our biggest bank, is among the first out of the blocks to estimate the wider impact of absenteeism levels reaching as much as 60% in businesses such as hairdressing. Gareth Aird, CBA’s head of Australian economics, reckons hours worked will drop 3-4% in January alone, and consumption will be hit by the significant economic disruption that “looks likely to be sustained over the next few months”. As a result, CBA has slashed their forecast for first-quarter growth to 1% from the December quarter, compared with a 2.3% pace the bank had previously predicted. That sounds bad but for now the damage is looking temporary with a “snapback” still predicted. Aird is leaving both the second half and fourth-quarter forecasts unchanged, provided Omicron comes and goes in a hurry and isn’t followed up by another nasty strain. Aird tells Guardian Australia the first-quarter cut will lower the bank’s full-year GDP forecast to 4.8% from an earlier prediction of 5.1%. That’s “not a lot in the scheme of things”, he says. As a result of the still strong momentum in the economy, the jobless rate will remain low and inflation pressures - probably made worse by these shortages - will continue to build. The CBA still predicts the Reserve Bank of Australia to commence lifting rates by late 2022 or earlier than the central bank is so far fessing up to. The Victorian numbers have just come through and sadly the state has recorded 22 Covid-19 deaths and 20,180 new cases. This case number tally may also include RAT and PCR duplicates as states iron out their new reporting systems. There are now 1,152 Covid positive people in hospital, including 127 in ICU and 43 requiring ventilation. It’s worth noting that there are now 209 people infected with Covid in the ICU in NSW, with hospitalisation numbers sitting at 2,850. New South Wales has recorded 29,830 new cases of Covid-19 and sadly 36 deaths – the state’s deadliest day of the pandemic so far. The health department has noted that this daily case tally may include duplicates where people have reported multiple RATs or a RAT and PCR result. Of course, we are fast approaching 9am, which means we are standing by for Victoria and NSW Covid-19 numbers. Stay tuned. Looks like we will be hearing from the NSW powers that be at 10am (Sydney and Melbourne time). Big miner Rio Tinto has warned that a protracted Covid-19 outbreak could cripple its workforce or supply chains and “severely constrain” output at its mines. In a quarterly production update out this morning, the company, one of Australia’s biggest, said it was already suffering from labour shortages and fatigue in its workforce, heightening safety risks. Chief executive Jakob Stausholm said operating conditions in 2021 “remained challenging, including due to prolonged Covid-19 disruptions”. The amount of iron ore Rio dug up from its mines in the Pilbara fell by 4% last year to 322Mt. The company expects to dig up between 320Mt and 335Mt this year, it said. Our guidance assumes development of the pandemic does not lead to government-imposed restrictions and widespread protracted cases related to new highly contagious variants with high severity, which could result in a significant number of our production critical workforce and contractor base being unable to work due to illness and/or isolation requirements ... This risk extends to prolonged interruption of service from a key partner or supplier which could lead to severely constrained operational activity of a key asset or project. This risk is exacerbated globally by tight labour markets and supply chain delays. Meanwhile, the Australian Tourism Industry Council has called for the reintroduction of the federal government’s cash flow boost program after a 52% fall in business in the last three months of the year compared with the previous year – a fall that came before the current Omicron outbreak smashed many hospitality businesses. “This is the worst it’s ever been for the tourism industry,” deputy chair Daniel Gschwind said. The summer period is our peak season, providing revenue that takes businesses through the winter and they’re not seeing it come in. Too many businesses are staring at disaster. Tongan officials have warned the death toll from the volcanic eruption and tsunami in the Pacific nation is only set to grow, as damage assessment begins. As Australia prepares to send more aid to Tonga, authorities have confirmed the first casualty from the natural disaster, British charity worker Angela Glover. The deputy head of mission at Tonga’s high commission in Australia, Curtis Tu’ihalangingie, told ABC radio it would still be weeks before communication was fully restored in the country. Communication is on locally, so people can call one another in Tonga, but can’t all internationally, we still have limited access to Tonga ... We still don’t have a direct communication with our government. All Australians have been accounted for in Tonga following the disaster. There are normally about 300 Australians living in Tonga, but the number is estimated to be less due to Covid-19. Tu’ihalangingie said there was still uncertainty about the level of damage to Tonga, but basic supplies were needed. At this point [Tonga needs] water and also masks ... The county was covered with volcanic ash and this is very alarming and dangerous, not only for young children but for everyone. Australia sent a P-8 plane to survey the damage on Monday, with further support on the way. Now McManus mentioned businesses attempting to require Covid-19 positive workers to work. The highest-profile example of this in recent days has to be the Teys Australia abattoir in South Australia which was given state government approval to operate while some staff were Covid positive. The ACTU said the exemption from the SA government was apparently unique in Australia and set a dangerous precedent given the risks of affecting other staff, but McManus has just confirmed that the workers of the plant have just secured a victory in this case. Just with breaking news, that’s been resolved and those workers don’t have to go to work while they’re Covid positive. This is about being very clear with employers that this is unacceptable. Unfortunately, the ACTU has been receiving a lot of pleas for help from workers, mainly in smaller organisations like hospitality and retail, where they’re casual workers and their employers have been saying “we know you’re positive, but come to work, you’re not infectious”. Just because you don’t have symptoms doesn’t mean you’re not infectious. It’s dangerous not just for workers but customers as well. It’s a line in the sand for us. We can’t have a situation where people are put in harm’s way and putting the community in harm’s way. Following a meeting of a number of major unions yesterday, Australian Council of Trade Union secretary, Sally McManus says businesses need to upgrade a raft of Covid-19 safety procedures to meet the new threat of Omicron. She told ABC News Breakfast: We are writing to all employers and we started that last night. We need to put in place upgraded safety protections for 2022. What cut it last year for Delta won’t work now. That involves things like better masks, it involves RATs when they’re available. That has to be done under the law and in consultation with workers. Workers have a right to cease work if they’re not in a safe workplace. At the moment, unfortunately, we’re seeing some employers trying to force Covid-positive people to go to work. That’s absolutely a red line. We must keep people safe during this pandemic, not just for them and their co-workers, but for the whole of the community. A man who was forced to hand over his phone and passcode to Australian Border Force after returning to Sydney from holiday has labelled the tactic “an absolute gross violation of privacy”, as tech advocates call for transparency and stronger privacy protections for people’s devices as they enter the country. Software developer James and his partner returned from a 10-day holiday in Fiji earlier this month and were stopped by border force officials at Sydney airport. They were taken aside, and after emptying their suitcases, an official asked them to write their phone passcodes on a piece of paper, before taking their phones into another room. It was half an hour before their phones were returned, and they were allowed to leave. James initially posted about his ordeal on Reddit. You can read the full report below: Sam Kerr has been beaten to the Fifa best women’s player of the year award by Barcelona’s Alexia Putellas, reports AAP. The Matildas captain came second to Putellas with another Spanish midfielder Jenni Hermoso, also of European Champions League winners Barcelona, in third. Robert Lewandowski, of Bayern Munich and Poland, won the men’s award ahead of Lionel Messi and Mo Salah. The awards were held in Zurich though most guests appeared by video link. The Australian captain was not on screen as she is preparing for the Matildas’ opening Asian Cup tie in India on Friday. Kerr surprisingly did not make the FIFPRO Women’s World XI, but neither did Putellas or Hermoso in a very odd selection that did not include any players from either Barcelona or Tokyo Olympics gold medallists Canada. Kerr’s boss at Chelsea, Emma Hayes, was women’s football manager of the year with Thomas Tuchel, also of Chelsea, taking the men’s award. International captains, coaches and selected media vote. Kerr herself voted for Putellas, Barcelona and Norway’s Caroline Graham Hansen, and Hermoso in the players’ category. As coach she voted for Hayes, Barcelona’s Lluis Cortes and Bev Priestman of Canada. Tony Gustavsson, Matildas’ coach, voted for Kerr, Putellas and Arsenal’s Vivianne Miedema. Kerr polled 38 points, 14 behind Putellas, five ahead of Hermoso. Novak Djokovic may not be allowed to defend his French Open title in May after the French government ruled that all athletes will have to be vaccinated in order to attend and compete in sporting events in France. The French sports minister, Roxana Maracineanu, has announced that athletes would not be exempt from France’s Covid pass, which will soon come into effect for over 16s. “The vaccination pass has been adopted. As soon as the law is promulgated, it will become mandatory to enter public buildings already subject to the health pass (stadium, theatre or lounge) for all spectators, practitioners, French or foreign professionals,” she wrote on twitter. Earlier in January, Maracineanu had suggested that athletes could be exempt from France’s vaccination requirements through a “bubble” system, but the government have now scrapped any such plans. You can read the full report below: Tonga’s deputy head of mission in Australia, Curtis Tu’ihalangingie, has told ABC radio that it could be weeks before communications are fully restored to the island. Communication is on locally, so people can call one another in Tonga but can’t call internationally. We still have limited access to Tonga. We still don’t have direct communication with our government. The shortage of rapid antigen tests for consumers is being exacerbated by state and federal governments and large corporates placing mammoth orders for the kits, causing stock to be diverted from online retailers and pharmacies. Australia is in the middle of a huge Omicron wave after state and federal governments pivoted from a policy of Covid suppression to one of “living with the virus”, causing a surge in demand for rapid antigen testing kits. Prof Trent Twomey, the national president of the Pharmacy Guild, said his members were struggling to secure stock and many had had orders delayed by their suppliers. You can read the full report below: Good morning all, it’s Matilda Boseley here on the blog with you, ready to bring you all of Australia’s morning news. (Which actually mostly takes place outside of Australia this morning.) Australia and New Zealand are standing by to offer additional support to Tonga following reconnaissance missions to assess damage in the crisis-struck Pacific nation. The Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volanic eruption on Saturday – potentially the world’s most powerful blast for 30 years – caused a tsunami across the Pacific and blanketed the Tongan capital Nuku’alofa in thick ash. While much of Tonga’s power has been restored, communication in and out of the remote Pacific nation remains limited. Yesterday morning a New Zealand defence force Orion aircraft took off from Auckland’s Whenuapai base on a mission to investigate further, with an Australian P-8 Poseidon also leaving Brisbane on a similar mission. New Zealand will follow the reconnaissance mission with flights from the heavy-duty Hercules C-130 to drop any needed provisions. One fatality has also now been confirmed. The body of 50-year-old British woman Angela Glover, who ran the Tonga Animal Welfare, has now been found. Heading across to Europe and the tennis star Novak Djokovic has touched down in his home country of Serbia after being deported from Australia after failing to meet vaccination requirements. He was welcomed by a small but noisy band of supporters at the Belgrade airport before being whisked through passport control and customs and driven home by his brother. However, it looks like the unvaccinated player isn’t out of the woods yet, after the French sports ministry made a point to confirm that a new law barring unvaccinated people from sports venues, restaurants and other public places will apply to sportsmen too. That would prevent Djokovic from playing at the French Open in May though a spokesperson noted the pandemic situation “could change by then”. There is certainly plenty to get through, so with that why don’t we jump right into the day.Credit Suisse needed someone to lead a clean-up job, and António Horta-Osório had impeccable credentials for struggling banks. During the financial crisis at Spanish bank Santander he had led the takeover of Alliance &amp; Leicester and Bradford &amp; Bingley when they were near collapse, and then helped pull Lloyds Bank out of the mire after its government bailout. He was not known to object to this shining-armour reputation, displaying in his office a cartoon showing a knight on horseback rescuing two banking damsels in distress. Yet his latest adventure has ended suddenly, after an internal Credit Suisse investigation found breaches of Covid regulations. They included admitted contravention of Swiss isolation rules. He also watched Novak Djokovic win the Wimbledon men’s final when he allegedly should have been in quarantine according to UK laws. Horta-Osório resigned over the weekend once the findings were made clear to him. Horta-Osório was born in Lisbon in January 1964, attending Jesuit school and acquiring a love of tennis, before studying management and business administration at the Portuguese capital’s Universidade Católica Portuguesa. He started on his banking career in 1987 at Citibank Portugal, where he rose to become head of capital markets by 1991, while also completing an MBA at France’s prestigious Insead in the same year. From there he joined US investment bank Goldman Sachs, before Spain’s Santander took him on as a chief executive of a Portuguese subsidiary in 1993. In 2006 he made the move to the UK to head up Abbey National, the former building society bought by Santander two years earlier. During four years in charge he steered the bank through acquisitions which built up a formidable high street presence, and a rebrand, not to mention the financial crisis. By June 2009 his reputation was such that he was appointed as a non-executive director to the Court of the Bank of England, but he quickly gave up that role when former chancellor George Osborne picked him to lead Lloyds Banking Group. Over the course of almost a decade Horta-Osório led Britain’s biggest high street bank past near-collapse during 2011 to leaving state ownership in 2017, and went through a big round of technology investment in response to the threat of digital startups, but also cut hundreds of branches and tens of thousands of jobs. He also collected £60m in pay. He oversaw the unprecedented £22bn in compensation payouts by Lloyds to people miss-sold payment protection insurance. Horta-Osório’s affection for the UK became clear when he became a British citizen, a move that made him eligible for the knighthood (although he also sampled the other side of being a British public figure when a Sun newspaper front page splashed an affair in 2016 with the headline “Lloyds bonk”). The royal honour was bestowed for services to “financial services, mental health and culture”, reflecting his work as chair of the Wallace Collection of art and antiquities as well as his ground-breaking openness about mental health struggles in an industry known for a sometimes punishingly macho culture. At Credit Suisse he was brought in to turn the page on a series of governance scandals, overseeing the launch of a new strategy in November. His abrupt departure means he is unlikely to leave much of a mark on the bank.In France the 400th anniversary of Molière’s birth is being celebrated in a big way. In Britain it has been greeted with a deafening silence. But then we have always been slightly wary of Molière. It is partly that we lack the histrionic tradition that led CE Montague to write that watching French actors play Molière was “like turning over a portfolio of old and choice theatrical prints”. It is also the difficulty of translation: I can think of a handful of good ones – including Tony Harrison’s The Misanthrope, Christopher Hampton’s Don Juan and Ranjit Bolt’s The School for Wives – but many that are rough without being ready. We seem much happier doing adaptations and one play that comes up repeatedly is Tartuffe. It is not hard to see why: hypocrisy, especially if it is religious, is always with us. Even Shakespeare jokes about it in Twelfth Night when Feste, donning a curate’s robe, says: “I would I were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown.” But Molière’s Tartuffe is much the greatest play on the subject and has prompted any number of transpositions: the two best I have seen both made use, in radically different ways, of Asian culture. Jatinder Verma, founder of Tara Arts, did a remarkable National Theatre mobile production back in 1990. Verma discovered that in 1667, just after Molière wrote the first version of Tartuffe, a French traveller, François Bernier, was in India and was struck by the omnipresence of wandering holy men known as fakirs. “Heaven help the family,” wrote Bernier, “that does not give them a good welcome even though everyone knows they have eyes only for the women of the family.” Since Molière’s Tartuffe uses his religiosity to conquer Orgon’s wife, house and wealth, that gave Verma the cue for an Indian Tartuffe. The result wittily reminded us that Molière’s work was anchored in popular tradition with Verma deploying Kathak dance and Khayal music. But he retained Molière’s plot: the duped Parisian bourgeois, Orgon, became a brocaded Mogul and Tartuffe, wonderfully played by Nizwar Karanj, a lecherous, shaven-headed guru in a saffron dhoti. Far from being mangled Molière, this was proof of the play’s classic status. It also demonstrated that, if you are going to reimagine a play, it’s no use tinkering at the edges: you have to find a precise social parallel that works on every level. Anil Gupta and Richard Pinto did just that when in 2018 they came up with an RSC Tartuffe that set the play among a family of Birmingham-based British-Pakistani Muslims. This did justice to Molière’s complexity while tackling contemporary issues. Here Orgon was a guilt-ridden businessman anxious to return to his Muslim roots and Tartuffe an aberrant outsider rather than a genuine product of Islam. But perhaps the shrewdest touch was to turn Molière’s maid into a Bosnian Muslim and authorial spokesperson: she capped Tartuffe’s quotes from the Qur’an about female modesty by arguing that there was nothing in it to prove that women should cover their hair or their heads. Not all updates are equally successful. Birmingham Rep did a Midlands-set Tartuffe in 2013 that turned the play into a vulgar panto. Marcus Gardley’s A Wolf in Snakeskin Shoes, seen in London in 2015, treated Tartuffe as a hedonistic healer from the deep south and made up in energy what it lacked in subtlety. Nearer the mark was John Donnelly’s 2019 National Theatre update which became as much a study of bourgeois angst as religious hypocrisy. Tartuffe is currently everyone’s favourite Molière but other plays have been subject to a culture shift. In 2002 the Scottish playwright Iain Heggie made Molière’s Don Juan a fading glam-rock star and Patrick Marber in Don Juan in Soho turned him, in David Tennant’s 2017 performance, into a priapic Peter Pan. But one test of any Molière production is whether it carries a note of ambivalence. Just as we should momentarily wonder if Tartuffe is more than a con man, Marber reminded us that Molière’s Don Juan, as well as being a heartless libertine, is also a rampant enemy of hypocrisy. Arguably, the biggest enemy of hypocrisy is Alceste in The Misanthrope. This is the most complex of all Molière’s plays in that Alceste is simultaneously a passionate truth teller and a victim of erotic enslavement. But although Martin Crimp did an agile update – seen with Damian Lewis and Keira Knightley in 2009 – it was hard to believe that a modern hypocrisy-basher would be punished for his sins rather than becoming a media celebrity. Adaptation, of course, is not the only route to Molière. It would be good, periodically, to see a production set in the plays’ historical context. But what is important is that we still go on staging one of the world’s great dramatists. What I find sad is that, in parochial Britain, his quatercentenary appears to be going signally and shamefully uncelebrated.Doctors and nurses will be diverted from private hospitals to the strained public network to help with the peak of Omicron cases, after the federal government activated a surge plan struck with the sector in April 2020. As Australia recorded its deadliest day of the pandemic so far, with 77 deaths across the country, the health minister Greg Hunt said up to 57,000 nurses and more than 100,000 staff would be made available to Covid affected areas dealing with workforce challenges. “It’s a workforce which is skilled, planned, appropriate and available,” Hunt said, saying there was “enormous capacity” that could be tapped to help public hospitals. “They are clinically trained, they are expert. The people that have the capacity to step straight into a hospital environment, those that have training, the expertise, the skills, the knowledge, the history are the nurses, doctors and care staff within the private hospital system.” The government will also make available the national medical stockpile for states and territories to access personal protective equipment in the event of any shortages. “This is a moment for which we have prepared over two years, and enacting those elements is an important part of providing hope and confidence to the Australian public,” Hunt said. The chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, said he believed the past two weeks was the first time that the country’s hospitals had come under severe strain. “This is the first time the health system has come under pressure to the extent that we’re seeing in the last week or two,” he said. “I said on the weekend, and I stand by those statements, that we are either at or close to the peak of this in certain states.” New South Wales reported a record 36 deaths along with 29,830 new cases; Victoria reported 22 deaths and 20,180 new cases, while Queensland reported 16 deaths and 15,962 cases. South Australia recorded two deaths from 3,079 new cases, while the ACT reported one death from 1,860 new cases. NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, warned on Monday that a higher death toll over the coming days was likely. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, lamented the new record, saying it was a “very difficult day”. “Often over the last two years, we can get focused on reporting the numbers but we should not forget, behind every one of those numbers is a loved one who passed away, or somebody who is in hospital ICU and going through a very difficult time,” he told reporters. ICU admissions in NSW increased slightly to 209, while the number of hospitalisations rose to 2,850. Chant said of the deaths, 22 were men and 14 were women; 33 were vaccinated and three were not. Those who were vaccinated “generally” had not received the third booster shot. She urged people to get their booster shot, saying authorities’ efforts to slow the spread of the virus were to allow people to get their third jab. “I really want the community to have a sense of urgency in going and getting boosted,” she said. “Having said that, we’re still trying to slow the transmission in the community because we want to give time for people to get those boosters.” Perrottet reiterated that he believed his government’s resistance to calls for further restrictions was the right path forward, citing his hopes for a strong economic rebound. “We believe the settings we have in place are appropriate,” he said. “While the health system is under pressure, we are currently tracking better than the best case scenario. That is encouraging, reassuring and pleasing.” Perrottet announced the state can expect another 1.2m rapid antigen tests to arrive overnight, and said another 15m were expected to arrive within the week. Queensland reported its deadliest day in the pandemic. Three of the deaths were people in their 70s, eight in their 80s, four in their 90s and one person who was over 100 years old. Ten people were fully vaccinated, two had had only one dose and four were unvaccinated. None of them had received a booster shot. The state’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, said the virus was now “hunting the unboosted”. “The virus does seem to be finding older people who have not received that third dose,” he said. The state also saw a jump in hospital admissions, with 819 people currently being treated for the virus, compared to 702 cases on Monday. 50 people are in ICU, with 18 on ventilators. But Gerrard warned that the jump in admissions did not reflect the peak of the outbreak in the state yet. “The numbers are going up, there’s no question about that,” he said. “That is what we’ve been predicting, we’re heading towards our peak, that is still projected to be towards the end of this month.” Queensland’s health minister, Yvette D’Ath, announced further restrictions to hospital visits, in the hopes of reducing transmission at health facilities. “This will limit the number of visitors at any one time to two people in wards, and one person in addition to the patient themselves who can attend in an emergency department,” she said. In Victoria, a statewide “code brown” was issued for health services, which streamlines the state’s emergency management response to allow redeployment of staff to critical areas. Acting minister for health, James Merlino, told reporters it was the first time authorities saw the need to introduce a code brown across the state, which will affect all public metropolitan and major regional hospitals from midday on Wednesday. “We’ve been saying for some time that our hospital system is under extreme pressure and the risks we’re seeing now in hospitalisations are testament to that. We’ve reached a point in our health system where it’s juggling severe workforce shortages.” “We’ve got more than 4,000 healthcare workers unavailable right now. We will see the peak in hospitalisations and ICU [numbers] over the next two to four weeks.” The state currently has 1,152 people in hospital with the virus, a slight drop on Monday’s figures. 127 people are in intensive care, with 43 of them requiring ventilation. The six regional hospitals the code brown will apply to are Barwon Health, Grampians Health, Bendigo Health, Goulburn Valley Health, Albury Wodonga Health and La Trobe Regional hospital. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “This coordinated approach will help ease the pressure on individual hospitals by better sharing the load across our system,” Merlino said. Tasmania lifted restrictions on interstate travel for the vaccinated, as the state recorded 1,310 new cases. From midnight Tuesday, fully vaccinated arrivals will no longer need to register their travel or take a test prior to travelling. However, those rules do not apply to the unvaccinated unless they have a valid medical exemption.I have often tried to imagine what Makewana, the original female rainmaker of ancient Malawi, must have looked like. There is a statue of her with long hair at Mua Mission in Dedza, since to cut her hair would have signified drought. The name means “Mother of Children” – a title passed down through the generations of rainmakers. Once identified as Makewana, a woman would live at Msinja shrine and be deemed responsible for rain. Makewana is the name we decided to use when, in 2014, Hendrina Kachapila, Ranka Primorac and I were talking about Malawian writers. Ranka was in the country researching women’s writing in southern Africa. She asked, “Where are the Malawian female writers?” We didn’t have a ready answer. Were there any women writing in Malawi? Oh definitely. There was Walije Gondwe, Emily Mkamanga, Catherine M’bawa, Cecilia Dube. We paused, trying to think. The fact that we had to pause, search and remember, spoke volumes. It was not so challenging to come up with names for male authors. In seconds, I could come up with the names of five: Jack Mapanje, David Rubadiri, Steve Chimombo, Aubrey Kalitera and Ken Lipenga. That day, the three of us decided that we would do more to find out where the women were. Hendrina came up with the name Makewana’s Daughters for our online forum, the title of Jessie Sagawa’s PhD thesis, Daughters of Makewana: A study of women in selected Malawian novels in English. We thought about Malawi’s history, and the leadership of rainmakers in the 18th century. We could not resist the urge of connecting creation and creativity, and we felt that the rainmaker’s strong image would be inspirational to women seeking to end the country’s literary drought. Our slogan, “Let words rain and reign”, reflected all that Makewana’s Daughters was aiming for. We have not found all the answers as to why Malawi does not have as much creative writing by women. I have talked to women and girls who have been writing for a long time, not because of Makewana’s Daughters, but because they felt that urge. For some, their work has been kept hidden in closets. They felt it was enough to write. For others, the work was rejected by publishers. But there is also the question of literacy levels, which remain lower among women in Malawi than men. But this does not mean that the women who did not have a formal education do not have a story to tell. Makewana’s Daughters has transcribed stories as well as songs composed by rural women: songs are just one way in which women express themselves. Using our online forum, we publish short stories, poems and songs as well as personal narratives. We have even created a comic strip, Nerdy Niva, which addresses another kind of drought – female protagonists created by female writers in comic strips. We have managed to visit primary schools and to run two writing competitions in English and Chichewa. We are mainly self-funded, but have had financial help in running the competitions from Asbjørn Eidhammer, Norway’s former ambassador to Malawi, and Asante Mtenje, associate professor in English at the University of Malawi. Among the many things I am happy about is that we are no longer just an online forum, there have been times when we have been to a school and heard girls clap their hands and shout, “Makewana!” We are thriving. We have also taken part in workshops with organisations such as Pepeta Malawi, a feminist platform fighting against gender-based violence, and Wona Collective, which focuses on social advocacy using the arts. Our interactions with the participants have made us even more humbly aware of the stories out there and of the artists in this country, even when publishing opportunities are rare. I’m impressed by how some Malawian women are embracing trends such as self-publishing. Having searched for outlets for years, they have stepped up, taking back the manuscripts they had put aside, and are getting their work published on their own terms. Visiting the statue of Makewana at Mua, and seeing her long hair, intrigued me, especially since I had grown up in an era when schoolgirls had to keep their hair short. This is still the case in government schools, and is seen as a form of discipline. Looking at a time before all this, the image of Makewana makes me wonder how she negotiated the issue of discipline in her time. I hope that I can write without a paralysing sense of self-censorship, and that women writing in the country will continue to let words rain and reign. Timwa Lipenga is an author and lecturer in French at the University of Malawi and director of Makewana’s Daughters Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly:Scott Morrison has urged parents to ignore the “dangerous messages” of government MP George Christensen who suggested children should not get vaccinated against Covid. The prime minister on Tuesday rebuked the controversial Nationals MP and called on parents to instead listen to the “world’s best regulators”. Morrison has been under pressure to rein in Coalition MPs who consistently undermine the government’s health advice after Novak Djokovic was deported partly because his presence could “foster anti-vaccination sentiment”. “I strongly disagree with the message sent out by Mr Christensen regarding children’s vaccinations,” Morrison said in a statement. “It is contrary to the official professional medical advice provided to the government and I urge parents to disregard his dangerous messages in relation to vaccines.” Morrison said vaccinations were the country’s “primary weapon” against the Covid-19 virus. He noted more than 90% of Australians aged over 16 were now fully vaccinated. “If you are not vaccinated against the virus you are more likely to experience severe illness and die. Getting vaccinated saves lives,” he said. “This includes five to 11-year-olds who are provided with a special children’s vaccine that has been approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration. These are the same medical experts who approve all other vaccines for children in Australia. They are the world’s best medical regulators. “These are the experts that have the knowledge, accountability and experience to provide the credible and reliable advice that parents need to make important decisions about their child’s best interests.” Australia’s chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, also urged parents to “listen to the experts” in the wake of Christensen’s remarks, while the health minister, Greg Hunt, said he “plainly” disagreed with the Queenslander. “Get your children vaccinated, please bring your children forward,” Hunt said on Tuesday. “Vaccinations save lives. I would flatly, plainly disagree with anyone who said that.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Kelly said people should take the advice of commonwealth and state chief medical officers and the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi), which was among “the best experts on immunisation in the world”. “We are of one voice – it is very important for children, now down to the age of five, to be vaccinated, and so please go ahead with that, and listen to the experts,” the chief medical officer said. In an attempt to promote his podcast, Christensen flagged he would “break the internet” with his call not to vaccinate children. On his Facebook page, Christensen said the podcast episode was “too hot” and would be censored by the tech giant. “I can’t even show you the title but I can tell you every parent should listen to it,” he said. The “Do NOT Vax Your Children” episode features an interview with Dr Robert Malone who claims to have invented mRNA technology but has reportedly been banned from Twitter for violations of its Covid-19 misinformation policy. Christensen, and several other Coalition MPs, have become vocal critics of the government’s vaccination program – campaigning against mandates and raising concerns about adverse events. Hunt, who like Morrison has this week rejected suggestions of a double standard over the treatment of Djokovic, said on Tuesday the government was “pro-vaccination”. “Wherever people have said things that are anti-vax, we disagree with them, whether that is people in our own movement, I disagree,” Hunt said. “Frankly, the anti-vaxxers aren’t just losing the debate, they’ve lost the debate. We’re at a 95% national 16-plus vaccination ... and it’s the Australian public, the Australian medical workforce, in partnership with local, state, territory and federal governments that have achieved that. So we’ll just keep going and we want that number to go higher.” According to the Therapeutic Goods Administration, evidence from clinical trials and real-world experience from overseas indicates that side-effects most commonly seen in the five to 11 age group were “mild and temporary”, similar to the safety profile in older populations. In clinical trials of over 2,000 children, most side-effects were reported in the first two to three days after vaccination, with the most common being a sore arm (70% of children), headache (25%) and tiredness (25%). In the US, where 8.7m doses have been administered to children in this age bracket, reports of more serious effects following vaccination were “extremely rare” with 100 reports from the 8.7m vaccine doses. Myocarditis – which is an inflammation of the heart – was also very rare in this age group with 11 mild cases from more than 8m doses. Kelly said the real-world experience gave Australian authorities additional assurance about the safety of the vaccine for children. “We have the advantage of watching multiple millions of children of that age group of five to 11 with the first and the second doses in the US [and] they have not seen a single issue in terms of severe safety signals,” he said. “We were looking very closely at that and so that’s a real reassurance that real-world experience, plus the TGA tick and Atagi in terms of safety and efficacy. [Vaccines] do work … particularly against severe disease in children the same as they do in adults.” More than 379,000 child vaccines have now been administered in Australia with Hunt saying that this number was expected to top 500,000 in the coming days.A minute into Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers’ 1959 standard Moanin’, its bluesy piano refrain is blown open by the piercing burst of a single trumpet note. That is Lee Morgan at 20 years old, soloing with a confidence that would come to define the so-called “hard bop” sound of jazz label Blue Note. At 18, he had already played with legendary composer Dizzy Gillespie and, by 19, he was accompanying John Coltrane. By 33, he was dead – shot by his partner Helen. Joining the ranks of pioneering jazz musicians who died too young, like Clifford Brown and Albert Ayler, Morgan never reached household name status like fellow trumpeters Miles Davis, Louis Armstrong or Chet Baker. Yet he was well on his way, with an astonishing 25 albums recorded as a bandleader for Blue Note and countless appearances as a sideman. Much like his life was cut short, so is his legacy – pressed to wax and then resigned to the archive. Kasper Collin’s 2016 documentary I Called Him Morgan is a masterful and much-needed act of remembrance, bringing Morgan’s genius back to life, as well as examining his downfall with a compassion that avoids reducing its tragedy into a true crime saga. We begin like the meandering and unpredictable opening of an instrumental solo with the swaggering figure of Larry Reni Thomas, a jazz DJ and North Carolina teacher. In the early 90s, he discovered that Morgan’s widow Helen was attending his adult education class and subsequently persuaded her to give him an interview in February 1996, only a month before she died. Helen’s half-swallowed voice comes to us through the tape hiss to describe her childhood growing up in Wilmington and having two children at only 13 and 14 out of wedlock before leaving them in North Carolina with her grandparents and moving to New York at 17. There, her apartment became a hang for musicians – largely due to the pot of beans she would always have on the stove. We then cut to Morgan – 13 years Helen’s junior – as remarkable footage of him playing with Gillespie and Blakey in the late 1950s showcases a towering creative force hidden within the fresh-faced, emaciated frame of a teenager. Talking heads including saxophonist Wayne Shorter, Gillespie’s drummer Charli Persip and bassist Larry Ridley spell out his precocious genius, while the black-and-white photos of Blue Note co-founder Francis Wolff express the cool camaraderie of now-legendary recording sessions. With only a 1971 recorded interview of Morgan available, his horn does most of the speaking throughout the film, building an impressionistic image that encircles the man behind the music. Signifiers of his self-destruction begin to weave their way into Collin’s narrative though: the head bandage concealing a burn wound sustained after a heroin overdose; his adrenaline-fuelled need to race his car through Central Park; the anecdote of his turning up to a session after selling his shoes for drugs. He is eventually booted out of his groups and ends up on the street without a coat and with a mouthful of broken teeth. One day, Helen sees him and offers shelter from the snow. They soon become “confidantes and lovers”, the composer Benny Maupin recounts. Morgan gets clean and gets back to music with Helen as his manager. As his star once again ascends, though, he begins an affair and Helen is sidelined. Through the whirring of the tape recording she tells us how she battled through a February snowdrift to see Morgan play a show at New York’s Slugs club in 1972, as they were becoming estranged. He had totaled his car on the way to the venue and between shaky sets they had an argument. Then, “we heard two pops and that was it,” saxophonist Billy Harper solemnly recounts. Morgan is shot and, while the ambulance spends an hour battling through the weather to get to him, he bleeds to death. Just as breath builds pressure to produce a horn’s note, so Collin’s narrative in I Called Him Morgan is shrouded in evocative atmospheres of sound, archive images and snippets of testimony that build to the climax of this murder. Ultimately, it is a film not just for jazz fans; it is the story of the bonds made through crisis and the chaos that ensues when that crisis consumes. The questions that remain reflect the incompleteness of Morgan’s life and music, as well as the faltering continuation of Helen’s, who moved back to Wilmington after her jail sentence for manslaughter and spent her time volunteering in the church. She died before she could complete her interview with Thomas. All we are left with are voices, memories, and – perhaps most importantly – the wordless stories of music. I Called Him Morgan is available on Netflix in the US and UKAs he steps out of the mosque on the banks of the Kholpetua River, Mohammed Sabud Ali looks out at a view he has seen several times a day for most of his life. But never before has the sprawling Sundarbans mangrove forest felt so important to him. The vast Sundarbans has always protected Bangladeshi coastal communities from the violent cyclones that regularly crash in from the Bay of Bengal, and they have always harvested its resources. But now, as the climate crisis encroaches, people are becoming even more dependent on the forest. Ali lives on the island of Gabura, at the entrance to the Sundarbans. Gabura is so exposed to the climate that it is best known for the numbers of people who have abandoned it. Rarely does a year pass without cyclones that break the embankments, leading to salt water flooding in and making the land infertile. Those who stay on Gabura have few options for making a living; they can work on boats, as day labourers, or turn to the Sundarbans itself. “We are dependent on the river and the forests. Everyone goes now to the forests. For honey, fish, crabs,” says Ali, who is in his 50s. The island is defined by the rivers that snake through the Sundarbans. Pairs of crab catchers sit on the small canoes that dot that vast Kholpetua, filling their nets as much as they can during fishing trips that last days. They return to Gabura’s small docks, the entry point for produce from the Sundarbans to labourers, cows and motorbikes returning from the mainland. The whole tattered embankment, still damaged by the last cyclone, is lined with boats, tied up and being repaired before their next journey into the mangroves. Gabura is one of numerous settlements along the long frontier between Bangladesh’s coast and the Sundarbans that rely on the forest for a living. Most locals say that dependency is increasing, raising fears that the forest could be pushed too far by businesses and tourism, threatening the delicate ecosystem. The government imposes a licence system restricting entry to the forest. For locals, who have few other options, the licences are a nuisance. “There are maybe 100 licences at a time and 10,000 people needing to go to the forest,” says Ali. “In the name of saving nature, they put our lives at risk.” Climate change has made the region poorer, with almost 50% living in poverty, according to the World Bank. Cyclones have increased migration, whether for seasonal labour or longer-term resettlement. According to a report last year by Anti-Slavery International, this has had a knock-on effect, making people more vulnerable to modern slavery. Traffickers target people who want to migrate, or lure them with promises of work to places such as Dublar Char – a remote Sundarbans island where children can be found working in fish processing. Bishawjit Mallick, a researcher at Dresden University of Technology, who grew up in the region, says he has seen dependency on the forest increase during his lifetime but that business interests have also driven activity. Previously, a select number of villagers took responsibility for the forests, catching only what was within the reach of their small boats, but as Bangladesh’s road network has developed, big business has turned hungrily towards the region’s resources. “If I recall,” says Mallick, “30 years ago, there was not too much extraction from the Sundarbans. There were some specific groups who took for their needs – fish, crabs or to cut from the golpata tree – but it was not so many. “It was a specific group and everyone knew who they were. My grandfather used to call a specific person who he knew could bring honey for us. “There was a harmonious relationship – they realised they shouldn’t extract everything, but over time as others got involved to go there for tourism, for business, then the relationship changed. Small fishermen couldn’t survive because of the big businessmen,” he says. A survey of more than 1,000 households published by Mallick last year found that almost all villagers nearby relied on the forest to some extent, especially young people who had received little education. The study argued that the future relied on decreasing dependency by diversifying livelihoods, making communities more resilient and regulating access more effectively. “Now we see the Sundarbans is still producing lots of trees and resources but if you go to the interior, deep into the centre, you will see a lot of vacant spaces,” he said. “When the threshold has been reached, when people cannot take any more, then it will be a big issue. They will lose its protection from cyclones.” The forest also poses dangers, with pirates and bandits kidnapping villagers who venture inside and holding them for ransom. There is also the threat of Bengal tigers, which still roam the forests despite being pushed close to extinction by human settlement. Abdul Hakim, 61, a retired teacher, says: “We also fear the forest; my elder brother was killed here by a tiger when he was collecting shrimps and I’ve been scared of it since.” In the 20 years since his brother’s death, he has seen his pupils and his own family become increasingly reliant on the forest for their living. “Our people come here for everything: they catch crabs, they come here to collect honey, to collect firewood,” he says. “We’re entirely dependent on the Sunderbans. We live by it and die by it.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The Perrottet government will have to rework large parts of the environmental impact statement for its proposal to raise the Warragamba dam wall, according to officials responsible for assessing the project. New South Wales environment officials have told the government its analysis, published in September, has failed to properly assess or justify impacts to the Greater Blue Mountains world heritage area that would be caused by the $1.6bn plan to raise the wall by up to 17 metres. In responses published by the department of planning, industry and environment, Heritage NSW and the department’s environment, energy and science division (EES) both offered significant criticisms of the project. The environment division’s response identified numerous problems with the assessment including that an evaluation of the project’s impact on world heritage values had been based on “incorrect assumptions”. Officials wrote that the assessment of the WaterNSW project also incorrectly excluded Aboriginal heritage from the world heritage values of the area and there was a risk that sites of high cultural value had not been identified. “EES does not consider the impacts of the project on the natural and cultural values of the national parks estate and Greater Blue Mountains World Heritage Area have been adequately assessed or justified,” Dean Knudson, the deputy secretary of biodiversity, conservation and science wrote in the 88-page response. Among their concerns, environment officials wrote that the assessment’s conclusion that the project would have minimal impact on threatened species was “not supported by the data or evidence”. The EIS also had not addressed requests from the World Heritage Committee that the government fully consider all potential impacts to the outstanding universal values of the area, including Aboriginal cultural values, or whether raising the wall would exacerbate bushfire risk and threaten the recovery of species and habitat. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Environment officials highlighted inadequate surveys of threatened species habitat and wrote the assessment of aquatic ecology had failed to identify that raising the dam wall would result in inundation of about 284km of rivers and streams during floods. They said while WaterNSW had correctly identified the process for sourcing environmental offsets for the project, it had failed to identify the actual location of proposed offsets or whether the offsets requirements could even be met. In a separate response, Heritage NSW wrote the assessment underestimated the area’s cultural significance. It said the impact to Aboriginal cultural heritage values would be significant. Heritage NSW’s executive director Sam Kidman wrote that the “presence and clear expression of dreaming stories and songlines in the archaeological record of the Burragorang Valley” was unique and could not be offset, even if similar sites were identified. The response states that clear concerns raised by the Aboriginal community had not been addressed “and there has not been a concerted effort to redesign or appropriately mitigate the impacts”. The department has published 2,088 public submissions responding to the EIS. An analysis it commissioned of 2,067 responses found 1,931 were opposed to the project. Of those objections, the most frequently raised concerns were about impacts on biodiversity (raised in 80% of submissions), the world heritage area (50% of submissions) and cultural heritage sites (47% of submissions). The NSW ministerial reshuffle last month means the new infrastructure minister, Rob Stokes, has joint carriage of the dam project with Stuart Ayres, the minister for western Sydney. A final decision, though, would still sit with the government as a whole, a spokesperson for Stokes said. Harry Burkitt, of the Colong Foundation for Wilderness, said the responses from government agencies demonstrated “the farcical nature of the entire EIS process” and the “complete failure of due diligence”. “For the past four years, minister Stuart Ayres and his departments, WaterNSW and Infrastructure NSW, have attempted to force the NSW government into supporting the raising of the Warragamba dam wall. Their attempts have now comprehensively failed,” he said. Kazan Brown is a Gundungurra woman whose great-great-great-grandfather, John Joseph Riley, owned land at Burnt Flat, which is in the inundation zone. She said the written advice of both environment officials and Heritage NSW reiterated “everything we’ve said from the start”. “The consultation [from WaterNSW] was useless, it wasn’t real,” she said. “What they did was they came and told us what they were going to do and they went and did it and didn’t care what we had to say. “All along we have said the cultural surveys and assessments had not been properly done.” A letter from the department asks WaterNSW to make several changes, including conducting a more comprehensive survey of Aboriginal cultural heritage values and of likely impacts to the world heritage area. It also asks WaterNSW to detail the proposed offsets for all damage the project would cause. A spokesperson for WaterNSW said: “WaterNSW will now review the submissions received during the public exhibition and address the issues raised in a submissions report to the Department of Planning and Environment”. Comment was sought from the minister for western Sydney, Stuart Ayres.I have a wonderful partner, and we’re getting married next year after three years together. We live together, and both work quite intense jobs. I’ve always been quite a sexual person, but recently my libido has fallen off a cliff. It’s like I don’t even have sex organs any more, which is a bit frightening. My partner has a high sex drive and I worry he is unfulfilled, despite saying he doesn’t mind. I think he takes it personally, but I love him very much. We are often not in the house at the same time and keep quite different hours because of his job. I have had a traumatic year, with a few bereavements and family illness, and wonder if this has affected my sex drive. My question is, how can I get it back? Bereavement and trauma are two fairly common reasons for lowered libido. This is normally temporary, but you need time to recover and heal. Help your partner to understand your lack of desire is not about him – ask him to be patient. And try not to let your anxiety about your libido escalate, as that could make things worse. Any kind of loss can lead to depression, and it could be worth seeking some therapeutic help if you don’t feel like yourself pretty soon. Like anxiety, depression is another likely culprit when libido drops. Many people have become depressed as a result of the losses of our time – lockdowns, health issues, curbs on our freedoms, financial struggles and job losses – and sexual problems often follow. Mental and sexual health can never be taken for granted. Now more than ever, we must find ways to soothe, nurture and sustain ourselves. This too shall pass. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.The cocktail of chemical pollution that pervades the planet now threatens the stability of global ecosystems upon which humanity depends, scientists have said. Plastics are of particularly high concern, they said, along with 350,000 synthetic chemicals including pesticides, industrial compounds and antibiotics. Plastic pollution is now found from the summit of Mount Everest to the deepest oceans, and some toxic chemicals, such as PCBs, are long-lasting and widespread. The study concludes that chemical pollution has crossed a “planetary boundary”, the point at which human-made changes to the Earth push it outside the stable environment of the last 10,000 years. Chemical pollution threatens Earth’s systems by damaging the biological and physical processes that underpin all life. For example, pesticides wipe out many non-target insects, which are fundamental to all ecosystems and, therefore, to the provision of clean air, water and food. “There has been a fiftyfold increase in the production of chemicals since 1950 and this is projected to triple again by 2050,” said Patricia Villarrubia-Gómez, a PhD candidate and research assistant at the Stockholm Resilience Centre (SRC) who was part of the study team. “The pace that societies are producing and releasing new chemicals into the environment is not consistent with staying within a safe operating space for humanity.” Dr Sarah Cornell, an associate professor and principal researcher at SRC, said: “For a long time, people have known that chemical pollution is a bad thing. But they haven’t been thinking about it at the global level. This work brings chemical pollution, especially plastics, into the story of how people are changing the planet.” Some threats have been tackled to a larger extent, the scientists said, such as the CFC chemicals that destroy the ozone layer and its protection from damaging ultraviolet rays. Determining whether chemical pollution has crossed a planetary boundary is complex because there is no pre-human baseline, unlike with the climate crisis and the pre-industrial level of CO2 in the atmosphere. There are also a huge number of chemical compounds registered for use – about 350,000 – and only a tiny fraction of these have been assessed for safety. So the research used a combination of measurements to assess the situation. These included the rate of production of chemicals, which is rising rapidly, and their release into the environment, which is happening much faster than the ability of authorities to track or investigate the impacts. The well-known negative effects of some chemicals, from the extraction of fossil fuels to produce them to their leaking into the environment, were also part of the assessment. The scientists acknowledged the data was limited in many areas, but said the weight of evidence pointed to a breach of the planetary boundary. “There’s evidence that things are pointing in the wrong direction every step of the way,” said Prof Bethanie Carney Almroth at the University of Gothenburg who was part of the team. “For example, the total mass of plastics now exceeds the total mass of all living mammals. That to me is a pretty clear indication that we’ve crossed a boundary. We’re in trouble, but there are things we can do to reverse some of this.” Villarrubia-Gómez said: “Shifting to a circular economy is really important. That means changing materials and products so they can be reused, not wasted.” The researchers said stronger regulation was needed and in the future a fixed cap on chemical production and release, in the same way carbon targets aim to end greenhouse gas emissions. Their study was published in the journal Environmental Science &amp; Technology There are growing calls for international action on chemicals and plastics, including the establishment of a global scientific body for chemical pollution akin to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Prof Sir Ian Boyd at the University of St Andrews, who was not part of the study, said: “The rise of the chemical burden in the environment is diffuse and insidious. Even if the toxic effects of individual chemicals can be hard to detect, this does not mean that the aggregate effect is likely to be insignificant. “Regulation is not designed to detect or understand these effects. We are relatively blind to what is going on as a result. In this situation, where we have a low level of scientific certainty about effects, there is a need for a much more precautionary approach to new chemicals and to the amount being emitted to the environment.” Boyd, a former UK government chief scientific adviser, warned in 2017 that assumption by regulators around the world that it was safe to use pesticides at industrial scales across landscapes was false. The chemical pollution planetary boundary is the fifth of nine that scientists say have been crossed, with the others being global heating, the destruction of wild habitats, loss of biodiversity and excessive nitrogen and phosphorus pollution.Labour has called on the government to immediately withdraw a proposed law that would allow the Democratic Unionist party leader to “double job” at Westminster and Stormont. The shadow Northern Ireland secretary, Peter Kyle, said Labour would vote against the government and had tabled the amendment to the Northern Ireland (ministers, elections and petitions of concern) bill, having “clearly failed the sufficient consensus” among Northern Ireland parties to support the move. The plan for Sir Jeffrey Donaldson prompted a row over the weekend with four of the five political parties in Stormont opposing it and another party leader branding it a “corrupt” pact between the DUP and the government. Donaldson has categorically denied there is any secret deal with the government and said the first to propose the double mandate was the Labour party last summer. However, Kyle said the plan was never tabled by the frontbench after Labour spoke to leaders in Northern Ireland who were opposed to it. “Controversial changes such as reintroducing dual mandates requires broad agreement across parties. The Conservative government has clearly failed to achieve the sufficient consensus to proceed,” he said. “The Westminster government had plenty of time to explore this but chose not to do so. To force this through now risks further destabilising an already fragile political landscape in the approach to elections. “The government should withdraw their amendment as it is opposed by four of the five Stormont executive parties. If not, Labour will oppose this measure in parliament.” The chair of the Northern Ireland affairs committee, Simon Hoare, described the move as a bad idea and urged the House of Lords to reject the relevant amendment to proposed legislation. So far, Donaldson is the only MP to confirm he will run in the local assembly elections in May. The proposals would temporarily restore a practice that was banned in 2016. The double-jobbing proposal has been roundly condemned by all the other parties, with the SDLP MP Claire Hanna telling Good Morning Ulster that it was impossible to bilocate jobs and any attempt to do so would lead to “worse government” in Northern Ireland. The Ulster Unionist party member of the legislative assembly Mike Nesbitt said the plan “reeks of corruption”, claiming Boris Johnson’s government was “going out of its way to prop up and support one party”. Donaldson categorically denied there was any pact with the UK government, telling BBC’s Good Morning Ulster on Monday: “There is no agreement on this between the DUP and the government.” The DUP hit out at the “fake outrage” by political opponents, saying the proposal would bring stability to Northern Ireland “at a time when devolution is deeply unstable because of a one-sided and undemocratic [Brexit] protocol”. The Alliance party deputy leader and North Down MP, Stephen Farry, described the move as a “backwards step” and said there had been a lack of consultation on the issue. “Doing this so close to an election campaign is interfering in the democratic process,” he said. Michelle O’Neill, Northern Ireland’s deputy first minister and vice-president of Sinn Féin, which does not take its seats in Westminster, described it as “disgraceful interference in the upcoming assembly election”.The Tennis Australia board has come out in support of its under-pressure chief executive, Craig Tiley, while acknowledging it “deeply regrets” the distraction the Novak Djokovic deportation saga caused other Australian Open players. The Jayne Hrdlicka-led board, which has been quiet throughout the two weeks of the scandal, finally broke its silence on Tuesday evening to note it “respects the decision of the immigration minister and the finding of the federal court of Australia” in cancelling Djokovic’s visa and then dismissing his bid to have it restored. “Tennis Australia has been working closely with both the federal and Victorian government for the past year to deliver a Covid-safe Australian Open for the players, staff, and fans,” the board said in a statement. “Embarking on a major international sporting event during a global pandemic that continues to evolve and challenge us all, is profoundly demanding for all stakeholders. “The board and member associations commend the Tennis Australia CEO and the entire Tennis Australia team for their hard work and dedication to delivering a spectacular summer of tennis.” Tiley, who is also the tournament director, has found himself in the firing line over Tennis Australia’s role in allowing the unvaccinated Djokovic to fly to Melbourne under the belief that a medical exemption approved by TA and a Victorian government independent expert panel would be sufficient to enter Australia. Tiley, who has not spoken publicly since Djokovic left the country on Sunday night, has faced calls to resign over the crisis which sparked an international diplomatic tit-for-tat and highly charged domestic political finger-pointing. Australian tennis great John Newcombe has questioned the absence of the board throughout the saga, while former TA president Steve Healy demanded an explanation about what it knew. “Surely the board were aware of this? They should have been,” Healy told Nine. “It’s such a large reputational risk, not just in terms of the tournament but the relationship with government. If it’s just been run by management, I’d say, why weren’t the board involved?” The board ultimately has the power to terminate Tiley’s employment but any suggestion it might do so appears to have been quashed. Tuesday’s lengthy statement – in stark contrast to Sunday’s short and belated tweet – mentioned Tennis Australia’s achievements in staging “one of the world’s greatest sporting events” but also addressed the issue that has overshadowed the first grand slam of the year. “As the Australian tennis family, we recognise that recent events have been a significant distraction for everyone, and we deeply regret the impact this had on all players,” it said. “There are always lessons to learn, and we will review all aspects of our preparation and implementation to inform our planning – as we do every year. That process always starts once the Australian Open champions have lifted their trophies.”The AFL has “immoral form” and is “corrupting and compromising the sport” with deals such as its $25m sponsorship deal with cryptocurrency firm Crypto.com, Reverend Tim Costello of the Alliance for Gambling Reform has said. The AFL announced the five-year partnership on Tuesday, saying Crypto.com would be the official cryptocurrency exchange and trading platform for the AFL and the AFLW. Crypto.com is a trading platform for cryptocurrencies, digital encrypted currencies that allow payments to be made without banks. It also offers pre-paid debit cards. The company already has deals with international sporting brands including Formula One and UFC. It will also run an advertisement featuring actor Matt Damon at the Super Bowl in February. The AFL’s chief executive, Gillon McLachlan, said on announcing the deal that “cryptocurrency and blockchain technology is a dynamic and emerging industry, and the AFL is delighted to partner with Crypto.com to be at the forefront of the industry’s growth in Australia”. Costello, the Alliance for Gambling Reform’s chief advocate, said in theory there was a “bigger cake” with cryptocurrency than conventional gambling, which was an entirely “zero sum” game. But both were compromising the AFL’s integrity, he said. “The sport is meant to be a sport, and all these add ons just because they say they need the money, chip away at the integrity of the sport. “You are literally corrupting and compromising the sport with all these other alternatives.” Costello said the AFL’s history with sports betting made him “suspicious” about the new deal. “The AFL has really immoral form, utterly immoral form on this,” he said. “AFL clubs have got out of pokies, by and large, but the AFL hasn’t moved an inch on Sportsbet and saturation ads.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning David Glance, a cryptocurrency expert and University of Western Australia computer scientist said crypto companies were trying to gain legitimacy through various sponsorship deals. As the deal was announced, Crypto.com’s customer support account on social media was responding to complaints from multiple users that they had been kicked out of their accounts, with some of them saying they had lost money. “We have a small number of users reporting suspicious activity on their accounts,” the company tweeted. “We will be pausing withdrawals shortly, as our team is investigating. All funds are safe.” Some users responded claiming their accounts had been hacked and their money was missing. Podcaster Ben Baller said about $18,000 went missing from his account, then later said it had been returned. The chief executive of Crypto.com, Kris Marszalek, said no customer funds were lost. “The downtime of withdrawal [infrastructure] was [about] 14 hours – our team has hardened the infrastructure in response to the incident,” he wrote on Twitter. “We will share a full post mortem after the internal investigation is completed.” In a press release detailing the deal with the AFL, Marszalek said Crypto.com was “committed to investing in Australia”. “The AFL and AFLW are perfect platforms to associate ourselves with Australian sports and culture,” he said. Glance said it was “strange” for sporting organisations to become involved in cryptocurrency, although less so when one considered they are often also involved with gambling companies. “Someone in the AFL thought this was a good idea, but I don’t think they’ve thought it through,” he said. “[Cryptocurrency] is an environmental catastrophe and it’s fuelling crypto crime. The people benefiting from this are doing it at the expense of people who lose money, and the environment.” It is estimated that “mining” cryptocurrency uses so much computer power that it burns more energy than entire countries. Guardian Australia revealed earlier this week that Australia’s financial security agency, Austrac, had concerns about a rise in crime as the use of cryptocurrencies increases. Cryptocurrencies are also often criticised for having no underlying value and relying on new investors to deliver returns to existing investors. The AFL and Crypto.com have been contacted for comment.Abdullah*, 34, was a security guard for the British embassy, employed under contract by GardaWorld, and had a senior management role, looking after other locally employed embassy guards. He and about 180 colleagues had hoped to be evacuated to the UK at the end of August, but the evacuation was stopped by a bomb at the airport. The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) made a clear commitment that all GardaWorld staff would be allowed to travel to the UK, but this has not happened. We’ve heard nothing from the Home Office or the FCDO and life is becoming very hard for everyone who worked for the British embassy. Surviving when there is no income and no work is very difficult. We’re still hoping we will get an email about evacuation plans, but we haven’t heard anything. The UK government is helping footballers and writers to leave the country, but there has been no help for us. We feel like we should be first in line because we risked our lives for the British government. It’s a huge disappointment for all of us. All of the guards from the French embassy have been evacuated; the German and Australian governments are still evacuating embassy staff now; the Canadian government has even evacuated the cleaners and carpenters; but the British embassy, which was one of the largest embassies in Kabul, has left us. We wonder why we’ve been forgotten. Do they see us as a threat to them? Most of us have already sold our possessions – televisions, carpets, everything – so that we’ve got money to buy food. People are out on the streets selling things every day, but you can’t get much for your things, you have to accept about 30% of the real value. I’ve sold our car, and have managed to get the landlord to halve our rent from $400 to $200 a month, and I’m lucky to have a brother in the UK who is able to send a bit of money to support us. But everything has become so expensive in the markets, the money won’t last long. One of the guards called me last week, crying, and said he had sold everything apart from the mobile he was talking on; he said he was keeping it so he could check for an email from the British government with news of an evacuation plan. We’re sending emails every day, but they just say: you have to wait. My daughter is four and a half, and should be going to nursery, but there’s nothing. We keep her and her brother, who’s two and a half, at home most of the time because it doesn’t feel safe to go out. If anyone found out I had worked for the British government it would be very dangerous; one of my former colleagues has already been badly beaten. We don’t leave the house very often now. A UK government spokesperson said: “The government will honour its commitments to resettle those British Council workers and GardaWorld employees who are at risk.” *The name has been changed for this article.Ben Roethlisberger is lucky that football legacies are not decided by finales. If Sunday night was indeed Big Ben’s last ever NFL game, as he has strongly hinted, it wasn’t exactly a mic drop. In the 42-21 beatdown by the Chiefs, Roethlisberger struggled with rollouts, and lacked the creativity and finesse of his opposing number, Patrick Mahomes. Just as no one places too much weight on Dan Marino’s 62-7 playoff loss to the Jaguars in his career finale, Roethlisberger’s clunker of an ending won’t be a significant part of his story. But in comparison to Marino – and most other quarterbacks – Roethlisberger’s legacy is complicated. His on-field success over an 18-season NFL career speaks for itself. Roethlisberger is a two-time Super Bowl winner and will one day be enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame. The Steelers haven’t suffered a single losing season with him under center. In turn, they’ve been a playoff staple – during Sunday’s loss Roethlisberger passed Joe Montana and Brett Favre for the third-most career passing yards in the playoffs. Injuries and age have taken their toll, and in recent years the team often won in spite of their quarterback rather than because of him. Roethlisberger in his prime, though, was an absolute marvel. With his signature pump fakes and ability to escape pressure, he had a habit of extending plays and converting first downs that didn’t seem possible … until they were. He wasn’t flashy like younger quarterbacks such as Mahomes, Lamar Jackson and Josh Allen. Nor was he a quarterback like Tom Brady or Aaron Rodgers, who often seem five steps ahead of opposing defensive coordinators. He was just Ben. Gritty. Strong. Tough. While Roethlisberger’s farewell tour has come with incessant gushing from teammates, broadcasters and Steelers fans, the NFL world at large doesn’t have the same fuzzy feelings. Some of that is Roethlisberger’s personality. He’s surly and can be difficult with the media. He also has a history of publicly calling out teammates. But most of the hostility stems from Roethlisberger’s history with women. ESPN’s Brian Griese spent the majority of Week 18’s Monday Night Football broadcast talking up Roethlisberger as if he were the Messiah. At one point, Griese paused his lovefest to channel his inner journalist and vaguely mention that Roethlisberger has “made some mistakes.” The first “mistake” occurred in 2008 when Roethlisberger was accused of sexual assault by Andrea McNulty, then an employee of a Lake Tahoe hotel and casino. McNulty said she was lured to his hotel room under the guise of fixing a broken television. Her complaint alleges that Roethlisberger blocked the door when she tried to leave. According to the lawsuit the quarterback grabbed her and then tried to kiss her. Roethlisberger denied the allegations and never faced any criminal charges. He reached an out of court settlement with McNulty in 2011. The NFL did not punish Roethlisberger. McNulty, on the other hand, was the recipient of backlash from those who did not like to think of their favorite quarterback as an alleged sexual assaulter. McNulty later suffered from depression. In 2010, another accusation surfaced when a 20-year-old college student in Georgia claimed that Roethlisberger assaulted her in the bathroom stall of a nightclub. Her complaint alleged that Roethlisberger’s bodyguard grabbed the woman’s arm and escorted her to a hallway where the quarterback was waiting with “his penis out of his pants.” She says he went on to rape her and a subsequent medical examination of the woman found “superficial laceration and bruising and slight bleeding in the genital area” although no semen was detected. The case was dropped after authorities cited insufficient evidence. Roethlisberger was questioned by just one police officer who coincidentally had asked Roethlisberger to pose for a photo earlier that night and allegedly later described the accuser as a “drunken bitch”. The NFL finally swooped in with a six-game suspension for violating the league’s personal conduct policy but later reduced it to four games for “good behavior.” Yes, an accused rapist received the same punishment from the league as Tom Brady for releasing air from footballs. Roethlisberger already had a history of reckless behavior, most notably when he crashed his motorcycle in 2006, suffering serious facial injuries. He was not wearing a helmet and it was reported that he did not have a valid license at the time of the crash. By the time of his suspension, many in the Steelers organization had tired of Roethlisberger’s behavior. One of the team’s other star players, receiver Hines Ward, said the NFL suspension was “justified”, adding: “When you’re in the quarterback position, everybody looks to you and there are certain situations you can’t put yourself in.” Since then Roethlisberger has stayed out of trouble. He married in 2011 and is a father of three. And he went on to win a lot more football games, an achievement that was more than enough for many fans to forget about his past. Roethlisberger is, of course, not the only alleged rapist to be embraced by his team’s fanbase. But there’s something especially difficult to swallow as we consider him as a player and person. When we consider that the quarterback is supposed to be the ultimate leader. From a talent standpoint, the Steelers have been lucky to have a future Hall of Famer under center for so many years. But that same future Hall of Famer is far luckier that the actions he’s accused of didn’t ruin him. Roethlisberger was accused before Ray Rice punched his wife on camera and the league was forced to pretend it cares about its players’ behavior off the field. What if these accusations had come out during the more recent #MeToo movement? There are a variety of sliding doors scenarios that could have led to us bidding adieu to Big Ben years ago. But instead we’ve had 18 years of Roethlisberger – glorious for some, uncomfortable and infuriating for many.There can be no excuse for not knowing Olive Senior – who has recently taken over as poet laureate of Jamaica, where she was born (although she has lived in Canada for much of her adult life). Yet I have to admit that I had, unaccountably, not read her until now, and after days immersed in her splendid Hurricane Watch: New and Collected Poems, I have emerged with the sense of having met a life-enhancing person through the most beguiling poetry – filled with intransigent tropical gardens, singular birds and a keen social conscience. I cannot think of a better way to read your way into 2022. Olive Senior – the name itself nudging towards becoming a poem – has an inclusive attitude towards her work and never disdains humble things. She will give full, equal and affectionate attention to mango trees, magpies and even to a Christmas pudding (a recent, gorgeous poem, soaked in rum) as well as to global and racial injustice and environmental issues. There are playful, shaped poems here too: an egg about to hatch, a nutmeg charged with history, slanting rain. She is unlofty, humorously humane and I read her back-to-front, beginning at the end, focusing on her fine new work and later learning, by chance, how she has propped herself and readers up, internationally, during the pandemic. Between May and September 2020, Senior produced Pandemic Poems: First Wave, what she describes as “a pandemic lexicon” (which she has since self-published), with each poem a “riff on a word or phrase trending through the period” – and it is worth perusing these. She makes no swanky claim for them, freely admitting that “what I needed to say was more important than the saying of it (which is not how I usually write)”. But readers on Facebook and Twitter were entranced and the poems have, however modest she is about them, been a runaway hit (or, in lockdown, a stay-put hit). In her preface, she marvels at the “instant call-and-response offered by poetry in the moment”, which, she suggests, “takes us back to the dawn of humanity”. She is keen to promote democratic, down-to earth writing in the West Indies and beyond, and to remind us that poetry is for everyone (to read and write) and can help in times of need. These coronavirus poems are slight, sympathetic and binding: about social distancing, contact tracing and (one of my favourites) desperate measures applied to the cutting of hair in lockdown. F for Flattening (the curve) is a reassuring mix of accepting what cannot be controlled and revelling in continuing wildness. Here, too, you get a tiny hint of her humour, the possibility that there is an absurdity attaching to our bumpy road. The Collected Poems, which start in 2007, are more evolved than the pandemic offerings but share the same atmosphere of staunch, warmly present empathy. A former journalist, Senior is a natural celebrator but is in no danger of idealising her beloved Jamaica or the world beyond. In her outstanding poem Dead Straight, she describes returning to Jamaica and finding the land disfigured by a “dead straight” highway for tourists; a pre-pandemic flattening of the curve. “Not a glimmer of the coastline as I try to make it home/to you through a forest of hotels as thick as thieves…” In this “new paradise”, she adds, “the only palms are greased”. But her triumph, here as elsewhere, is that although undeceived, she travels light and retains a gift for not taking life too seriously, which is, in itself, in our po-faced times, a serious undertaking. F for Flattening (the curve) We have beaten nature down Exalted straightness. But somewhere, are things we can never control: Wildness always trying to break in. When and where, unnoticed for how long did this bump in the road emerge this curve that so urgently needs flattening now? • Hurricane Watch by Olive Senior is published by Carcanet Press (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyEverton are all over the shop. Having sacked Rafa Benitez after laying off all the folk he didn’t want, they’ve been rebuffed in their efforts to force the Belgian FA into sharing Roberto Martínez. They’re now considering José Mourinho, for goodness sake. And now there are reports claiming owner Farhad Moshiri is considering upping sticks and cutting his losses. Given the pig’s lug he’s made of the last six managerial appointments, some may be quite sanguine about that particular prospect, but while it wouldn’t necessarily hinder, it wouldn’t necessarily help, either. And Everton could do with some help right now. Manchester United are a little bit further into the process of getting their house in order. To this end, they want Aston Villa heartbeat John McGinn, Lazio midfielder Sergej Milinkovic-Savic, and/or RB Leipzig’s Amadou Haidara. Newcastle United are the third – and longest-serving – members of the Shambolic Big Club Club. Today’s attempt to extricate themselves from the mess they’ve created comes in the form of a £25m offer for Duvan Zapata. Atalanta want nearly double that for the Colombian striker. Back to Manchester United, as it would seem they’re in for a fourth midfielder, Denis Zakaria of Borussia Mönchengladbach. Arsenal, Chelsea and Liverpool are all threatening to ruin that particular plan. Meanwhile Anthony Martial wants out, we’ve known this for quite some time. He’s drawn up a list of preferred destinations, and he’s aiming for the stars: Juventus, Barcelona and Sevilla. Barcelona are also in the running for Adama Traoré, and may even catch the speedy bugger. Tottenham hope to shepherd the Wolves winger to north London instead. One midfielder whose links to Old Trafford are cooling – so lump on, folks – is Aurélien Tchouaméni. The young Monaco man is reportedly off to Chelsea instead. And Rangers defender Borna Barisic, linked with a reunion with his old boss Steven Gerrard at Aston Villa, may have to settle for Watford instead. There are worse fates, such as writing up the day’s rumours on a winter’s morn when it’s below freezing. Don’t worry, though, we have thermal underwear and tea.The 1980s pop singer and actor Hazel O’Connor is recovering after what her family described as a “serious medical event”. O’Connor was found at home in southern France on Sunday and taken to hospital, where she was found to have suffered a bleed on the brain. She was placed in an induced coma for 24 hours while receiving treatment. Her brother Neil O’Connor wrote in a blog post that since being taken out of the coma on Monday, she has “been showing a lot of progress although, saying that, her recovery is going to take a while but she is tough and is responding to stimuli and to treatment. She’s receiving the best of care and I thank the French medical service there for taking such good care of her.” Neil added: “I’ve already learned that she’s started to show her usual feistiness.” O’Connor was a striking figure in the British pop scene in the early 1980s, after acting in the film Breaking Glass alongside Jonathan Pryce and Phil Daniels, and performing songs on its soundtrack. The album reached the Top 5, and two singles from it, Eighth Day and Will You?, landed in the Top 10 in 1980. Her solo album Sons and Lovers was released the same year, and she has continued to put out music ever since alongside roles in TV and theatre. O’Connor had been due to tour the UK, beginning in March. An announcement from her management is expected soon regarding these concerts.Dominic Raab has admitted that lying to parliament is “normally” a resigning matter, amid claims that the prime minister deliberately misled MPs over his knowledge of a Downing Street party. Boris Johnson’s former senior aide Dominic Cummings had earlier accused the prime minister of lying when No 10 denied Johnson had been warned against allowing a “bring your own booze” garden party during lockdown. The justice secretary said it was “nonsense” that Johnson had lied to MPs, saying he felt the prime minister’s account was to be believed. But he added that any deliberate falsehood in the Commons would leave Johnson in jeopardy. “If it’s lying, deliberate in the way you describe, if it’s not corrected immediately, it would normally, under the ministerial code and the governance around parliament, be a resigning matter,” Raab told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Tuesday. Raab had said on Sky News earlier that Johnson was “confident he’s been straightforward” with parliament and said the “PM has been very clear” that Cummings’ claims were “not true or accurate”. Johnson admitted to parliament last week that he attended drinks in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020 but claimed he had not realised it was a social gathering. Cummings wrote a blogpost on Monday challenging that account. He said he told Martin Reynolds, a senior official, that the invitation broke the rules and claimed Reynolds replied: “So long as it’s socially distanced I think it’s OK, I’ll check with the PM if he’s happy for it to go ahead.” Cummings said in his blogpost: “Not only me but other eyewitnesses who discussed this at the time would swear under oath this is what happened.” Sue Gray, the senior civil servant in charge of the inquiry into Downing Street lockdown parties, could make a formal request to interview Cummings, Whitehall sources confirmed. It is within the remit of the inquiry to approach former members of staff if their evidence might be relevant. No 10 staff had hoped that the inquiry, which is examining more than 15 separate allegations of illegal gatherings in Downing Street, would conclude this week. Because of the constant drip of new parties and developments, officials believe it may not report until next week. Cummings then said that, during a discussion over the future of the cabinet secretary and Reynolds, he had said to the prime minister something like: “Martin’s invited the building to a drinks party, this is what I’m talking about, you’ve got to grip this madhouse.” Cummings added: “The PM waved it aside. I had told him repeatedly the PPS [parliamentary private secretary] should be replaced, as had other competent officials who knew the whole structure needed a huge upgrade in personnel and management.”In the past three years, two babies born inside English prisons have died. In September 2019, a woman, now known as Ms A, gave birth alone in her cell at HMP Bronzefield and the baby died. In July 2020, a baby was stillborn at HMP Styal. Prison will never be a safe place for pregnant women, so why are our courts still sending them there? Geraldine Brown, Maria Garcia de Frutos and I set about trying to answer that question. Our research into pregnancy in English prisons (there are no women’s prisons in Wales), published this week, has convinced me that imprisoning pregnant women is disproportionate, cruel and simply unnecessary. Most of the 22 women who responded to our survey were in prison because they had been recalled by the probation service, which means that at the end of a prison term they were placed under probation supervision for one year, but then breached their probation conditions so were sent back inside. Some of these “breaches” included a missed probation appointment, changing address and shoplifting (in this case, committed by a woman who was 30 weeks pregnant and was homeless, living in a car park – she was returned to prison for 11 weeks). Two women were in prison on remand, awaiting their trial. The most common offence was shoplifting. Four were there for drug offences. Other offences included fraud, perjury, robbery and affray. Five of the women were sent to prison at a very late stage of pregnancy: three at 36 weeks, one at 35 weeks and one at 30 weeks. Sending pregnant women to prison is unnecessary. Multiple countries, including Russia, Brazil, Mexico and Colombia already have laws to prevent pregnant women going to prison. It is time for the UK to follow their example. English courts can and should use alternatives to imprisonment for pregnant women. If they were given community orders instead, the probation service would help them to access support, training, education and counselling at women’s centres, which offer support in a non-punitive setting. This kind of support is proven to be effective in helping women turn around lives that were previously chaotic. Non-punitive residential options, along the lines of therapeutic communities such as the Jasmine Mother’s Recovery in Plymouth and Phoenix Futures in Sheffield, should be created and sustained across England. I spent two days at Jasmine with the mothers and staff, and saw the nursery full of babies. The work they do is life-saving. It is accepting, non-judgmental and trauma-informed. This is what pregnant women in the criminal justice system need. In this all-female setting, women find protection from domestic violence, they care for themselves and for each other, for their unborn child, and for the baby once born. They receive highly skilled peer-mentoring and group counselling, which has proven to be effective in treating addiction. Out of court disposals are another alternative that police forces can use. They divert women from the criminal justice system, and, with the help of women’s centres, help them deal with difficult issues with their lives and avoid conflict with the law. The law must change. Whenever a pregnant woman is in court, a protocol should be activated to alert the court to issues concerning the need to protect pregnant women, mothers and their children. There must be absolutely no committal to custody on remand (which means they are held until they appear in court), or sentencing of a pregnant woman without a full assessment of dependent children or pregnancies by way of a bail information report or a pre-sentence report. Level Up, Birth Companions and Women in Prison are campaigning to change sentencing laws so that no pregnant woman will be sent to prison, and have launched a petition calling for Dominic Raab, the justice minister, to change sentencing laws. The starting point must be that no pregnant woman should be in custody. If custody is decided upon, the reasons must be stated and justified in open court. The mother whose baby died in Bronzefield prison was there on remand. This vulnerable young woman – 18 years old, eight months pregnant and unwell – was remanded in custody awaiting trial, and it was her first time in prison. After her baby had died, she was granted bail. Why was remand in custody ordered in the first place? No court decision should endanger the life of an unborn baby. Rona Epstein is an honorary research fellow at Coventry Law SchoolThere’s a lot going on in this fervent and cathartically personal movie from writer-director Matt Fifer, in which he himself stars as Ben, a young gay guy in New York who begins a relationship with Sam, played by Sheldon D Brown. (Brown also contributed personal material to story development, evidently in the form of personal trauma.) Sam has not come out to his work colleagues or his very religious father Francis (Michael Potts) and Ben has not yet been able to tell his mother Debbie (Sandra Bauleo) that he was abused as a child by his stepfather at their family home in Long Island, where the sound of the cicadas brings back complex, painful memories. So Ben’s suppression has resulted in anxiety and physical symptoms whose psychosomatic origin he has been unable to accept. The gentle, realist tone of the film is contrasted by the broader comic identity of some of the smaller roles: Ben’s wacky therapist Sophie (Cobie Smulders), who has a dog called Klonopin, and the faintly predatory guy called Bo (David Burtka) who hangs around while Ben does his secondary painting and decorating job. Scott Adsit (from TV’s 30 Rock) plays Ben’s long-suffering doctor who has to convince him that his problems, though real enough, need a doctor of a different kind to be treated. This is a watchable, fluent indie film with some lovely ambient cityscape shots of New York, though perhaps a little emotionally and dramatically unfocused. There are sympathetic, heartfelt performances from Fifer and Brown, and some funny material about the role played in their relationship by the children’s book The Very Hungry Caterpillar. • Cicada is released on 21 January in cinemas and digital platformsHaving personal conversations at work, in the days before mobile phones existed, could be perilous. Usually, you had to duck into an unoccupied desk space or wait until everyone was at lunch. But I worked on a trading floor – each desk crammed next to another, with everyone eating lunch there, too. Perilous didn’t begin to cover it. In addition, phones rang constantly, people shouted across the room or at each other, and market information was broadcast over the Tannoy while overhead TVs blared CNBC and Bloomberg News. Private conversations had to wait. Except the thing with love, especially fiery new love, is that it doesn’t wait. One day, early in my newlywed life, I got to work at 6.30am, as usual, fuming about an argument from the night before that my husband and I had failed to resolve. When he called me later that morning to “check in” (his code for “just making sure you agree I was right all along”), I lost it. A massive row ensued that lasted for, literally, hours. I had to conduct this angry marathon from under my desk, the only place I could find that had a semblance of privacy. Beneath my workstation, I curled in a foetal position, shrieking and sobbing, before coming up to take calls from clients, get prices from traders, confirm and complete trades, file the “tickets”, and then get back to marital war. I was new to the trading floor and new to marriage, and I definitely jeopardised both that day. But, as is often the case, there were silver linings: that row proved to be a bonding experience for me and the two (very English) guys who sat on either side of me. Appalled and petrified at the volcano of unfettered emotion erupting around their feet, they handled it the only way they knew: by pretending everything was fine. They ducked under my desk to get me when my clients called, offered me cups of tea (and Diet Coke) from time to time, and absolutely did not acknowledge that personal issues were being aired in front of them. Neither was married and I think that day extended their singledom by some margin, but their supportive efforts in my time of need were truly touching. Over the following years, that day was never again mentioned between us, but I know it marked us all for ever. I met one of them in 2019, after one of my comedy shows, and he opened with: “You’re still married! Ha! Good stuff.” I hear him. Sindhu Vee’s UK tour Alphabet runs until 18 February. Get information and tickets at sindhuvee.comThe Wolves winger Adama Traoré has said that “all too often in football the headlines are stolen by racist actions” as he joined Common Goal’s anti-racism project ARP. The Spain international joins a long list of footballers and managers who have pledged 1% of their salary via Common Goal, the social impact movement in global football. There are more than 200 professional players and managers from 45 nationalities on the team, including Pernille Harder, Paulo Dybala, Vivianne Miedema, Jürgen Klopp, Serge Gnabry, Christiane Endler and Giorgio Chiellini. Traoré said: “If I’ve learned anything in my career so far, it’s that leading with action rather than empty words is what counts in making a difference. I’ve become part of Common Goal in order to tackle racism through the anti-racist project. It’s important to me to use my platform to be part of the solution. “I know that my 1% alone isn’t going to fix this problem, and my voice alone won’t solve systemic racism. But, if I can encourage others to join us in this fight, nothing can stand in the way of the impact we can make together. All too often in football the headlines are stolen by racist actions.” ARP is an action-based programme aimed at ending racism in football though comprehensive anti-racism training for decision makers such as club owners and presidents, professional and grassroots coaches, players of all levels, and fans. ARP launched last year in the US with a coalition of industry leaders including clubs such as Chicago Fire, Angel City and Oakland Roots, plus professional players including the Manchester City and United States goalkeeper Zack Steffen, and also the largest fan group in the country, the American Outlaws. After the success of ARP in North America, Traoré aims to help Common Goal to grow the project in Europe. Common Goal was launched in 2017 when a single player, Juan Mata of Manchester United and Spain, committed to pledge 1% of his salary to a collective fund that invests in high-impact community organisations using football to empower young people. Mata said: “It’s fantastic to see another person from the Premier League join myself, Kasper Schmeichel and Jürgen Klopp in this growing team of now over 200 professionals from around the world. In England there are so many inspiring female players that are already Common Goal members, and I hope that Adama joining the movement in order to take tangible action on tackling racism will inspire other male colleagues from the Premier League to join the movement. One per cent is almost nothing, but together we can create meaningful change and the time to act is now.”The question is inevitable and Maro Itoje, to his credit, has the punchline ready. “I can assure you I’m not in the middle of a career transition and looking to take to the Old Vic stage,” he says, chuckling. What a letdown. When England’s head coach, Eddie Jones, revealed last year that he had sent his best forward away for acting lessons, surely a West End debut was only a matter of time? It seems not. Instead Itoje is as committed to the day job as ever, with his Equity card still in the post. “I think there was a bit of miscommunication,” he continues, insisting the “communication classes” he attended with the team psychologist, Andrea Furst, and an external specialist fell some way short of an audition for Othello. “While I don’t think I was necessarily bad at communicating – I think I’m fairly articulate and can get a message across – there’s always room for growth. When the opportunity arose I said: ‘OK, let me take advantage of this resource that is available.’” Tellingly Jones has also since retracted the words from the book passage in which he described Itoje as an unlikely future England captain because he was too “inward-looking”. It was a pretty harsh message for the only player in his squad who would be an automatic pick for a current World XV. If England prosper in the 2022 Six Nations, the Saracens lock will be a major reason why. So how is Itoje feeling now, physically and mentally? Fine, though a bout of Covid – “a bit of a cough, heavy chest and fatigue” – just before Christmas did slow him down temporarily. Crucially he senses he and England are in a better place than last year when they finished fifth in the Six Nations. More relaxed Covid protocols this time, he argues, could help England more than anyone. “Hearing how other camps were run, our restrictions were fairly tight. I don’t think you can underestimate the importance of teamship and camaraderie. You only develop that by spending time with each other and perhaps that was a bit restricted.” He is all too aware, nevertheless, that England will have to improve and build on the promise they displayed in the autumn. “You could probably pick apart aspects of our game this time last year that weren’t sharp enough. They’re all areas that Eddie has identified and has been trying to improve since. I like to think our attack is in a better place than it was. Obviously the team has been shaken up a bit and it was probably necessary. As players you just hope it’s not shaken up at your own expense.” Deep down Itoje clearly still feels England have sufficient talent to beat anyone. “My expectation, as an England player, is that whenever we take the field against anyone we should win,” he says, speaking as part of his commitment as an ambassador for Vitality. “That’s not to say I don’t respect the other nations because they’re very good teams who have beaten us before. I have a lot of respect for them. But that’s the mindset I have. My expectation for England is always to be on the front foot.” After 51 caps he is clearly keen to show that his competitive fires still rage. “Maybe the pandemic has highlighted this to me further but sometimes you can start taking things for granted or as a given. Most people in this world will not get the opportunities to do some of the things I’m doing. And these opportunities don’t come around too often. You have a duty to yourself, to give it your best shot. If you do that you can sleep easy at night.” These are also pivotal times, he believes, for rugby generally. “The next 18 months are massive. The 2023 World Cup needs to be a landmark event and I think it will be. But in terms of the general marketing strategy of rugby at the moment I’m not sure it’s doing everything it needs to do to reach a wider audience. The broadcasters could package things in different ways, the clubs could be more engaging and reach out to different communities. “I don’t feel it is something that will just happen with time. It is something that rugby needs to put a conscious effort towards because it isn’t the dominant sport in this country. Rugby is football’s little brother, reaching up to the table to try and grab some food. In order to do that you have to make a constant effort to do more. I might be wrong but I’m not sure if rugby is doing that. “The trick is to pull fans into the game who aren’t necessarily already interested. Look at the impact of Drive to Survive. You don’t even need to be a Formula One fan to find that compelling. It’s about the human stories. Something like that would have a positive impact on how our game is seen.” Leading role or not, England’s star man is still eager to shine. Maro Itoje is an ambassador for Vitality, the insurance and investments provider helping people to live healthy and active lives This is an extract taken from the Guardian’s weekly rugby union email The Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Hong Kong has ordered thousands of hamsters be surrendered for “disposal” after traces of Covid-19 were found on 11 animals in a pet shop. The order includes pets that were bought days before Christmas be handed over, with a warning not to “kiss or abandon them on the street” as Hong Kong and mainland China attempt to sustain a zero Covid strategy, attempting to suppress all outbreaks internally while maintaining tight border controls with the outside world. Authorities announced on Tuesday that traces of the virus were detected on 11 hamsters out of 178 hamsters, rabbits and chinchillas tested at the Little Boss pet shop and associated warehouse in Causeway Bay while investigating the city’s first untraceable Delta variant diagnosis in more than three months, in a 23-year-old store employee. Two employees were also confirmed to have the disease, including one who cleans out the animal cages and handles the hamsters. In response, they ordered the immediate suspension of hamster sales and imports of all rodents. An estimated 2,000 hamsters, including any bought since 22 December, must be handed over, local media reported, and the owners must report for testing. Hong Kong’s health secretary, Sophia Chan, conceded there was no evidence domestic animals can pass the disease to humans, but authorities were acting out of caution. “We have assessed the risks of these batches are relatively high and therefore made the decision based on public health needs,” the director of agriculture, fisheries and conservation, Dr Leung Siu-fai, said. “We urge all pet owners to observe strict hygiene when handling their pets and cages. Do not kiss or abandon them on the streets.” All animals taken from the Causeway Bay shop would be dealt with “humanely”, authorities said. Louis Yeung, at the Chinchilla and Pets shop on Hong Kong island, said he had about 20 hamsters in stock and was waiting for instructions. “A man called me and asked my phone number and said he will send a message to me, but so far I don’t have any information from [the government],” he told the Guardian. “We just follow the government instructions. There’s nothing to do, worry or not worry. If they decide something we must do it.” Leung said he was surprised to hear hamsters could get infected and was also worried by reports of virus transmission on food packaging. “I don’t really understand what we should do. I don’t really know if the human takes this [virus] to a hamster or the hamster takes this to the human.” The imported hamster theory comes a day after Chinese authorities, who are similarly battling outbreaks while pursuing a zero Covid strategy, blamed an untraceable case of the Omicron variant in Beijing on a package sent from Canada, via the US and Hong Kong. While the global science community is sceptical on the likelihood of Covid-19 spreading by international mail, at least at the frequency it is reported in China, Beijing authorities said testing had found traces of the virus on the outside and inside of the package. There have been previous cases of animal infection, including several pets in Hong Kong, over the course of the pandemic. In 2020, Denmark culled its entire population of 15 million minks after some were found to be carrying a mutated variant of Covid-19. It also banned mink breeding until this month. Several thousand carcasses that had been hastily buried in West Jutland began rising out of the earth months later, prompting alarm and a police operation to rebury the animals at the macabre scene. It appears it was known hamsters could be infected with the disease – a May 2020 study by leading Hong Kong infectious disease experts used the animals to determine the effectiveness of mask-wearing, by lining some hamster cages with them and measuring the transmission between infected animals and their health neighbours.There’s surely only one thing that unites Russian composer Igor Stravinsky’s Rite of Spring, the 1974 comedy horror Young Frankenstein and The Muppets’ most recent special on Disney+. Regrettably, it is not Kermit the Frog. The thing that appears in all of these works has no easily recognisable familiar name, although it is perhaps one of the most recognisable three-beat musical phrases in history. It starts with a dun; it continues with a dun; it ends with a duuun! On screen, a dramatic “dun, dun duuun” has appeared in everything from Disney’s Fantasia to The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air to The IT Crowd. In 2007, a YouTuber scored a video of a melodramatic prairie dog with the three beats, earning over 43m views and a solid place in internet history. Yet though many of us are familiar with the sound, no one seems to know exactly where it came from. Try to Google it and … dun, dun, duuun! Its origins are a mystery. Taken together, these three duns are what’s known as a sting – a brief bit of music that media producers can use to break up the action or punctuate a theatrical moment. While today’s dun dun duuuns are often employed jokingly to parody the dramas of days gone by, the suspenseful sound was once legitimately used to frighten and thrill. “One of the challenges of radio – and it’s the same now as it was 100 years ago – is how do you hook the listener?” says Richard Hand, a media professor at the University of East Anglia and author of Terror on the Air! Horror Radio in America, 1931-1952. Alongside orchestral stings, sound effects such as clock chimes, claps of thunder, and whistling wind were used to grab the audience’s attention in the early days of radio, as the medium has always invited multitasking.“Those dramatic organ stings could have a powerful effect.” Before the development of sound libraries, many of these stings were performed live. “They became cliched and we laugh at them, but actually what soundscapes can do can be extraordinary.” Suspense, an American horror show broadcast on CBS Radio between 1942 and 1962, was filled to the brim with sound effects and dramatic stings. Just over three minutes into its first episode (after bells, the sound of a train, and plenty of piano), a three-beat sting lingers on its last note when a man discovers his wife is potentially an undead poisoner. But it’s difficult to pinpoint the very first on-air dun dun duuun, and it’s likely the musical phrase predates the radio. Hand says the medium tended to adopt already popular tropes to entice listeners. “They imported that musical structure and musical language,” he says, pointing to Victorian stage melodramas. In fact, Patrick Feaster – an expert in the preservation of early sound media, and co-founder of the First Sounds Initiative – argues that dun dun duuun could have been a cliche long before the advent of radio drama. Though he doesn’t know when or where the three duns arose, he points out that stings “that work in much the same way” appeared in the 1912 melodrama parody Desperate Desmond by comedian Fred Duprez. In a recording of the sketch which can be heard on the US Library of Congress website, Duprez mocks melodramas by telling a story and rebutting the incongruous sounds that play between the action (when a villain enters with a dramatic sting and a clip-clop, he exasperatedly says, “Not on a horse! Just on his feet!”). Though the stings heard in this sketch are single duns (sans the follow -up dun and duuun), Feaster says: “It seems stinger chords must have been entrenched enough in melodrama by 1912 to invite parody.” He guesses that the three-beat version may have then come to be preferred for satire, “because it’s more conspicuous than a single all-at-once chord would be.” Producers continued to enjoy parodying dramatic stings on radio shows throughout the 20th century – The Goon Show in the 1950s regularly ridiculed audio tropes in mock detective stories such as The Dreaded Piano Clubber. Occasionally, three duns were still used for dramatic effect in film: In 1940’s Fantasia, Disney’s recording of Stravinsky’s 1913 Rite of Spring emphasised two duns and a lingering duuun at the end of a dinosaur battle (though the composer’s original features a similar three beats, they’re not as pronounced or as recognisable as the sound we know today). From Tom and Jerry to Ren and Stimpy, dun dun duuuns also cropped up in cartoons, ensuring the sound became a television mainstay. Young Frankenstein’s version debuted in the 1970s, and it was this recording that was used for the dramatic prairie dog viral vid. But since 1984, if you’ve heard a dun dun duuun vibrating from your television set, it’s likely it came from one specific source. “It’s like having a Penguin Classic,” says 74-year-old composer Dick Walter, who has arranged music for programmes such as The Two Ronnies and The Morecambe &amp; Wise Show. In 1983, recordings library KPM Music asked Walter to produce four vinyl albums of musical phrases known as The Editor’s Companion. With an orchestral lineup of around 35 to 40 people, Walter recorded hundreds of tracks over the course of 18 months, including chase music, sleighbells, and a four-second, three-beat sting called Shock Horror (A) that comprises the notes D#, C and F#. “It’s musical shorthand which says a lot very quickly,” Walter says of the first of five melodramatic exclamations that run all the way down to Shock Horror (E). But where did he find the inspiration? Walter’s mother, an amateur pianist, used to play Edwardian and Victorian melodrama in the house, while he was a lover of jazz as a teen. He explains that for centuries, composers have used a particular musical interval to denote tension. Its name? Diabolus in musica – or “the devil’s interval” to you and me. The devil’s interval is a dissonant combination of tones that unsettles the listener because it is unresolved. You’ve likely heard the devil’s interval as the opening two notes to The Simpson’s theme tune, as well as the beginning of Maria from West Side Story (Walter helpfully sings both). Yet in both cases, the tension is immediately resolved with the next note, producing a pleasant effect. “But if you don’t resolve it, you’re left feeling unsatisfied,” Walter explains, “That’s what it boils down to.” When Walter was charged with creating horror stings for The Editor’s Companion, “the obvious thing to do” for Shock Horror (A) was use the interval – his is “just an extremely abbreviated version, about as short as you can get”. A few years ago, he was happy to hear his sting played on BBC radio show I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue, realising “it’s obviously become a bit of a go-to thing”. This is an understatement – The recording has since been used in SpongeBob SquarePants, Roseanne, The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air and Beavis and Butt-Head, as well as adverts for cereal, snacks and a home improvement store. While some producers may prefer to create their own version, Walter’s sting has become an easy staple – the bread and butter of dun, dun, duuuns. There is – dramatic pause! – no way of knowing where it will end up next. “I think the thing that makes Shock Horror eminently usable is that it’s orchestral, so it’s quite big,” Walter says of the track’s appeal. “So in one sense, it doesn’t date. It’s sort of timeless.”Shares in THG have fallen sharply after the online shopping group warned profit margins for 2021 would come in below expectations and the early part of 2022 would be more challenging compared with the same period last year when global lockdowns fuelled sales. The company, founded and run by Matthew Moulding, announced on Tuesday that margins for 2021 would be 7.4% to 7.7%, against estimates of 7.9%, but should recover this year. Its shares fell 9% after the update, to 169p, well below the float price of 500p in September 2020. Manchester-based THG (formerly known as The Hut Group), which runs beauty and nutrition websites including Lookfantastic, Cult Beauty and Myprotein, made record annual sales of £2.2bn in its first full year as a public company, up 37.9% on 2020 and helped by acquisitions. Sales grew 27% in the fourth quarter to £711.7m. Moulding has pinned his hopes on the growth of Ingenuity, a division building direct-to-consumer websites for other companies. It increased sales by 42.7% to £57.4m, making it the fastest-growing division between October and December. THG warned that the early part of 2022 would be more challenging because of the tough annual comparison and record commodity prices within the nutrition division. It expects revenue growth of 22% to 25% this year, including £108m to £112m sales from Ingenuity. Russ Mould, an investment director at AJ Bell, said: “The only way THG is going to win back the market’s favour is if it delivers better than expected figures consistently for at least two or three quarters. Unfortunately, its latest update doesn’t pass the test as it flags margins are slightly below expectations. “Under normal circumstances, a business delivering the level of growth seen in THG’s latest update would be applauded by the market. Sadly, THG has shot itself in the foot thanks to the way it has behaved as a listed company since joining the stock market. And that means only something spectacular will lift the share price.” THG has been through a torrid 12 months on the stock market after its £4.5bn flotation turned out to be the biggest London stock market debut since 2013. Its shares, which had soared after the group floated, slumped more than 70% in 2021. The drop cost its investors, among which Moulding is the biggest shareholder, about £6.9bn in paper losses. Moulding has alleged the company’s shares have been unfairly targeted. THG handed over a dossier of data to the Financial Conduct Authority, the UK’s financial watchdog, last week after observing irregular trading of its shares. Moulding has claimed hedge funds colluded in a “pretty aggressive short attack” on THG’s shares last year. The shares were affected in November after it emerged that BlackRock, the retailer’s largest institutional shareholder, was halving its stake. Moulding and the business have attracted criticism for his role as both executive chair and chief executive, which is against best corporate governance practice. The board also signed off a pre-flotation deal that saw Moulding acquire THG’s offices, warehouses and leisure facilities, before immediately becoming the company’s landlord by leasing those buildings back to the company for an annual rent of £19m. “Failure to deliver the level of detail about the business desired by investors, questionable corporate governance standards, and comments by chief executive Matt Moulding that he wished he’d never floated THG all amount to bad practice as far as investors are concerned, and they’ve voted with their feet which has left the share price languishing well below its IPO price,” Mould added. Moulding said on Tuesday the firm’s achievements in 2021 included the opening of its 1m sq ft UK technology campus. It hired 3,000 people last year, mostly in the UK. “Despite challenging conditions, we have scaled revenue and expanded our business model, particularly THG Ingenuity, well ahead of expectations given at our initial public offering 16 months ago,” he said. “The new year has started well, and we remain confident in delivering our strategic growth plans during 2022 and beyond.” Moulding told analysts: “Beauty tends to be one of the last things that people would stop spending on. In nutrition the move towards healthier living is very much still there.”.A Chinese human rights activist and writer who was detained following repeated pleas to be allowed to visit his terminally ill wife has been formally arrested days after she died for allegedly “inciting subversion of state power”. Yang Maodong, who goes by the pen-name Guo Feixiong, was formally arrested on Wednesday last week by the Guangzhou Public Security Bureau, two days after the death of his wife, Zhang Qing. An arrest document stated he was arrested “on suspicion of inciting subversion of state power”, and was being held at the Guangzhou No 1 detention centre. Yang’s arrest was first reported by the online Rights Protection Network group. Yang is a prominent human rights activist and legal consultant known for working with Taishi villagers protesting against corruption in 2005, after which he was jailed. He has been harassed, reportedly beaten, and in and out of detention for years, including a total of 11 years in prison, where Human Rights Watch said he was subjected to torture, including electric shocks. In 2009, Zhang and their children fled to the US, where she advocated for Yang’s release. After Zhang was diagnosed with a terminal illness in January 2021, Yang made repeated requests to Chinese authorities to let him go to his wife and children, but was refused on unspecified national security grounds. “You public servants are also husbands, [blessed with] marital love, must also have empathy of ordinary people,” he wrote to China’s premier, Li Keqiang, and the minister of public security, Zhao Kezhi, at the time. Dozens of academics, foreign politicians and human rights groups expressed concern about the case. Yang was detained again in December. From the US, Zhang pleaded with Chinese authorities to let Yang join his family. “I’m in a critical condition. Things are particularly hard in these cold winter days – we, my family, need him,” she told the South China Morning Post. “Never could I imagine the Chinese authorities were capable of such inhumane cruelty – to keep him locked up when my life is coming to an end, it’s very shocking to me.” The couple had not seen each other in 15 years. Yang could face more than five years in prison, according to Sui Muqing, a Chinese human rights lawyer, who also said it was unlikely Yang would go to trial before six months to a year. “There won’t be any credible evidence, all charges and evidence are arbitrarily fabricated, and the purpose of arresting him is to block his voice,” he said.ExxonMobil is attempting to use an unusual Texas law to target and intimidate its critics, claiming that lawsuits against the company over its long history of downplaying and denying the climate crisis violate the US constitution’s guarantees of free speech. The US’s largest oil firm is asking the Texas supreme court to allow it to use the law, known as rule 202, to pursue legal action against more than a dozen California municipal officials. Exxon claims that in filing lawsuits against the company over its role in the climate crisis, the officials are orchestrating a conspiracy against the firm’s first amendment rights. The oil giant also makes the curious claim that legal action in the California courts is an infringement of the sovereignty of Texas, where the company is headquartered. Eight California cities and counties have accused Exxon and other oil firms of breaking state laws by misrepresenting and burying evidence, including from its own scientists, of the threat posed by rising temperatures. The municipalities are seeking billions of dollars in compensation for damage caused by wildfires, flooding and other extreme weather events, and to meet the cost of building new infrastructure to prepare for the consequences of rising global temperatures. Rule 202 in effect allows corporations to go on a fishing expedition for incriminating evidence. They are able to question individuals under oath and demand access to documents even before any legal action is filed against them. Exxon wants to use the provision to force the California officials to travel to Texas to be questioned by the firm’s lawyers about what the company describes as “lawfare” – the misuse of the legal system for political ends. Exxon claims in a petition to the Texas supreme court that it is entitled to question the officials in order to collect evidence of “potential violations of ExxonMobil’s rights in Texas to exercise its first amendment privileges” to say what it likes about climate science. “The potential defendants’ lawfare is aimed at chilling the speech of not just ExxonMobil, but of other prominent members of the Texas energy sector on issues of public debate, in this case, climate change,” the company claims in its petition. The oil giant’s critics say Exxon’s attempt to use claims of free speech to curtail the first amendment rights of others follows a pattern of harassment toward those who challenge the company’s claims about the climate crisis. Patrick Parenteau, a law professor and former director of the Environmental Law Center at Vermont law school, has described the company’s move as “intimidation” intended to make “it cost a lot and be painful to take on Exxon” whether or not the company wins its case. In a highly unusual move, Texas’s governor, Greg Abbott, has written to the all-Republican court – half of whose members he appointed – in support of Exxon. He accused the California litigants of attempting “to suppress the speech of eighteen Texas-based energy companies on the subject of climate and energy policies”. “When out-of-state officials try to project their power across our border, as respondents have done by broadly targeting the speech of an industry crucial to Texas, they cannot use personal jurisdiction to scamper out of our courts and retreat across state lines,” Abbott wrote. In backing its claim, Exxon’s petition to the Texas supreme court gives the example of the Oakland city attorney, Barbara Parker, who in 2017 “issued a press release seeking to stifle the speech of the Texas energy sector or, as she likes to refer to it, ‘BIG OIL’”. The press release said: “It is past time to debate or question the reality of global warming … Just like BIG TOBACCO, BIG OIL knew the truth long ago and peddled misinformation to con their customers and the American public.” The company also names the then San Francisco city attorney, Dennis Herrera, because he accused fossil fuel companies of launching a “disinformation campaign to deny and discredit” the reality of global heating, and pledged to hold the companies responsible “to account”. Exxon has, in addition, targeted an environmental lawyer in Boston, Matthew Pawa, who represents some of the California municipalities. The firm describes him as “an outspoken advocate of misusing government power to limit free speech” and alleges that Pawa “recruited” the California cities and counties to sue Exxon. “Those lawsuits are an affront to the first amendment,” the company claims. Naomi Oreskes, a Harvard professor and co-author of Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming, said Exxon had a long history of attempting to bully its critics into silence. “Now that the arguments have moved into the legal sphere, this feels to me like an extension of the sort of harassment, bullying and intimidation that we’ve seen in the scientific sphere for the last two decades,” she said. Oreskes said that the legal strategy is also part of a broader public relations campaign to paint the company as a victim of radical environmentalists and opportunistic politicians when Exxon argues that it should be heralded for its efforts to combat the climate crisis. “Exxon Mobil has for a long time now tried to make themselves out to be the victim, as if somehow they’re the innocent party here,” she said. The Texas supreme court is considering the case after a lower court backed Exxon’s attempts to use rule 202 against the California officials. The ruling was later overturned on appeal. The appeal court sympathised with Exxon by acknowledging “an impulse to safeguard an industry that is vital to Texas’s economic well-being” and saying that “lawfare is an ugly tool by which to seek the environmental policy changes” pursued by California municipalities. But the appeal court said the defendants did not have sufficient direct connection to Texas for the case to be heard in the state. Exxon has tried to head off climate litigation before with lawsuits claiming that the attorney generals of Massachusetts and New York were violating the company’s rights by investigating it. Those moves were blocked by the Massachusetts supreme court and by a federal court. If the Texas supreme court allows its rule 202 bid to proceed, Exxon might expect a more sympathetic hearing for its claims in a state court system that has shown deference to big oil. Exxon is facing a barrage of other lawsuits across the US. A number accuse the company and other fossil fuel firms of breaching consumer protection laws by propagating misinformation about climate science. Oreskes said Exxon went further than most other oil companies in seeking to hide the evidence of its own scientists collected about global heating and in running a disinformation campaign. “They’re pushing their freedom of speech as an issue because more than any other company, it’s been proven by people like me and others that they have a track record of promoting half truths, misrepresentations and in some cases outright lies in the public sphere,” she said. “This is so well documented that unless they can come up with some strategy to defend it, they’re in potentially pretty serious trouble.” This story is published as part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of news outlets strengthening coverage of the climate storyFour years ago, Debra Lekanoff was busy traveling across the nation in her role as governmental affairs director for the Swinomish Tribe when her daughter came to her, worried. The 14-year-old had just learned some of the troubling details of the crisis of missing and murdered Indigenous women and was concerned that her mother, who is Alaska Native and tended to travel alone, might one day not make it home. Lekanoff said she remembers her daughter asking her: “Isn’t there a way where we could let everybody know when we get stolen?” Today, as a Washington state Democratic representative and the only Native American member of the state legislature, Lekanoff is working to do just that. Earlier this month she helped introduce legislation that would implement an alert system specifically for missing Indigenous people. If passed, the system would be a first in the US. It is expected not only to help locate the individual and improve communication between law enforcement agencies and local jurisdictions, but also to increase awareness about the crisis of missing Indigenous people, particularly women and girls. American Indian and Alaska Native women in Washington go missing at a rate more than four times higher than the state’s white residents, according to a 2019 report by the Urban Indian Health Institute, a division of the Seattle Indian Health Board. In a 2018 report, the institute found that of the 29 states surveyed, Washington had the second highest number of cases of missing and murdered American Indian and Alaska Native women and girls. Lekanoff, who is Tlingit and Aleut, said the system will convey to Washingtonians “that this isn’t just an Indian issue, this is really a crisis that all Washingtonians need to take responsibility for. We want to hear her screams when she’s being torn away from her family. And this alert system is her scream.” The proposed alert system would function similarly to “silver alerts”, which are used in Washington and dozens of other states across the nation to help locate missing vulnerable people. The idea is that when an Indigenous person is reported missing, law enforcement could activate the alert, resulting in details about the person being broadcast via highway advisory radio messages, signs and press releases for the media. “The more this is in the dark corners of our state and that we’re not talking about [it] and we’re not sharing information, the more this crisis is going to continue,” said Washington’s attorney general, Bob Ferguson, who worked with Lekanoff on the legislation. “I think an important step, one of many, but an important step to address the crisis, is to daylight it.” Some tribal leaders across the state have also voiced their support for the legislation. But given the many years this crisis has gone on, there have also been questions about why such a system wasn’t implemented long ago. “This is something that could have been enacted very quickly early on when we became of knowledge of how severe this issue was,” said Puyallup tribal councilwoman Anna Bean. “It’s something that we could have put in place, like a long time ago.” But, she added: “It’s being brought to the table now, and something’s being done. And I’m just very thankful for that.” Bean, who is also a member of the Washington State Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and People Task Force, described the Puyallup Tribe, whose reservation lies along the US Interstate 5 corridor, as practically a “stomping ground” for trafficking and other types of crimes that result in disappearances. She said this type of alert system could make a big difference in these cases, when timely, accurate dissemination of information on a disappearance is vital. Just a few years ago, Andy Joseph Jr, who chairs the Colville Business Council, the governing body of the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, said his own family found themselves in the middle of one of these devastating situations when the boyfriend of his daughter’s sister-in-law took their young children. The man was caught in part thanks to the community’s posts on Facebook. But Joseph said he believed the man could have been found even quicker if an alert system like the one proposed had been in place. “I think it would make our people feel a lot safer and also I think the perpetrators might think a little bit more before they would attempt to do anything like this, because they probably know that they’d been pinned or tagged,” he said. Some tribal officials have recommended that the alert include elements such as a photograph of the missing individual, and that the system be automated, rather than law enforcement activating the alerts, so that no one gets missed. Officials have also suggested improving data gathering on the wider crisis, so that more is understood about the issue and the impact of such an alert system. Lekanoff said the finer details of the system would be worked out in consultation with the 29 federally recognized tribes in Washington. She said that the proposal has received bipartisan support from lawmakers and with the legislative session kicking off last week she’s hopeful it will pass. Lekanoff talked about the red handprint over the mouth, which has become a symbol of the missing and murdered Indigenous movement. She said: “The alert system is removing that hand. It is unleashing the screams of those women who are being stolen or murdered from their families, from their children, from their communities.”She wowed Cop26 by castigating dithering global leaders for inflicting a “death sentence” on island nations and then made headlines around the world when she ditched the Queen as head of state, installing the singer Rihanna as an official national hero. On Wednesday, the Barbados prime minister, Mia Mottley, hopes her soaring international profile will translate into a second term when the country goes to the polls in a snap general election. Like Rihanna, whose umbrella is now exhibit No 1 in the Museum of Barbados, Mottley is known locally just by her first name. Her Barbados Labour party (BLP), which won all 30 seats in the 2018 election, is running with the slogan: “It’s safer with Mia – stay the course.” Bumper stickers dismiss the opposition with the legend: “Dem rest ain’t ready.” Posters of the 56-year-old are on palm trees and lampposts across Barbados, declaring the smiling incumbent “strong and caring”. She called the election on 27 December, more than a year earlier than necessary. Her opponents accuse her of disenfranchising more than 5,500 Bajans who are in Covid-19 quarantine and will be unable to vote as the Omicron variant sweeps Barbados. On Monday night, Mottley embarked on a tour of the island, which has a population of 287,000. Arriving at a basketball court in Gall Hill in the eastern parish of St John, she danced to her dancehall campaign song Mia Encore and launched into a speech that concentrated on hyperlocal issues: craterous potholes that make driving in the east “like a Disneyland ride” and the upgrading of pit toilets – open latrines still common in some parts of an island famed as a playground for the rich and famous. Other campaign pledges include building 10,000 homes and developing a Barbadian wealth fund to give Bajans cash from government assets and land. Wearing gold hoop earrings and a red “Safer With Mia” branded jacket, she then rushed off to Carrington Village in St Michael on the west coast where she went on the defensive about the “fake news” briefings in the weekend papers. Lucille Moe, a former minister who is advising the opposition Democratic Labour party (DLP) after Mottley sacked her last year, called Mottley a dictator in an interview. “She is autocratic and does not allow anyone to have an opposing view or opinion. Everyone must be in the Mia Mottley choir,” said Moe. Mottley’s administration has also been criticised for accepting investment from the Chinese government, including a US$115m (£84m) loan for road repairs and $210m (£154m) to upgrade the water and sewage system on the south coast. But she was at pains to tell the loyal crowd in Gall Hill that she wanted wealth to stay in Barbados. “We are not only concentrating on people from overseas,” she said. Chinese contractors are rebuilding Sam Lord’s Castle, once the island’s landmark hotel. The BLP has pledged to divest its ownership of the site and offer shares in it “as an investment opportunity to ordinary Barbadians and to the credit union movement”. An MP since she was 28, Mottley is Barbados’s first female prime minster and the eighth since the island declared independence from the UK in 1966. The DLP, which was in power from 2008 to 2018 before its electoral wipeout, is largely trying to win votes by arguing Barbados needs an opposition. Its leader, Verla de Peiza, a UK-educated lawyer like Mottley, has spoken out against the “one-party state”. Her manifesto promises a more socially democratic Barbados, “much more than a cosmetic republic”, as well as a rethink of the island’s tourism industry to focus on “heritage tourism, eco-agro tourism, the yachting community and community-based tourism”. Pollsters predict a comfortable win for the BLP and Mottley, with the party losing a handful of seats to the DLP.The UK and Europe are home to some of the world’s most spectacular cycling routes, through magnificent mountainous regions and places steeped in history to more leisurely routes meandering through peaceful villages and towns. Whether it’s a few days riding along the Parenzena, a beautiful cycle route that runs between Trieste in Italy and Poreč in Croatia, pootling along the Monsal Trail in Derbyshire or having an epic adventure exploring foothills of the Albanian Alps, we would like to hear about your favourite winter cycle routes. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on Tuesday 25 January at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The BBC will be forced to axe some of its programming after being left with a £285m gap in funding from its six-year licence fee settlement with ministers, its director general has warned. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Tim Davie said there was “no doubt” the deal would affect the broadcaster’s frontline output. He argued in support of a continued publicly backed model for the organisation, in the face of recent suggestions from the Conservative government that the future of its funding was up for discussion. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, confirmed on Monday that the BBC’s funding would be frozen for two years, remaining at £159 until April 2024, after which it would rise in line with inflation for four years. The announcement was made in a Sunday newspaper and on Twitter. Revealing the settlement would leave a £285m gap in funding by 2027, Davie said: “We are disappointed, we would have like to have seen an inflation rise throughout the period. We’ve got four out of six years and on we go. “I would say having certainty of income for six years – as you know the media market moving so fast – is very material to us. “Our estimate is – and just to set this clearly for everyone – by the year end 2027, the licence fee income will be about £4.2bn based on our assumptions around inflation, obviously guessing games around inflation are obviously difficult. We know this settlement … gives a £285m gap at the end of the period.” Davie warned the BBC was already “lean”, and while cuts were possible they would “affect our frontline output” – meaning losing programmes. “Inevitably, if you don’t have £285m, you will get less services, and less programmes. I still think the BBC can offer extraordinary value for the £13 a month and we absolutely think we can do that,” he said. When pressed further on the future of BBC Four, BBC Two and Radio 5 live, he added: “I think everything’s on the agenda.” When making the formal announcement in the House of Commons, Dorries watered down her suggestion that the licence fee would be abolished from 2028, raising suspicions that the focus of her provocative intervention on Sunday was to distract from Boris Johnson’s woes. Davie, who took up the role as director general in September 2020, said it was an “interesting way” to announce the real-terms cut and he had been of the understanding that negotiations were ongoing. “Clearly the pressures on household incomes are material, the government was clear that was a key factor when they made the announcement and we understand that,” he said. But Davie argued there should be a future for a publicly backed model of funding for the BBC and added that a subscription service – a model advocated by hard-right commentators – would not be the same. “Once you’re trying to serve a subscription base, it is a completely different situation,” he said. “Because suddenly you are there to make profit and make a return to a specific audience.” He added: “The debate is more centred around do we want a universal public service media organisation at the heart of our creative economy, which has served us incredibly well. If we want that we have to support a publicly backed and not a fully commercialised BBC.”Good morning. After winning more votes than any presidential candidate in US history, Joe Biden is now – just 12 months later – one of the country’s most unpopular presidents. Much of his domestic agenda is stalled on Capitol Hill, impeded by members of his own party. The virus is once again raging out of control: daily infections of Covid-19 have soared to record levels, hospitalizing more Americans than at any previous point during the pandemic. The administration’s vaccine-or-testing mandate for large employers was blocked by the supreme court’s conservative super-majority. Inflation is at a nearly 40-year high. Diplomatic talks have so far failed to pull Russia back from the brink of war with Ukraine. The puzzle of Biden’s unpopularity has many pieces, pollsters and political analysts say. “There’s an element of it that has nothing to do with Joe Biden,” Sarah Longwell, a prominent anti-Trump Republican strategist said. “It’s just a tough time.” How unpopular is he? For months, Biden’s approval ratings have languished in the mid to low 40s, with an average approval rating of 42%. A Quinnipiac poll released last week found him at a dire 33%. Leaked photos show scale of damage caused by Tonga volcano eruption Aerial images prepared by the New Zealand defence force for the Tongan government have been leaked online and show some areas have had “catastrophic” devastation inflicted by the tsunami and volcanic eruption while others were relatively unscathed. The 40 aerial pictures show some areas blanketed with ash, with damaged buildings, while others show parts of the country that appear unscathed. They were taken by the New Zealand defence force during a reconnaissance flight on Monday and put together in a report for the Tongan government. The photos were then leaked online. The Guardian has confirmed the provenance of the photos. After the reconnaissance flight, the New Zealand defence force shared a handful of photos with the media, most of them showing defence personnel at work, rather than shots of the islands. The 40 leaked images paint a much fuller picture of the damage to the country, and include annotations about the severity of damage. Little has been heard from Tonga since the eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano and subsequent tsunami on Saturday, after the Pacific nation’s main communication cable was broken. Capitol attack panel grapples with moving inquiry forward The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack is weighing whether to subpoena some of Donald Trump’s top allies on Capitol Hill as it considers its options on how aggressively it should pursue testimony to move forward its inquiry into the January 6 insurrection. The Republican House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, and Republican members of Congress Jim Jordan and Scott Perry may have inside knowledge about Trump’s plan to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election and whether it was coordinated with the Capitol attack. But the outright refusal of McCarthy and the other Republican lawmakers to testify voluntarily with the investigation has intensified discussions among the panel’s members and investigators about whether to force their cooperation. The select committee is undecided on whether to take that near-unprecedented step. Why are they hesitating? In part because of one major concern that has emerged in recent days, according to two sources familiar with the matter: Republican retaliation against Biden and Democrats in future inquiries. In other news … The vice-president, Kamala Harris, said on Monday that the right to vote in America was “under assault”. The speech was given on the Martin Luther King day public holiday and comes as King’s family push for expanded federal voting rights legislation despite opposition from Republicans. The cocktail of chemical pollution that pervades the planet now threatens the stability of global ecosystems upon which humanity depends, scientists have said. Plastic pollution is now found from the summit of Mount Everest to the deepest oceans. A British man who flew to the US, acquired a gun and took hostages at a Texas synagogue had a criminal record and an extensive history of mental health issues, the Guardian understands. Malik Faisal Akram was killed after a tense 11-hour hostage standoff at the Congregation Beth Israel synagogue. Joss Whedon, the Buffy creator and director of films including The Avengers and Justice League, has responded to allegations of misconduct, denying claims from actors including Gal Gadot and Ray Fisher that he threatened and belittled them on set. Stat of the day: Prince estate valued at $156.4m at end of long legal battle The estate of the late pop singer Prince, including his catalogue of songs, has been valued at $156.4m (£114m), nearly double the figure arrived at by an earlier appraisal. The estate’s administrator, Comerica Bank, agreed on the figure with the Internal Revenue Service and the heirs to Prince’s estate. The singer died in 2016 without a will, and his estate will pass to three of his siblings as well as the publishing company Primary Wave, who in August 2021 bought rights to the Prince catalogue from another three heirs, two of them deceased. Don’t miss this: The charming history of menopause and HRT For centuries the symptoms of menopause were documented, but women went through it with little intervention. It wasn’t until the advent of science as we know it that physicians (all male at the time, obviously) started more commonly “treating” its symptoms. Suffice it to say, the history of misogyny in medicine goes way, way back, all founded in the idea of women as inferior, and of menstrual blood as evil and poisonous. Climate check: How Exxon is leveraging Texas courts to silence its climate critics ExxonMobil is attempting to use an unusual Texas law to target and intimidate its critics, claiming that lawsuits against the company over its long history of downplaying and denying the climate crisis violate the US constitution’s guarantees of free speech. The US’s largest oil firm is asking the Texas supreme court to allow it to use the law, known as rule 202, to pursue legal action against more than a dozen California municipal officials. Last Thing: Marlon Bundo, Pence family pet rabbit and unlikely star of gay rights book, dies Marlon Bundo, the family pet rabbit of the former vice-president Mike Pence, has died, marking the end of an unlikely career as a prominent gay rights figure in the US. Political pets are a common theme in American politics but Bundo’s high media profile was unusual. Firstly, he featured in a series of children’s books written by the second family. Secondly, as a parody of Pence’s deep social conservatism, Bundo was also the main theme of a satirical book by the comedian John Oliver that chronicled his search for a same-sex bunny partner. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comScarborough’s Stephen Joseph theatre had to cancel almost half the run of its Christmas show because of coronavirus cases in the company. But, like the previous year’s The Snow Queen, they wisely filmed Jack and the Beanstalk for online audiences. Which means that, mid-January, eight-year-old Hilda and I get to see a panto together after Covid self-isolation put paid to our festive outings. Nick Lane’s adaptation, directed and choreographed by Gemma Fairlie, has a daydreaming hero whose head is in the clouds even before he starts to climb. But this is a fairytale grounded in modern-day reality. Jack lives with his mum in “an ordinary house on an ordinary street” in Scarborough. The cow is a battered old black-and-white bicycle (albeit with tail and ears) that he intends to trade at Cash Converters. He’s conned by the school bully into swapping it for a magic beanbag and the stalk springs up right in his back garden. Hilda likes the idea of giving her own bike ears and a tail but she says it’s not quite as fun as the super-long cow Daisy, played by socially distanced actors in Coventry Belgrade’s 2020 panto film, which she loved. “Is this one a musical or a panto?” she asks early on. That’s not just because of the frequency of Simon Slater’s songs – which efficiently drive the story and flesh out the characters – but also an initial shortage of truly delirious silliness. Happily, this is remedied by Jack’s trip up the beanstalk with a mysterious new friend, Jill. He meets a flamenco-loving hen (pluckily played by Alicia Mckenzie) who sports a fake moustache and waistcoat with gold lamé trim, which is pleasingly random in the traditional panto style. Designer Helen Coyston has a nice line in trousers: Jill’s are decorated with clouds befitting their journey into the skies, while Jack sports end-of-the-pier stripes. Props are stashed around the set in bean-shaped boxes and the stalk shoots up around a playground-type structure complete with a slide that will entice younger viewers. Hilda likes that Jack is the same age as her, but detects that Jacob Butler, in the five-strong, all-adult cast, is “quite tall for an eight-year-old”. The story is told with chapter titles shouted out by Butler (“Four: Everything Goes Bonkers!”) and the weather has a supporting role that recalls Slater and Lane’s The Snow Queen. There are plenty of nice, off-the-wall touches: Jack’s mum has an irrational fear of hippos, duplicitous bully Danny (well played by Loris Scarpa) is the headteacher’s son – “he pretends to be nice!” mutters Hilda, outraged – and there are fears that the Giant has eaten the Easter Bunny and that Santa might be gobbled up next. The bond between Butler and Jessica Dennis (as Jack’s mum) is tender but never over-sentimental and Hilda loves Sheri Lineham’s performance as Jill. If it’s a little strange to quietly watch the call-and-response of panto at the desktop, just the two of us, the in-the-round theatre’s audience are present in most shots and gamely cheer when required, helping to make this a winter warmer. Available online until 31 January“Anxiety” has been chosen by children as their word of the year for 2021, according to new research from Oxford University Press – but teachers have plumped for “resilience”. OUP’s academics have analysed the evolution of children’s language, and how they use it to reflect their emotions and experiences, for more than a decade. They draw from the largest children’s English language corpus in the world, the Oxford Children’s Corpus. This year, they chose to focus on wellbeing as their research focus, given the impact of Covid-19 on education, and concerns about children’s mental health. OUP surveyed more than 8,000 children aged between seven and 14, from 85 UK schools, asking them to select the top words they would use when discussing health and wellbeing. While “anxiety” came in top, chosen by 21% of children, it was followed by “challenging”, chosen by 19%, “isolate” (14%), “wellbeing” (13%) and “resilience” (12%). The teachers were also asked for the word they used most often when talking to their pupils about health and wellbeing. “Resilience” was their top choice, named by 31%, followed by “challenging” (19%) and “wellbeing” (18%). The Children’s Society’s executive director of social impact, Joe Jenkins, said it was “concerning” that anxiety had been chosen as the No 1 word, but not surprising, “when you consider all the restrictions and changes children had to endure”. He pointed to the Society’s Good Childhood Report from last year, which found that while most children showed “great resilience”, 8% of 10-to-17-year-olds reported that they had coped less well with the changes to life. “Having conversations and using the right language is incredibly important when supporting children if they are feeling anxious, isolated or going through tough challenges, and it’s also crucial children are able to express how they are feeling,” he said. OUP’s director of early childhood and home education, Helen Freeman, agreed. “The findings demonstrate the role we all play in making sure children have the words they need to be able to express themselves and that, as adults, we are aware the language we use around children can significantly influence their learning and wellbeing,” she said. The Oxford English Dictionary chose “vax” as its overall word of the year, saying that it had “injected itself into the bloodstream of the English language” during the pandemic.For Brian Donnelly – known as Kaws since his graffiti beginnings in 1990s New York – art has always been a communication tool. From street art to vast public commissions, he says, “it’s a chance to create a dialogue”. His desire to bring art to the masses is partly why his work spans collectable toys and streetwear collaborations, as well as paintings and sculptures that sell for millions. His new exhibition will allow him to connect with a large number of eyeballs in, he says, “a new and massive way”. The show, New Fiction, is at London’s Serpentine Gallery, and simultaneously on two free online platforms: the gaming behemoth Fortnite and the augmented-reality (AR) app Acute Art. With more than 400m player accounts, Fortnite is massive, especially when compared with the estimated footfall of an average Serpentine show (around 35,000). While the uninitiated might dismiss Fortnite as just another shooting extravaganza, players are increasingly spending time in its more peaceful zones, such as creative mode, where they can mooch about the Fortnite metaverse without fear of elimination. “You can hang out with your friends and explore new features,” says Fortnite’s partnerships director, Kevin Durkin. This could mean honing your dance moves but also watching a film or an Ariana Grande concert (as players did in August 2021), or, as of today, visiting an art gallery. In April 2020, rapper Travis Scott wowed an audience of 12 million with a show on Fortnite. It was like a stadium concert, only with a lower carbon footprint and rendered in Fortnite graphics (the costume changes were stunning). Donnelly, who had produced the artwork for one of Scott’s tracks, says: “That was the first time that I was, like, ‘Wow, this is such a bigger thing than your impression of what a video game is.’” On a much smaller scale, Donnelly went on to partner with Fortnite for Halloween 2021, enabling players to buy a Kaws “skeleton companion” outfit (or skin). Kaws’ companions are what he’s best known for: a group of characters he created in the 90s that are part cuddly, part cool, with Xs for eyes, each one conveying a very different theme or emotion. Numerous companions can be encountered at the Serpentine show (with yet more to discover in the Fortnite version), alongside vivid abstract paintings. As you enter the physical gallery, the first plinth appears to be empty. To see what’s hovering magically above it, Acute Art’s smartphone app can reveal an AR rendering of a floating companion figure that first appeared in balloon form, as a commission for Macy’s Thanksgiving Day parade in 2012. “It’s a work just like any other in the show,” says Donnelly. “Like a bronze sculpture, you want to view it, walk around it, understand the volume.” But you don’t have to go to the gallery to see it. I try the app in my living room and marvel as I view it from all angles, along with a David Shrigley worm. Donnelly first teamed up with Acute Art in 2020 to produce a series of AR public art pieces. It was fortuitous, he says, that it launched just as the world locked down. “Being able to create works,” he says, “and the version that I’m viewing in Brooklyn is the version you could be viewing in India, I just started to get really obsessed with the opportunities within that.” For non-digital natives, enjoying online artworks can require a shift in mindset. The cliched cultural question of modern times used to be, “But is it art?” Now, in the age of virtual shows and NFTs it has become, “But is it real?” Donnelly concedes: “There’s no comparison when standing in front of a painting or a piece of sculpture. So I was sceptical, thinking about digital versions. But when I started working with Acute, [I realised that] working with them is the same back and forth as when I work with the bronze foundry, or the factory that I make toys in. And the quality they achieve, it seems very real.” Donnelly is yet to make an NFT. “I haven’t felt the piece or [had] the thought that made me think, ‘This is the right thing to make one for,’ ” he says. Even so, the unfakeable element of NFTs appeals: “Thinking about my toys, and how many counterfeits are made in the world … Is this a possible way of navigating around that? I don’t know. I’m learning as much as I can. “Being born in ’74,” he continues, “you’re witnessing all these things that are new to you. And you can’t assume that the way you’re perceiving something is the way your children will perceive it. And if an NFT is real to the next generation, who’s to say it’s not?” Donnelly’s children are five and seven and, he says: “I’m wondering what it’s going to be like in 10 years, when they’re into screens. I started doing work on the street before social media, before the internet.” And yet Donnelly is living the generation X dream of still being cool to kids today, including my 11-year-old son. “I always think of what reached me in my bedroom in Jersey City, when I was a kid,” he says. “Like, what got me interested in art? It was magazines and skateboard graphics. They got me out of my room and exploring.” He imagines that for many Fortnite players, his exhibition will be “the first time they walk around a space like that, experiencing painting and sculpture in the video game that they’re completely comfortable in and used to.” Just as buying fabric patches from Keith Haring’s Pop Shop in the 1980s helped the young Donnelly feel comfortable walking into galleries, he says: “I’d love to throw bridges to a new generation.” New Fiction, Kaws is at the Serpentine Gallery, London, until 27 February, with an AR version on the Acute Art app. The exhibition is on Fortnite from 3pm GMT on 18 JanuaryHundreds of care homes in England are providing substandard care to dementia patients, analysis by the Guardian has found. One in five homes specialising in dementia are rated “inadequate” or “requires improvement” by the Care Quality Commission (CQC), inspection reports show. Some pose such a serious risk to people with dementia – including filthy conditions, poor infection control and untrained staff – that inspectors have ordered them to be placed into special measures. Altogether, 1,636 care homes are failing patients in findings described by charities and campaigners as “appalling”. They said urgent action was needed to tackle the “unacceptable” state of dementia care across the country. Of 7,589 care homes registered in England with a dementia specialism, 153 are classed as “inadequate” and 1,483 as “requires improvement”, the analysis of official data for December shows. There are 5,413 rated “good” and 307 “outstanding”. A further 232 had no rating. Zoe Campbell, the director of operations at the Alzheimer’s Society, said: “It’s appalling to hear that one in five care homes specialising in dementia are delivering substandard care. Every person with dementia deserves to live in a safe, secure place and to be treated with compassion and respect.” Campbell said the revelations meant staff recruitment and dementia training must be prioritised in the government’s social care proposals. In October, the Guardian revealed how a care home boasting of “exceptional personalised care” for dementia patients had been put into special measures after inspectors found residents with faeces under their fingernails, wearing other residents’ clothes and sleeping in dirty bedrooms. Longfield residential home in Blackburn, Lancashire, said its dementia patients “receive the best personalised care”. But when CQC officials made an unannounced visit they were alarmed to discover “undignified” conditions. Staff said they would never put their own relatives in the home, while a manager admitted it appeared people’s feet “hadn’t been washed for months”. Patients at risk of weight loss were not being weighed as frequently as necessary, putting them in danger of malnutrition, according to a damning 14-page inspection dossier. Since October, the number of care homes with a dementia specialism in England rated “inadequate” by the CQC has increased, from 143 to 153, and care homes classed as “requires improvement” rose from 1,456 to 1,483. Caroline Abrahams, the charity director at Age UK, said: “Hundreds of thousands of older people with advanced dementia live in care homes, and while each and every one of them deserves excellent personalised and compassionate care, we know only some actually get it. “The pandemic has made the situation worse, but the biggest problem of all is the growing staffing crisis in social care. It’s frankly impossible to provide the kind and intensive support that many of these older people need if there aren’t enough staff to go round, or if there’s a lot of churn and consequent reliance on agency workers to plug gaps. “Without one to one help with eating and drinking, for example, there’s a risk of some older people becoming malnourished and dehydrated, jeopardising their underlying health as well as their happiness and wellbeing.” Abrahams said it was an indictment of society “that we are failing so many” dementia patients. “They are fully able to enjoy life, just like you and me, if they receive great care, based on strong relationships and delivered by skilled and confident staff, who are themselves well supported. It’s so sad that as a result of underinvesting in care and failing to nurture the care workforce we are leaving too many of these older people in suboptimal settings, where some just fade away.” At Longfield, inspectors found the laundry room contained a sluice area that was so dirty staff were using a toilet area and a resident’s bedroom as a laundry area instead. A relative of a resident said they discovered their loved one had gone to hospital with faeces under their fingernails, wearing another person’s clothes with holes in and slippers that were too big. Because the care home did not have enough staff to meet people’s needs, it used agency workers who were unreliable and who “didn’t have the appropriate training to look after people”, the CQC found. Longfield said at the time it was under new management and had since made significant improvement. A spokesperson added: “The home implemented a new management system a week prior to inspection and was undergoing significant renovations. The home has been regularly liaising with CQC and Blackburn with Darwen adult social care services.” Judy Downey, the chair of charity the Relatives &amp; Residents Association, said: “No amount of clapping or kind words on the overworked and underpaid workforce is a substitute for training and regular oversight. Unless and until the government commits to mandatory and accredited training and a proper career structure for care workers, nothing will change.” Debbie Ivanova, the CQC’s deputy chief inspector, said the majority of care homes registered to care for people with dementia were providing good, safe care. “However, there are sadly some instances where our inspectors have found care so poor that we needed to take action to protect people. “Earlier this year at Longfield residential home, Blackburn, inspectors found such poor hygiene and infection control standards that we placed the home into special measures. “These examples are shocking but we want to provide reassurance – firstly, that most providers are rated good or outstanding and secondly, that where we have concerns about care we will inspect and will act to protect people if necessary. If anyone has concerns about care, they should contact us.”When climbers die on the mountains leaving young families behind, they are frequently criticised for putting themselves in harm’s way. How could they be so selfish? That question feels judgmental to me, cruel even. But the person asking it in this National Geographic documentary is director Max Lowe, who was 10 in 1999 when his pioneering climber dad Alex Lowe was buried under an avalanche in Tibet. His body was not discovered until nearly 17 years later. His film is an emotional, tender and painful love letter to his father and family. Max’s mum is Jenni, an artist who was left a young widow with three small boys when her husband died. She’s emotionally rock-solid, raising her sons as a tight unit. When she first started dating Lowe, she didn’t expect it to last. “He was a wild thing.” Long pause, then a confession. “That’s what I loved about him.” Lowe was rugged, good-looking, incredibly charismatic. The couple married, moved to Montana, had children. But he struggled to balance family life and climbing. Talking about that final expedition, Jenni says: “You couldn’t question his love for our family, but he chose to be there.” She doesn’t let him off the hook. Max’s brothers Sam and Isaac were seven and three when their dad died; they don’t have any solid memories of him. The loss shaped them. How can you walk in the footsteps of a man you hero-worship but don’t remember, who wasn’t around to show you how to be a man? Lowe’s best friend and climbing partner Conrad Anker, who was injured in the accident, talks about being wracked with survivor’s guilt. There’s an emotional twist in the story: something that happened in the family after Lowe died. I’m glad I didn’t know before watching. Because, in its own way, this film is as gripping and absorbing as any documentary about the thrills ascending a north face. One of its pleasures is that everyone here is thoroughly decent, with a real story to tell. • Torn is released on 21 January in cinemas.A cursory glance at the latest jobs market figures suggests the economy was in good health as the end of 2021 came into sight. In the three months to November employment rose by 60,000 and the unemployment rate decreased by 0.4 percentage points on the quarter to 4.1%. The redundancy rate dropped to a record low, revealing a smooth transition out of the furlough scheme and a good deal of luck for a chancellor constantly betting that the effects of the pandemic would be short-lived. Put the unemployment and redundancy rate together and there is only a whisker of difference with the pre-pandemic level in February 2020. Wages tell a different story. While total pay including bonuses edged up 0.4 percentage points to 4.2% on the previous month, without bonuses pay remained static. Once inflation was taken into account wages went into reverse in real terms, declining by 0.9%, even when bonuses are included. The Resolution Foundation thinktank said this squeeze on pay was the third in a decade, after real wage falls after the financial crisis between 2011 and 2014 and in the year after the 2016 Brexit vote. Like previous episodes, the current hit to the average worker’s standard of living is unlikely to prove short-lived as energy, food and fuel price rises eat into household finances. It started last summer, said the thinktank’s economists, and “is likely to get deeper in the coming months with inflation forecast to peak at 6% in April, before it starts to ease in the second half of 2022”. Rishi Sunak will comfort himself with data on PAYE earnings from HMRC for December that showed few signs that the Omicron variant had a big impact, despite concerns that its emergence would provoke a fresh wave of life-threatening sickness. To some extent, the gains in the PAYE data merely reflect a transfer of workers from self-employment into permanent jobs. Nevertheless, a rise of 184,000 in December was impressive and takes the number of people added to payrolls since February 2020 to 409,000. It appears that employers listened intently to the message from South Africa that Omicron was not as virulent as Delta and continued to respond to rising demand for their goods and services as if the new arrival didn’t exist. However, the rise in payrolled employees disguises the huge number of people, most of them aged over 50, who have quit the jobs market altogether, taking their skills and experience with them. Many will have long Covid, while others have had enough of working and will from now on depend on their property and pensions to give them an income. There are 260,000 more people out of work because of ill health and early retirement than pre-crisis and older women are the largest group of leavers, according to Tony Wilson, the head of the Institute for Employment Studies He said policymakers should not forget the labour market was growing strongly pre-crisis, “so these falls in participation are even worse than they look”. Had pre-crisis trends continued, there would be 1.1 million more people in the labour force. Kitty Ussher, the chief economist at the Institute of Directors, said: “The legacy of the pandemic appears to be this rise in economic inactivity.” How does all this shift the Bank of England’s thinking when it sets interest rates next month? Before Christmas the central bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC) said the prospect of spiralling wage growth and a booming jobs market played a big part in the decision to increase rates to 0.25%. When so much of everyone’s salary will be diverted to paying higher heating bills over the coming year, the MPC might think it can sit on its hands. If inflation needs to be crushed by a hit to incomes, it could be said static wages and rising inflation do their own dirty work without the central bank needing to heap more pain on households by increasing borrowing costs. This is not the way the MPC will interpret events, which is why most analysts still predict an increase in the base rate to 0.5% in February and a rise above 1% by the end of the year.A club statement when Reading supporters are desperately seeking greater transparency from the hierarchy would ordinarily be greeted with open arms. Only the seven paragraphs published on Saturday – when some fans were on the motorway back from Middlesbrough – posed more questions than answers. Hours after conceding a 95th-minute goal that condemned Reading to a fourth defeat in five matches, the club confirmed Liam Moore had been stripped of the captaincy and the owner, Dai Yongge, effectively offered the under-pressure manager, Veljko Paunovic, the dreaded vote of confidence. It capped a miserable week for Reading, who suffered a record-breaking 7-0 home defeat by Fulham last Tuesday, three days after being dumped out of the FA Cup by sixth-tier Kidderminster. Save for Andy Carroll’s equaliser at Boro and his spectacular disallowed goals against Fulham – an overhead kick and a preposterous chest-and-volley from outside the box – the only reason Reading fans have felt compelled to get off their seats recently is to vent their anger. The bad news is Carroll’s contract expired on Saturday. “Mr Dai is fully supportive of the manager and his decisions and understanding of the hard few months we have endured both on and off the pitch,” Reading said in a statement that started by saying Moore had made clear his desire to leave in recent months. In 2018 Moore signed a new five-year contract now worth about £35,000 per week, making him one of the club’s highest earners. “Incredibly shocked by the statement,” he said on Instagram, accompanied by 18 face-palm emojis. There has also been infighting among supporters and the fear is the situation could sour further. One win from their past nine matches, coupled with a six-point deduction for breaching the English Football League’s profit and sustainability rules, has left them three points above the Championship relegation zone. The alarming run gives Derby survival hope despite a 21-point deduction. It is a similar story to Derby in that exorbitant spending has been a key factor in Reading’s demise from play-off finalists five years ago to the prospect of lining up in the third tier for the first time since 2002. Reading’s 2019-20 accounts show a wages-to-turnover ratio of 216%. “If they had got to the Premier League, the promised land, as they say, all of these problems would have gone away,” says one source. “Aston Villa managed to get up just in time. The owner has gambled, ploughing money in, but it has backfired.” Home crowds have plummeted and Star (Supporters’ Trust at Reading) asked to urgently bring forward a biannual meeting with the chief executive, Dayong Pang, and finance director, Bryan Stabler, to address a “perceived lack of direction and connection with the fanbase”. The meeting is scheduled for Friday. “We are concerned and worried,” says the Star board member Roger Titford. “Before the situation becomes irretrievable, we need some kind of oomph and change. The fans have to be able to see key characters around the place and relate to them … We have an absent king.” The Chinese owners since May 2017, brother and sister Dai Yongge and Dai Xiu Li, speak little English and are based in Hong Kong. They previously tried to buy Hull City and owned KSV Roeselare and, until the club ceased to exist, Beijing Renhe. Pang, appointed in November 2020, said Yongge watches every game but “does not like publicity, and much like a lot of owners in football, is reluctant to communicate with supporters directly”. In a recent meeting the club said “thankfully, the manager is a great communicator”. Yongge’s last direct communication with supporters was in November, in a statement that addressed the six-point deduction. He said his “determination to succeed has not diminished but has amplified”. A recent survey of 257 supporters by the podcast The Tilehurst End found that 83.5% wanted to hear from Yongge. People with knowledge of the workings of the club have been left scratching their head at everything from how Reading have allowed key assets such as Omar Richards to leave on free transfers to starting recent games with a teenage midfielder at right-back and a 20-year-old at left-back because both first-choice full-backs are at the Africa Cup of Nations with Ghana. An injury crisis has not helped but the striker Lucas João, a £5m signing, returned to the squad last weekend. The academy graduate Richards joined Bayern Munich in the summer. Reading received £8m for Michael Olise after Crystal Palace triggered his buyout clause but players such as Joe Rodon, Jarrod Bowen and Ollie Watkins were each sold to Premier League teams by other Championship clubs for at least double that. This summer 13 players are set to be out of contract, including the top scorer, John Swift. “When Nicky Hammond was the director of football we would buy cheap and sell dear,” says Titford. “Now it is the other way around. We bought Sone Aluko and Sam Baldock for the best part of £10m [from Fulham and Brighton in 2017 and 2018 respectively] and they both left on free transfers.” Recruitment is a significant issue. The four-man football board comprises Paunovic, Pang, Stabler and the academy manager Michael Gilkes but sources say the agent Kia Joorabchian has influence in that area. “All of the club’s recruitment seems to go through one person,” claims one agent. Another tells of how his client was approached for the managerial vacancy, only for Reading to lose interest when it became clear that Joorabchian would be sidelined. Questions have been raised about Joorabchian’s influence in the club more generally as sources claim he acts as an informal adviser to the owner. He was described by Pang at a meeting with Star in October as a “personal acquaintance of Mr Dai” although he does not have an official title at Reading and Stabler said Joorabchian had not been paid any money as an agent. Reading have been contacted for comment. Joorabchian said it was false to suggest he has influence at the club. Last season’s seventh place looks more of an anomaly by the day. This week is pivotal with home games against Luton and Huddersfield on Wednesday and Saturday respectively. The owners have invested substantially in players and staff – Paunovic is their fifth manager in less than four years – and in a £50m training facility because of their craving for success. Now they badly need points.Shrewsbury have banned two people from all games for a total of eight years following events surrounding their FA Cup match with Liverpool this month. Video clips emerged after the third-round tie at Anfield on 9 January appearing to show some Shrewsbury supporters singing a song about the Hillsborough disaster in 1989, in which 97 Liverpool supporters died. The Shrewsbury goalkeeper Harry Burgoyne tweeted his condemnation of the fans after Liverpool’s 4-1 victory and called for them to be identified and banned. The League One club issued a statement a day later saying they were “disgusted and appalled” to see and hear the reports on social media and were liaising with police to identify the offenders. In a new statement on Tuesday, Shrewsbury said: “As part of the ongoing investigation into incidents at the Liverpool Emirates FA Cup tie, Shrewsbury Town has today banned two individuals from attending future games for a total of eight years. “As a club we do not condone and will not tolerate any behaviour that breaches our supporter code of conduct and brings our good name into disrepute.”Controversial measures including police powers to stop noisy protests could be brought back to the Commons by the government after a series of late-night defeats in the Lords, the justice secretary, Dominic Raab, has said. Peers rejected a series of measures in the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill that were proposed in response to activist movements such as Insulate Britain and Extinction Rebellion. The bill will return to the Commons for MPs to decide whether to accept the changes. Proposed powers that were voted down included allowing police officers to stop and search anyone at a protest “without suspicion” for items used to prevent a person being moved, known as “locking-on”. A move that would allow individuals with a history of causing serious disruption to be banned by the courts from attending certain protests was also dismissed, along with a proposal to make it an offence for a person to disrupt the operation of key national infrastructure, including airports and newspaper printers. In a separate defeat, peers backed restricting the imposition of tougher sentences for blocking a highway to major routes and motorways rather than all roads. Asked if any measures would be reintroduced through the Commons, the justice secretary told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “We’ll look very carefully at all of that, but, yes, absolutely. “In relation to noise, of course we support the right to peaceful and rambunctious protest, but it cannot be allowed to interfere with the lives of the law-abiding majority.” Rejection of the Conservative government’s plans sets the stage for a protracted “ping-pong” parliamentary tussle, whereby legislation passes between the Lords and the Commons until agreement can be reached. Peers were strongly critical of not only the measures, but also the way they had been introduced at such a late stage of the passage of the bill, after it had already gone through the elected house. Earlier, the Lords also defeated other contentious curbs on demonstrations proposed in the legislation, including powers to impose conditions on protests judged to be too noisy. The Labour frontbencher Richard Rosser said the “sweeping, significant and further controversial powers” had not been considered by the Commons and called it an “outrageous way to legislate”. Rosser said: “We cannot support any of these last-minute, rushed and ill-thought-through broad powers… … with the exception of approving the increased sentences for wilfully obstructing motorways and major roads.” The independent crossbencher and prominent QC Alex Carlile, who served previously as independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, said: “The dilution of without-suspicion stop and search powers is a menacing and dangerous measure.” Brian Paddick, a Liberal Democrat peer who was a deputy assistant commissioner in the Metropolitan police, said: “If the government is determined to bring in these draconian, anti-democratic laws, reminiscent of cold war eastern bloc police states, they should withdraw them now and introduce them as a separate bill to allow the democratically elected house time to properly consider them.” Lord Paddick added: “The anti-protest measures in the original bill were dreadful. These measures and the way they have been introduced are outrageous.” Stressing the need for the protest measures, the Home Office minister Susan Williams argued they were “vitally important in protecting the country from the highly disruptive tactics employed by a small number of people”. Lady Williams said: “The rights to freedom of speech and assembly are a cornerstone of our democracy and this government will not shrink from defending them. “But a responsible government, one that stands up for the rule of law, must also defend the rights and freedom of the law-abiding majority.” Greenpeace UK’s political campaigner, Megan Randles, said nationwide protests against the bill had played a part in stopping curbs on the right to protest. “It’s so fitting that the many protests staged over the past few days against these outrageous attempts to remove our right to protest played such a key role in defeating the government last night. There couldn’t be a clearer demonstration of why removing these oppressive amendments was so important,” she said. Fatima Ibrahim from the youth movement Green New Deal Rising, which has challenged leading politicians over their record on the climate crisis, said: “It’s good to see some of the worst elements taken out of this bill last night by the Lords. This wouldn’t have happened without people taking to the streets and building pressure through the ‘Kill the Bill’ movement. “But the fight continues and this bill is still full of measures to silence protest and attack marginalised groups like Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities. So we won’t stop until we kill this bill.”In theory, nothing on Earth should be easier to make than an Oscar Isaac superhero vehicle. Because he’s Oscar Isaac, for heaven’s sake. Bung him in a muscle suit, give him a quippy script and let him spend 85% of his screen time twinkling for the internet and, bingo, you have a runaway hit on your hands. But real life is complicated, and even the best intentions can result in unforced errors. I guess what I’m trying to say is this: what the hell is going on with Oscar Isaac’s accent in the Moon Knight trailer? I mean it. Guys, you had a sitter. Slowly but surely, the Marvel Cinematic Universe has spent an entire year laying a carefully constructed path for its Disney+ shows. WandaVision skilfully wove an existing post-Endgame storyline into the medium of television. The Falcon and the Winter Soldier took time to focus on themes that might have got lost in the wham-bam soup of a movie. Loki introduced the concept of the multiverse. Marvel has been careful to hold our hand every step of the way, and Moon Knight was supposed to be the moment where it let go. A new character, based on a relatively obscure comic book, Moon Knight is a mercenary with dissociative identity disorder. Now, based on that description, and knowing who plays him, imagine what Moon Knight’s voice sounds like. Something low and growly, perhaps. Something aloof and cool. No. Because according to the Moon Knight trailer, Moon Knight actually talks like Alan Bennett. Well, almost like Alan Bennett. He sounds like Alan Bennett being played by Dick Van Dyke towards the latter stages of a 48-hour am-dram Some Mothers Do ’Ave ’Em recital. It is – and please remember that we live in a universe where Don Cheadle, on three separate occasions, played a cockney who sounded as if he’d been given a fatal dose of dental anaesthetic – the most incongruous British accent in the history of filmed media. Marvel, you should have prepared us for this. You’re so good at weaving characters throughout your properties, why didn’t you do it here? Why wasn’t there a scene in No Way Home where Doctor Strange informed Spider-Man of the existence of this mysterious character? “He becomes a hero in his sleep,” he could say. “Woah, like a werewolf?” Spider-Man could reply. “Sort of, except he sounds a bit like a depressed Teletubby”, Strange could explain. And then we’d all be warmed up for this atrocity. But no. There is not enough space on the internet for me to try and pinpoint exactly what Oscar Isaac’s accent sounds like in the Moon Knight trailer. It sounds like the malnourished cousin of the Churchill nodding dog. It sounds like Alan Partridge impaling his foot on a spike. It sounds like someone cast an evil spell on the 2017 Saturday Night Live Great British Bake Off sketch. It sounds like Jane Horrocks trying to be South African. It sounds like Dominic Raab wetting the bed as a child. It is awful. True, some producers have tried to make Oscar Isaac less sexy in the past. In Drive he was too much of a low-rent baddie to be evil. In X-Men: Apocalypse he was caked in enough prosthetics to render him unidentifiable. And yet all this effort was for nothing. All it takes to make Oscar Isaac unsexy, it turns out, is to give him a voice that sounds like an 18th-century Leicestershire grandmother. Still, I have hope for Moon Knight. Oscar Isaac’s accent has the feel of a classic Marvel bait and switch. Remember, the character he plays has multiple personalities. My guess is that this one – the one that sounds like infant Tom Holland singing Billy Elliott songs on Channel 5 News – is merely the first personality we’ll encounter. By the middle of the opening episode, he’ll be shaken from his dissociative state and we’ll get to hear Oscar Isaac sounding like Oscar Isaac. Maybe I’m wrong, though. Maybe Moon Knight exists purely as a vehicle for Isaac to do all the terrible accents nobody else has ever let him do. Maybe one of his personalities will be Japanese. Maybe one will be Jamaican. Maybe he’ll spend the entire duration of episode three being Michael Jackson. Or maybe we’re really out of luck, and all of his personalities sound like Daphne from Frasier visiting a doctor for constipation. We’ll just have to find out in March.France’s education minister is facing calls to resign after it emerged he had announced a strict Covid-testing protocol for schools shortly before the start of the January school term while he was on holiday in Ibiza. As French teachers and parents struggled to prepare children’s return to school amid France’s fifth wave of Covid, Jean-Michel Blanquer had flown to the Spanish island known for its beautiful beaches and party culture for a four-day holiday over the new year, the investigative website Mediapart reported. The revelation that Blanquer was on holiday in Ibiza at one of the toughest moments for schools and parents has created a public relations disaster for the government. Blanquer was once seen as a close ally of the president, Emmanuel Macron, but he has come increasing criticism this month over the many changes to Covid protocols as schools struggled to put in place last-minute testing rules, manage class-closures and find replacements for absent teachers. Teachers' and parents’ unions have called for a second nationwide strike on Thursday after tens of thousands of teachers took part in a one-day strike last week. The strict testing and isolation rules were unveiled by Blanquer in an interview with Le Parisien newspaper on 2 January, hours before classes were to resume after the holiday break. Mediapart revealed that the interview had taken place by video from Blanquer’s holiday in Ibiza, from which he flew back on the afternoon of Sunday 2 January in time for the start of the new term the next day. Le Parisien said its journalists had not known the minister’s location. Blanquer was not breaking any laws – there were no Covid restrictions stopping travel to Spain and ministers had been asked to remain in Europe, two hours from Paris. But it has presented the government with an image problem as political campaigning is under way for the spring presidential election. “There is a real gap between what Ibiza represents and what school staff were going through at that moment just before the start of the school term,” said Guislaine David, of the SNUipp-FSU teachers union. She said it would deepen the “already big divide” between the education ministry and teaching staff. Yannick Jadot, a presidential candidate for the Green party EELV, said that instead of preparing the new school term alongside teachers and parents, Blanquer had had his “feet in the sand”. Jadot called for his resignation, saying: “This degree of contempt and irresponsibility is unacceptable.” Olivier Faure, the Socialist party leader, said it felt like France had returned to the “bling bling” of holidays during the rightwing presidency of Nicolas Sarkozy years, and “at a moment when we were asking everyone to tighten their belts”. Government ministers said Blanquer had been working constantly over the new year period and was in permanent contact with his team. He had flown to Ibiza after taking part in the government’s emergency Covid meeting on 27 December. Gabriel Attal, the government spokesman, said: “The rule on holidays set by the government is that you must be constantly reachable, working on your brief, and I have no reason to think that was not the case for Jean-Michel Blanquer.”Dominic Cummings has published new revelations on his blog, claiming the prime minister was warned on multiple occasions about a party at No 10 during the first lockdown, where invitees were asked to “bring your own booze” to the garden. What does Cummings claim? The PM’s former chief adviser, now turned nemesis, was the first to reveal a party organised by Johnson’s principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, during the first lockdown, when it was only permitted to socialise outdoors with one other person. Johnson has admitted he was at the gathering but claimed he believed it was a work event, which is what he told MPs in the House of Commons. Cummings now claims Johnson lied to the house – a serious charge – and that Reynolds was warned the event broke the rules by another senior official but took the PM’s guidance that it should go ahead. He also claims to have told the prime minister himself that the event was against the rules. “The events of 20 May alone, never mind the string of other events, mean the PM lied to parliament about parties,” Cummings wrote on Substack. Who else can corroborate Cummings’ claim? There are a number of senior officials who worked closely with Cummings and Johnson during that period in Downing Street who are known to have been unnerved by some of the antics in Downing Street. The Guardian has spoken to one official who claims to have raised concerns within the office, and multiple other newspapers and broadcast journalists have also been told concerns were raised – off the record. Cummings claims that his vocal concerns were witnessed by others. “Not only me but other eyewitnesses who discussed this at the time would swear under oath this is what happened.” Will anyone else go public? The track record is not great. Cummings had made similar claims before – including that other officials heard the “let the bodies pile high” remark made by the PM ahead of the second lockdown. Though this has been claimed by another source off the record, no one else has ever gone on record. Is there a written record of Cummings’ own interventions? Cummings claims to have told Reynolds in person that his invite broke the rules and that an email was sent by another very senior official. “This email will be seen by Sue Gray (unless there is a foolish cover-up which would also probably be a criminal offence),” Cummings wrote. Cummings then claimed to have told the prime minister in person that the invite broke the rules. “Amid discussion over the future of the cabinet secretary and PPS himself, which had been going on for days, I said to the PM something like: Martin’s invited the building to a drinks party, this is what I’m talking about, you’ve got to grip this madhouse,” he wrote. “The PM waved it aside.” Why does Cummings claim that 15 May was a work event and 20 May was not? Cummings himself was pictured with a glass of wine next to Reynolds and Johnson, as well as Johnson’s wife Carrie, in the Downing Street garden on 15 May in a picture leaked to the Guardian. Cummings claims that was, indeed, a work event. He said that officials regularly had meetings outside to ensure good ventilation. “The meeting ended roughly 6-6.30. The PM and I continued talking as it broke up.” He said either the PM or Reynolds had brought out a bottle of wine but that they had continued “chatting about Covid, about domestic priorities, and about how to sort out the Cabinet Office, which had totally collapsed.” Cummings, a fierce critic of Carrie Johnson, said she was permitted to join them. “Nobody has been as critical of her as I have for her influence on the PM and No 10 but it is an unarguable legal fact that she was allowed by ‘the rules’ to be in the garden in her own home.” Can Sue Gray interview Cummings as part of her inquiry? Yes, Sue Gray is permitted to interview Cummings who has said he will answer questions. It is not yet clear whether she will decide to do so but his evidence could lead to a major expansion of the investigation – and delay its publication. Is Cummings to be trusted? Cummings himself was infamously found to have breached the first lockdown, though he claimed he was following guidance, when he drove his family to Durham while his wife was sick, and later visited Barnard Castle claiming to have been testing his eyesight for the drive back to London. His excuses, made in a Downing Street rose garden press conference, stretched the limits of credibility. He has since emphasised that his main reason for leaving London were threats he had been receiving and that he believed his family were at risk. There were other times too when Cummings has overpromised and underdelivered – including a promise to provide evidence that former health secretary Matt Hancock had lied, which he has not published.Five payment companies including Mastercard have been fined a total of more than £33m for operating illegal cartels when providing prepaid cards for local authorities to distribute to vulnerable people. The companies were found by the Payment Systems Regulator to have broken competition law by agreeing not to compete with each other for the authorities’ custom. The regulator said that by acting in this way, the providers may have denied the councils access to cheaper products, and vulnerable people may have missed out on better quality services. The cards in question were used to distribute welfare payments to vulnerable members of society, such as the homeless, victims of domestic violence and asylum seekers. Benefits payments or emergency funds could be uploaded to the cards and used to pay for goods and services without the holder needing access to a bank account. The PSR launched an investigation in October 2017 and carried out dawn raids on premises in February 2018. It found evidence that between 2012 and 2018 five companies – Mastercard, allpay, Advanced Payment Solutions (APS), Prepaid Financial Services (PFS) and Sulion – were involved in a cartel, although some did not participate for all of that time. The cartel was organised against the backdrop of the National Prepaid Cards Network, which was sponsored by Mastercard and brought together public sector bodies that were potentially interested in prepaid cards and programme managers. The five parties arranged for the programme managers not to target or poach each other’s customers, and colluded on the allocation of potential business contacts that came in via network events. Between 2014 and 2016 there was a second cartel involving APS and PFS, with the companies agreeing not to target each other’s public sector customers when a contract was up for renewal, including through a tender. Despite the rule-breaking uncovered by the investigation, vulnerable card recipients would still have received their full benefits, but councils may have paid higher fees than in a competitive market, and there was no incentive for providers to improve the scope of the services. Chris Hemsley, the managing director of the regulator, said: “This investigation and the significant fines we have imposed send a clear message that the PSR has zero tolerance for cartel behaviour.” He added: “This case is particularly serious because the illegal cartel behaviour meant there was less competition and choice for local authorities. This means they may have missed out on cheaper or better-quality products which were used by some of the most vulnerable in society.” Mastercard, which was fined £31.5m, said in a statement: “Mastercard is committed to upholding all regulatory and legal standards and we apologise that the actions of two former employees resulted in the standards expected of us not being met in this instance. “We have taken this issue very seriously and have put further controls and training in place to ensure it cannot occur again, while working with the PSR to settle this matter at the earliest possible opportunity.”Welcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every week, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. When I was writing last week’s newsletter, I felt like I could still legitimately recommend Wordle as game of the week, because plenty of people still hadn’t heard of it. At the time it had 300,000 players. Now, though, it has millions, and has become ubiquitous; the most viral game since … Pokémon Go? The last week has seen a whole cycle of news purely about this appealing daily word game. Its creator Josh Wardle – who famously has no interest in monetising his creation, made as a gift for his partner – told the Guardian he was totally overwhelmed by its success. Amusing tributes popped up, from the evil Absurdle, which actively pulls the answer further and further away from you with every attempt, to the absurdist nightmare Letterle (the clue is in the name). Attack of the clones Then, some opportunistic baddies cloned the game and released it on app stores for profit – one of them even bragged about it on Twitter, and seemed surprised when thousands of people, including some quite famous game developers, called them out. Thankfully, what could have been a “this is why we can’t have nice things” moment was salvaged when the clones were removed from the App Store last week. The Twitter bragger even apologised, to their credit. More clones keep popping up, but it seems that at least someone at Apple has an interest in keeping lovely things pure and untainted. Wordle’s uncomplicated innocence is part of what makes it so damn appealing: in an age where literally everything seems to be trying to collect our data and monetise our attention, from our phones to sodding smart fridges, it’s no wonder that the world has responded so positively to something that’s simple, fun and free. Highly contagious One of the first times I experienced a game going properly viral was back in 2014, when my then-young stepson introduced me to Five Night’s at Freddy’s, a shonky horror game about a haunted pizzeria stalked by horrible Chuck E Cheese-style animal mascot automatons. I have no idea how the kid heard about the game. Could have been YouTube, could have been playground chat. But before long practically every child I knew had, somehow, played it. Parents were asking me about it. It’s a pretty scary game, and a lot of younger kids were pretty upset by it – it was its generation’s equivalent of the nightmare-inducing snatches of horror movies that I glimpsed through the slightly-open door of the living room when I was supposed to be in bed, as a child. Five Nights at Freddy’s had had no hype, no coverage on the gaming websites or social media accounts that I followed, no traditional path to popularity. It just arrived, out of nowhere, at a time when YouTubers were constantly looking for horror games to performatively scream at, and became inordinately successful. I was baffled and intrigued. Pokémon Go in 2016 is probably the biggest viral game of all time – there was a point where you couldn’t go outside without seeing people drifting around, convening at random phone boxes or shops or one of the game’s other arbitrary landmarks, staring at their phones, looking for a Psyduck or a fabled Snorlax. That summer I was in my home town of Edinburgh and ended up directing a whole group of wandering Pokémon hunters down an obscure close, where I’d just found a Haunter after 20 minutes of searching. Pokémon Go was laser-targeted at my generation of grown-up Pokémon kids, but it really felt like everyone was playing it at one point, right across age groups and in every country. It was a truly shared experience, and that’s always the crux of a viral game: they connect us to each other, somehow. And as proven by Pokémon Go developer Niantic’s subsequent games, most of which have been at best mildly popular despite sharing near-identical design, there’s no planning for a game’s viral success. There’s no recipe for them. Who on earth would have picked Wordle out of a crowd? Or Flappy Bird, the brief mobile gaming sensation that nearly broke its poor creator, Dong Nguyen? It’s not usually the ‘best’ games that blow up in this way. Flappy Bird wasn’t exactly wonderful to play – and Fortnite is far from the best multiplayer shooter around (don’t @ me). This is the interesting thing about virality, really; you can’t account for what resonates. In retrospect it’s easy to draw connections between, for instance, Among Us’ rise to fame and the isolation and paranoia of lockdown, but it’s not like the game was designed with that in mind. It just kinda happened. Isn’t that the beauty of it? What to play For some reason I only seem to be playing games that aren’t quite games recently (but not for much longer, I guess – Rainbow Six Extraction and Elden Ring will soon kick off a ludicrously busy year for video games). For now though, I’m going to recommend Radiohead and Epic Games’ KID A MNESIA EXHIBITION. It’s an interactive walkthrough of the seminal 21-year-old album(s), with absorbing visualisations, scrawled words and lyrics, black-and-white forests, wandering lost-looking stick-men with looming, grinning faces, and much else. Here’s why you should play it: I don’t mean this unkindly, but a lot of games don’t engage all that much with the rest of culture, and it shows. KID A MNESIA is what happens when someone from outside the game world designs a gamelike experience, which is to say, it’s like nothing you will have played before, and it will feed your brain. Appropriately, I felt an encroaching sense of ennui and alienation exploring this trippy and emotionally charged place. My partner, the biggest Radiohead nerd I know, describes it as “pleasantly disconcerting, which is Radiohead in a nutshell really”. Interestingly, it was originally going to be a physical exhibition, but Covid stomped on that idea, and the band and their collaborators started to explore the idea of a virtual thing instead – which means this is one of the few good things to have resulted from the pandemic. Available on: PC, Mac, PS5 Approximate playtime: 1-2 hours What to read A rundown of games industry CEO compensation released last week makes for grim reading. Infamous Activision-Blizzard CEO Bobby Kotick took home $152.6m last year, 1,560 times the median salary at his company, which spent most of 2021 battling allegations about what a toxic, sexist working environment it is. Even he can’t compete with Robert Antokol of free-to-play and casino-game developer Playtika, however, who took home over $372m. That’s $186,000 an hour. This Twitter thread from Doom creator John Romero taught me something I didn’t know: in 1902, the American government tried to force Native men living on reservations to cut their long hair. “I wear my hair long as a proud Yaqui and Cherokee man, and will continue to do so until the day I die,” Romero says. The nominees for the developer-centric DICE awards have been announced. All last year’s big hitters are there – space platformer Ratchet &amp; Clank and art-deco shooter Deathloop lead the nominations – but there are also nods to 2021’s less obvious games, such as Kena: Bridge of Spirits, Before Your Eyes, Inscryption, The Forgotten City, and personal favourites Unpacking and Death’s Door. What to click Museum of Mechanics: Lockpicking – an interesting experiment for video game history buffs Would you play a video game for 500 hours? Question Block Today’s question comes from reader Dominik Kurseja: What are the games that you wish you’d had more time to play? And if/when you revisited them, were they as good as you remembered? I asked Julia Hardy, presenter of the Top Gear Gaming Show (among much else), for her answer. Going back to replay older games can often be a mixed bag, as the lens of youth was Vaseline-thick – and the bar was low when it came to controls, which can ruin a perfectly good nostalgic replay. A good rule of thumb though is that puzzle games generally hold up. I recently spent a LOT of time revisiting Dr. Mario on the Switch (the music is still super catchy). And after a trip home to see the folks, I found my old Game Boy and got re-obsessed with Legend of Zelda: Link’s Awakening; my poor Link had been left in a complicated dungeon I couldn’t beat. “ I got the remake too – it’s so lovingly done and close to the original that it feels like the greatest remaster of all time: basically the same, but better looking and slightly tweaked to be a better play experience. Its now my go-to Sunday game. Other notable mentions for games that are actually good to revisit: Mario Kart, Super Mario World, the Sonics, Doom, and most point ‘n’ clicks (especially Day of the Tentacle / Sam and Max; avoid Leisure Suit Larry, as it’ll make you weep for women of the past).” If you’ve got a question for Question Block or anything to say about the newsletter, email us on pushingbuttons@guardian.co.uk.There were 922 Covid deaths registered in England and Wales in the week to 7 January, according to the latest figures from the Office for National Statistics. This was a rise of 58% from the previous week. However ,the increase is artificially high because the figures in the previous week’s release were affected by the Christmas and Boxing Day bank holidays. Of all deaths registered in the first week of January in England and Wales, 7.5% mentioned Covid – up from 6.9% in the last week of 2021. A total of 130 care home residents’ deaths were registered involving Covid-19 in England and Wales in the first week of the new year, up from 64 in the previous seven days. However, the rise was affected by the closure of register offices with two bank holidays in the final week of 2021. The ONS weekly death count includes all deaths where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate and now exceeds 176,000 deaths. The government counts only those deaths recorded within 28 days of a positive Covid test, which stands at more than 152,000. The seven-day average figure for cases in England has been falling in recent days and stood at 1,531 cases for every 100,000 people on 12 January, the latest date for which figures were available. Northern Ireland’s rate was higher, at 1,911 cases per 100,000, while Scotland and Wales reported rates of 1,394 and 1,347 per 100,000 respectively. The average of people being treated for Covid in UK hospitals has risen by 63% since the turn of the new year, according to the latest available government data. A total of 19,452 patients were being treated in UK hospitals on average in the week to 14 January, the highest weekly figure since 19 February 2021. However, the total number of patients hospitalised with Covid has been falling in more recent days: it stood at 19,345 on Friday, having reached a post-Omicron high of 19,906 on Monday 10 January. In the past week, an average of 794 patients have required mechanical ventilation for Covid but, in a sign of the combination of lower severity of the Omicron variant and high vaccination coverage, this is less than one-third of the number of that required in mid-February 2021. The figures come as the government is reportedly considering ending all Covid restrictions in England, including the mandatory isolation period for infectious people. The legal requirement to self-isolate is one of several pieces of Covid legislation due to expire in March. The isolation period was recently reduced to five days for those with negative lateral flow tests. Plans to end other measures such as working from home guidance and Covid passports are also set to be announced soon.Northern Ireland is at risk of becoming “the dirty corner of Europe”, campaigners say, if more ambitious targets are not set for the country as it seeks to approve its first dedicated climate legislation. Officials at the devolved Stormont institutions say that the environment strategy for Northern Ireland lags considerably behind the commitments made by Great Britain and Ireland, adding to concerns Northern Ireland may be becoming a serious outlier in climate and environmental governance. Stormont’s agriculture and environment committee heard this month that the targets outlined in its draft climate strategy are “significantly less ambitious” than those set by England, Scotland and Wales. The draft strategy’s target of 70% of water bodies reaching “good” status by 2027 falls “significantly” short of Scotland’s target of 81%, the committee heard. It is understood the strategy at present does not include an aim to recycle 70% of all waste by 2030, as recommended by the UK’s Climate Change Committee (CCC), nor does it set targets for food wastes and overall waste as Scotland and Wales have done. Pledges to increase new woodland plantation by about 1,400 hectares annually to 8.8% coverage by 2030 – with Northern Ireland having the lowest tree cover in Europe – were also said to be significantly behind corresponding pledges in Scotland, Wales and Ireland. Currently out for consultation, Tuesday is the deadline for the public to respond to the draft strategy. “The environment strategy is weak, flawed and fails to address the legacy of a country with declining water quality and no clean air strategy,” said James Orr, the director of Friends of the Earth Northern Ireland. “With only two months to go in this executive to pass progressive climate legislation, all eyes are watching to see if Northern Ireland can grasp the last chance in this mandate to build a society that works with nature or be ridiculed as the dirty corner of Europe.” Northern Ireland has for a number of years been the only devolved administration without its own specific climate change legislation and targets for emissions reduction. The 2008 UK Climate Change Act only requires emissions cuts as a cross-jurisdiction aggregate. Two competing climate bills are making their way through the Northern Irish assembly – the first a private member’s bill introduced in October 2020 that would set a legally binding 2045 net zero target, and another, tabled in July 2021 by the agriculture minister, Edwin Poots, aims for carbon emissions to be reduced by 82% by 2050. Upcoming elections for the devolved parliament are to be held no later than 5 May. Poots, echoing farming groups’ claims that the 2045 target could wipe out half of the country’s livestock farmers if enforced, has said the first bill would “decimate” Northern Ireland’s agrifood industry – which recorded a turnover of more than £5bn in 2019 and employs about 25,000 people. The Green party NI leader, Clare Bailey, who tabled the first climate bill, said: “If Northern Ireland remains the only part of the UK with no climate legislation and no net zero target, it risks undermining the UK’s climate action on a national level. “Northern Ireland has the highest per-capita emissions of anywhere in the UK, so it’s crucial that emissions are rapidly reduced here to ensure the UK meets its national targets.” The climate act is one of a number of environmental pledges at the heart of the “New Decade, New Approach” agreement that restored the devolved governing institutions in January 2020, after a record shutdown period of more than three years. An independent environmental protection agency regulator and a “green new deal” package promised for Northern Ireland are both yet to be delivered. Civil society organisations say the requisite science and technology is already in place to enable a rapid transition towards net zero and that the choice between the two climate bills is fundamentally a political one. “Northern Ireland’s inability to fulfil climate commitments is due to political failings, rather than a lack of scientific evidence,” said Dr Amanda Slevin, the chair of the Climate Coalition NI group. She accused Poots of having used CCC findings “selectively”, saying that his bill “gives the Department [of Agriculture, the Environment and Rural Affairs] the authority to change the [climate] targets both in terms of the level of emissions reductions and the date by which they are to be achieved. In effect, the bill’s targets are not fixed.” Although the CCC chair, Lord Deben, has said it would be “morally wrong” to hold Northern Ireland to the 2045 net zero goal, the organisation stresses that its 82-84% reduction target is a minimum for Northern Ireland and that it should be reviewed over time. Poots said: “My executive climate change bill, which is currently undergoing legislative passage, is evidence-based and science-led, and its at least 82% emissions reduction by 2050 target for Northern Ireland has been advised by the independent and world-renowned expert statutory advisory body – the UK Climate Change Committee. “This at least 82% target is a highly ambitious but an equitable contribution for Northern Ireland to fully contribute to UK net zero through a balanced pathway that will both protect the environment and boost the Northern Ireland economy. It also is scientifically compatible with the emissions pathway required to keep to the Paris agreement’s 1.5C [above pre-industrial levels] global warming limit.”Nick Kyrgios is simultaneously an open book and an enigma. He says what he thinks and does the unthinkable. Sometimes that comes in the form of throwing a tantrum or berating the chair umpire. Other times it is raising funds for communities devastated by bushfires or becoming the pandemic voice of reason. To this day it is unclear whether he has a sizeable chip on his shoulder or genuinely does not give a toss. A similar indecision can also be felt by the viewer, of wanting to like and dislike him and flirting with both in equal measure. Love him or hate, though, one cannot help but watch him. Kyrgios had missed all the warm-up events to his ninth Australian Open after problems with asthma and then coming down with Covid‑19, which he said had him sleeping 17 hours a day. The Australian was underdone when he rolled into Melbourne on a private jet on Sunday for this opener. Nobody knew how he would fare against Liam Broady, the British qualifier who has never made the main draw of this grand slam before and has not progressed past the second round in any other. Unfortunately for the 28-year-old Broady and his supporters at home in Stockport, his debut was short-lived, ending in a 6-4, 6-4, 6-3 defeat in one hour and 54 minutes. For the local favourite up the other end, this potential banana skin of a match morphed into a warm-up for his round-two antagonist, Daniil Medvedev, who swept past Switzerland’s Henri Laaksonen in straight sets. The Russian world No 2 was runner-up here last year and won the 2021 US Open but this will mean little to Kyrgios, who beat him both times they played in 2019. He holds the same winning record over the world No 1, his recent “bromance” buddy, Novak Djokovic. Such unpredictability is the essence of his personality, described by himself as “spontaneous” and “unorthodox”. It is the foundation of the public’s addiction to him, which was no more evident than on Tuesday night. John Cain Arena is the people’s court. It is also Kyrgios’s court, his haven for showboating shenanigans. Seemingly straightforward contests have gone very wrong for this player in the past, but by the time he had wrapped up the first set in 34 minutes he’d served 10 aces to Broady’s none. At the end of proceedings there were 21. One whacked a ball-boy on the hip. Broady had his moments, including a leaping smash to help him win a first-set service game to love, and several more eye-catching shots thereafter. In his opening service game in the second set, he rallied from 40-0 to deuce and survived three advantages only to cede the game anyway. This was largely the story of the match – he hung in there admirably but ultimately fell short. Kyrgios won the next service game to love, sealing it with another shot through the legs. He did not even move his feet, just stuck out his tongue, gave it a wiggle and broke into a grin. Broady said it made him feel like a “club player”. The early theatrics were not just of his own making. Broady walked on to the court to chants of “siuuu” and heard them again every time he went to serve. Midway through the second set he was about to release his serve toss when a spectator shouted “underarm, man”. He burst out laughing, Kyrgios did too, and then they were both standing there spluttering and smiling for a good 10 seconds. Before long Kyrgios too was copping the “siu” treatment from the Cristiano Ronaldo enthusiasts. “I thought they were going to do it for 10 minutes,” he said. “They did it for two hours. I know I’ve got the crowd in the palm of my hand. Obviously Liam’s a great player, but his experience on that court, in that situation, when the crowd’s going nuts, he’s never experienced that before. That’s the reason why, at break points, I’m trying to get the crowd up and get him to feel the pressure.” Broady described the experience as “absolutely awful”. “The way he orchestrates the crowd, again, you see videos on TV, but it doesn’t do it justice when you’re playing in front of an Aussie crowd – Nick Kyrgios’s home court,” he said. “It was pretty crazy out there. But glad to have got it out of the way.” The other stange thing about Kyrgios is that tennis, for him, is basically a fun thing to do – when he feels like it. “I like to feel good and I like to just enjoy my life,” he said last week. “I know it sounds ridiculous, but I play a bit of tennis on the side.” That much is apparent in the 26-year-old’s rankings slide to world No 114. He finds himself in the triple-digits for the first time since July 2014, when the then 144th-ranked teenager blew Rafael Nadal, then the world No 1, off centre court en route to the Wimbledon quarter-finals and subsequently shot up to 66th. The intervening seven and a half years have been a wild ride. Of brickbat and bluster, moral high grounds and meltdowns, and a generally untamed predilection for controversy. “If I’m ranked 1,000 or 10 in the world everyone knows what I’m capable of on tour,” he said before the tournament. “I’m not a player that hasn’t proven himself … I talk a lot, but I also have beaten a lot of players and I have won a lot of tournaments.” Tennis etiquette does not seem to apply. Emotions are never suppressed and protocols not always adhered to. Even when Kyrgios is not talking, he is talking. Each triumphant fist pump and indignant glare is an open window into his state of mind. Every last bead of sweat that drips from his brow has something to say. After the match, his actual words were of surprise. “The first couple of days [with Covid] I was bedridden, I didn’t know if I’d be able to play,” he said. “I couldn’t ask for a better team because the last week has been tough with the isolation. I was lucky enough to have a tennis court to just hit some serves. “I’m just super happy to be here again. We’ve all had a tough couple of years and to play in front of you guys it was a lot of fun. This is my favourite court in the entire world.”The court of appeal has overturned a ruling that found that a government contract given to a polling company with links to Dominic Cummings was unlawful. The lord chief justice reversed a ruling made last year after he found the original judgment to be “unprecedented”, and questioned how it perceived an alleged bias. Last June, a high court judge ruled that the Cabinet Office’s decision to award a contract to the market research firm Public First “gave rise to apparent bias and was unlawful”. Public First is run by policy specialists James Frayne and Rachel Wolf, both of whom previously worked with Cummings when he worked for Michael Gove. The company was given a contract for more than £550,000 in June 2020 for focus groups and other research – including testing public health slogans such as “Stay at home, protect the NHS, save lives”. The campaigning organisation the Good Law Project (GLP), which brought the case, plans to appeal to the supreme court. June’s ruling was the first in a series of judicial review legal challenges brought by the GLP against government Covid-19 contracts awarded with no competitive tenders under emergency regulations Mrs Justice O’Farrell found that the “apparent bias” was not due to the existing relationships between Cummings and Public First, but because of a failure to consider any other research agency or record the objective criteria used in the selection. However, in a judgment on Tuesday, the court of appeal overturned her ruling. The lord chief justice, Lord Burnett, sitting with Lord Justice Coulson and Lady Justice Carr, found that the original judgment was an “unprecedented outcome”. Burnett concluded: “The fair-minded and reasonably informed observer would not have concluded that a failure to carry out a comparative exercise of the type identified by the judge created a real possibility that the decision-maker was biased.” In response, the GLP said: “We don’t think the court of appeal is right. And so we plan to ask the supreme court to hear an appeal.” In a statement, it added: “We believe there is proper and widespread public interest in the extent to which the law restrains public servants from awarding valuable public contracts to their friends without adequate safeguards to protect against the risk of bias.” In a document setting out its grounds for appeal, GLP lawyers said: “Mr Cummings should not have been permitted to determine that the contract should be awarded to his personal friends without safeguards to mitigate the risk of bias.” Cummings said the court of appeal ruling was “total vindication for my decisions on moving super speedy on procurement to save lives”. He added: “Remember all the ignorant nonsense from pundits/minor social scientists/remainiacs?” In a reference to the Good Law Project chief, Jolyon Maugham, he said: “Lord chief justice crushes kimono-fox-killer.” Frayne, founding partner of Public First said: “Our research team worked unbelievably hard for seven days a week – from early morning till late at night – during the height of the pandemic, helping refine messages that prevented many casualties. Today’s judgment rightly pays tribute to the team’s efforts and they should be proud of their work.” A Cabinet Office spokesperson said: “We welcome the court of appeal’s ruling that this contract was awarded entirely lawfully. This includes the court’s firm rejection of the allegation of apparent bias, overturning the previous judgment. “Throughout the pandemic our priority has always been to save lives and the work by Public First helped to improve vitally important health messages.”Larry Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, the world’s biggest investment fund manager, said pushing climate policies was about profits, not being “woke”. In his annual letter to CEOs , Fink said businesses, cities and countries that do not plan for a carbon-free future risked being left behind. He argued that the pursuit of long-term returns was the main driver behind climate policies, after being criticised for seeking to influence companies. “Stakeholder capitalism is not about politics. It is not a social or ideological agenda. It is not ‘woke’,” he wrote. “We focus on sustainability not because we’re environmentalists, but because we are capitalists and fiduciaries to our clients.” West Virginia’s treasurer said this week that the state’s Treasury investment board would no longer use a BlackRock fund, after the fund manager urged companies to cut their carbon emissions to net zero by 2050. The official said this would damage West Virginia’s economy. In his Dear CEO letter, Fink wrote: “It is through effective stakeholder capitalism that capital is efficiently allocated, companies achieve durable profitability, and value is created and sustained over the long term. Make no mistake, the fair pursuit of profit is still what animates markets; and long-term profitability is the measure by which markets will ultimately determine your company’s success.” After Fink wrote two years ago that climate risk was an investment risk and that the firm would put sustainability at the heart of its investment decisions, many companies set out plans to become carbon-neutral. BlackRock had previously been criticised for not pushing hard enough on the issue. Last spring, BlackRock – which manages about $10tn (£7.4tn) in assets – reportedly threw its weight behind a shareholder campaign to oust several directors on the board of the US oil giant ExxonMobil. The coup launched by dissident hedge fund activists at Engine No 1 replaced two Exxon board members with its own candidates to help push the oil company towards a greener strategy. Fink predicted in this year’s letter that “the next 1,000 unicorns won’t be search engines or social media companies, they’ll be sustainable, scalable innovators – startups that help the world decarbonise and make the energy transition affordable for all consumers”, adding that established companies should strive to do the same. He said a “tectonic shift” had happened in recent years, with sustainable investments globally reaching $4tn. Fink also said that companies had a moral responsibility to adapt to “a new world of work” that had been reshaped by the coronavirus pandemic. He said “that world is gone” – where companies expected workers to come to the office five days a week, mental health was rarely discussed in the workplace, and wages for those on low and middle incomes barely grew.More homes have been provided with full fibre broadband in recent years as companies like BT expand their plan for Openreach in a bid to improve access to rural areas. However, some are still experiencing broadband issues either with their current supplier or because they do not have the technology installed where they live. We would like to hear your broadband experiences. Have you experienced any issues? We are particularly interested in hearing from those in rural areas. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Ali Martin Player of the series Pat Cummins was class personified, both as a courteous, seemingly ego-free captain who had Australia playing in his image and the standout fast bowler of his generation. Breakthrough player Scott Boland arrived mid-series with little in the way of fanfare and walked off at the end in Hobart with 18 wickets at 9.5 runs apiece. Build the man a statue. Best moment The final session on day two of the Boxing Day Test, when the Melbourne Cricket Ground turned into “The G” and Australia’s quicks charged in with a wall of noise behind them. Thrilling stuff. One thing I would have changed The schedule change made it understandable in this instance – and the twilight period does make for a stunning backdrop – but one day-night Test match per Ashes series is plenty. The 2023 Ashes series will be … a golden chance for Australia to claim a series win in England for the first time since 2001 unless the hosts can perform a handbrake turn on their flatlining form. Mark Ramprakash Player of the series If you asked any of England’s batters which bowler they would not want to face it would be Pat Cummins, who in his first series as captain was fast, accurate and led his team excellently. Breakthrough player I’ve been massively impressed by Cameron Green. Technically he looks a very sound right-hand bat who can play long innings at the highest level and as a bowler he is tall, strong, hostile and unsettles players with pace and bounce. Best moment England’s highlight has to be Mark Wood getting six wickets in Hobart. He’s such a great character, who brings the team energy, enthusiasm and a point of difference. His first three overs in the final Test went for 30 and his resilience, the way he stuck at his task and came back to earn his reward, is a lesson for all cricketers. One thing I would have changed I would rewind to the first morning and get England to bowl first. If I’m allowed a second change, I’d also have played Anderson and Broad. The 2023 Ashes series will be … very hard to predict for England and by then they may have lost Jimmy Anderson, but we will be more competitive. Barney Ronay Player of the series Scott Boland, a man having the time of his life against the most joyless opponents imaginable, a glorious and instructive note of contrast. Breakthrough player Cameron Green, who can be basically anything from here, genuine all-rounder, giant swooping eagle-man predator in the gully and a cricketer of real grace. The numbers. The numbers are going to be ridiculous. Best moment For Australia: first ball of the series. Also, everything else that followed. For England: n/a. One thing I would have changed Complete systemic restructure of professional game, abolition of the ECB in favour of body driven by engagement not profit, quota of annual ringfenced free-to-air TV, serious national investment in public facilities, genuine, no-bullshit 10-year plan to re-engage cricket in schools and lost parts of the demographic. Nobody gets to call themselves “chief executive” or “managing director” (lol) or draw vast personal bonuses. The 2023 Ashes series will be … very different. This is a low. Details matter. Chris Woakes hooping it around at Edgbaston, one or two semi-functional batters and the root and branch machine will be packed up in the shed for the next three years. Andy Bull Player of the series Pat Cummins. Just pips Mitchell Starc, who had a superb all-round series. Cummins took 21 wickets at an average of 18, led his team brilliantly, and did it all without whining, snarling, sledging or posturing. Breakthrough player Cameron Green. With all respect to Scott Boland’s Edwardian bowling average, Green looks utterly formidable. The idea of how good Australia could be in the next 10 years now they have a genuine all-rounder is a little terrifying. Best moment Cummins and Starc at the MCG. The way Starc bowled Rory Burns with the first ball of the series is the moment people will remember, but his spell with Cummins on the second evening at the MCG was as good as Test bowling gets. One thing I would have changed Everything? The one thing that would have made the most difference in the short term would have been a few proper warm-up games. Even that wouldn’t have saved England. The 2023 Ashes series will be … either a new low for England or a landmark on the upslope from this tour. It depends entirely on the decisions the management make in the next couple of months. Jonathan Liew Player of the series Travis Head. How different might the series have been without his momentum-shifting hundreds in Brisbane and Hobart? Well, probably not that different. But still, a towering effort. Breakthrough player Turns out the bowler of the series was an 83mph seamer in his thirties. Unhappily for England it was Scott Boland, Australia’s most spectacular Ashes debutant in a generation. Best moment The first ball. Who would ever want to forget the ferocious noise at the Gabba, the searing pace of Mitchell Starc, the thrilling clunk of shattered stumps? Well, probably Rory Burns. One thing I would have changed England’s preparation. Poorly drilled teams play desperate cricket and England’s capitulation did immeasurable damage to the Ashes brand. Two first-class games should be a bare minimum in future. The 2023 Ashes series will be … largely unaffected by Covid, riotously entertaining and probably an England win with a new-look team. Life moves pretty fast, you know. Tanya Aldred Player of the series A last-minute call-up to the captaincy, Pat Cummins did everything with grace, was the series leading wicket-taker and one end of an electric spell of fast bowling that wonderful Melbourne evening. Breakthrough player Cameron Green. He bangs the ball in with unerring accuracy, fields like an angel at gully and by the end was unfurling divine cover drives that defy his 2m height and wingspan. Best moment Jonny Bairstow’s hundred and Usman Khawaja’s two would be up there, but for Ashes-defining momentum, it has to be Starc’ toppling Burns with the first ball of the series. One thing I would have changed Chosen to bowl at Brisbane. England’s batting morale never recovered from being 11 for three in the first half hour of the series, while a jaunty bowling performance might have stayed that death spiral. The 2023 Ashes series will be … pimped for all its worth. Cummins will be photographed in the royal box at Wimbledon and England will be better with a Dukes in their hand and the clouds on their back. Geoff Lemon Player of the series Scott Boland. Sure he didn’t play the first two, but featured so dramatically from then on. Averaging 9.5 with the ball is like averaging 120 with the bat. Old school. Breakthrough player Also Boland, but he deserved the main gong too given his returns were so far ahead of everyone else’s. Beneath the radar, but every time he bowled, wickets came. Best moment Marnus Labuschagne dancing off to cover, getting bowled behind his legs and ending up flat on his face. Also, Stuart Broad repeatedly having the celebrappeal shot down – then declining to review. One thing I would have changed England’s batting. The coaches for England’s batting. The system that produces England’s batting. The 2023 Ashes series will be … not as bad as this one. Surely? Won’t it? Simon Burnton Player of the series Cameron Green. Only one Englishman scored more runs than him and only one took more wickets – plus they were often important runs (his partnership with Travis Head in Hobart turned the game) and important wickets (70% were top-five batters). Just 22, he is quite the prospect. Breakthrough player Not long before his 33rd birthday Scott Boland’s breakthrough was both late and ludicrous, his figures in the second innings of his debut Test in Melbourne – four overs, seven runs, six wickets – reading like some kind of practical joke. Best moment The first ball of the first match sensationally set the tone for a miserable campaign for Rory Burns individually and the England team as a whole. One thing I would have changed For all the pain involved this series may come to be seen as important and even beneficial for England. However, ideally I wouldn’t have watched any of it, read anything about it or spoken to anyone with any knowledge of it. The 2023 Ashes series will be … an unhealthy obsession for all of English cricket and general distraction from more useful stuff.Let’s take a look at the show court schedule for Wednesday, with Ash Barty, Rafa Nadal, Naomi Osaka and Sascha Zverev all in action. Rod Laver Arena (from 12am GMT/11am local) (Q, It) M Trevisan v P Badosa (8, Sp) (1, Aus) A Barty v L Bronzetti (Q, It) (Q, Ger) Y Hanfmann v R Nadal (6, Sp) Night session (from 8am GMT/7pm local) (US) M Brengle v N Osaka (13, Jpn) (3, Ger) A Zverev v J Millman (Aus) Margaret Court Arena (12am GMT/7pm local) (Fr) H Tan v E Svitolina (15, Ukr) (Kor) Kwon S v D Shapovalov (14, Can) (4, Cz) B Krejcikova v Wang X (WC, Chn) Night session (from 8am GMT/7pm local) (Q, Chn) Zheng Q v M Sakkari (5, Gre) (17, Fr) G Monfils v A Bublik (Kaz) Here’s Emma Kemp on Nick Kyrgios, who gave home fans plenty of entertainment in his win over Liam Broady: Day two was a very good day for British hopes, with Andy Murray, Dan Evans and Heather Watson all joining Emma Raducanu in winning their first-round matches.A decent day for the hosts, too, with Alex De Minaur and Nick Kyrgios progressing as wild card Sam Stosur rolled back the years. Elsewhere, Daniil Medvedev, Stefanos Tsitsipas, Félix Auger-Aliassime and Andrey Rublev all won, while Aryna Sabalenka fought back to avoid a shock against Storm Sanders. A couple of big names did fall in the women’s draw, with Petra Kvitova and Angelique Kerber both losing. Stefanos Tsitsipas has booked his place in the second round, making light work of a tricky opponent in Mikael Ymer. He wins 6-2, 6-4, 6-3 and will play 21-year-old Sebastian Baez of Argentina in the second round. Raducanu looked a little emotional during that interview, and after winning match point – I think getting through that match will mean a lot to her. It would have been easy to fold when Stephens found her game in the second set, but she fought back and passed a test she didn’t face at the US Open – winning a deciding set. Let’s not forget – this was her debut at the Australian Open. Emma Raducanu: “I just want to thank everyone for coming out and staying so late, I really appreciate it! I thought it was a high-quality match, with lots of great rallies. I’m really happy to come through against a great champion like Sloane.” “It was a tough match up for a first round, her athleticism is really up there – I was working really hard to win points. I’m just so happy to come through it. In the third set, I was really feeling it – the scoreline didn’t really reflect the game.” First set: Stephens 0-6, 6-2, 1-6 Raducanu A poor Stephens return, and a scorching inside-out backhand winner put Raducanu 30-0 up. The finish line is in sight, and an unreturned first serve brings up three match points. Then, an untimely moth-based interruption and a double fault, the second serve just catching the net cord. Stephens hangs in there with some terrific groundstrokes, and it’s 40-30. Another gruelling rally ensues – but Raducanu wins it with a crafty, cross-court drop shot that Stephens can’t return! First set: Stephens 0-6, 6-2, 1-5* Raducanu (*denotes next server) Some of Raducanu’s defensive shots has been excellent, digging out lost causes and making Stephens play one more shot – which has been enough plenty of times. Raducanu amuses herself with a wild attempt at a cross-court winner, and Stephens finds the line with a winner. The American dodges the double (filled?) bagel – now can she trouble Raducanu on serve? First set: Stephens 0-6, 6-2, *0-5 Raducanu (*denotes next server) This has been ... an odd match so far. But Raducanu deserves credit for holding firm when Stephens looked to be taking charge. That feels a long time ago now: Stephens looks weary, shoulders down and not getting her footwork right on a couple of points. At 40-0, a Stephens winner and a double fault crank the pressure up a touch. Raducanu tries to clip the line after a long rally, but it slips wide. Deuce, then unforced error, ferocious winner, unforced error, cross-court fizzer from the mercurial Stephens. Next, a nervy Raducanu second serve is belted back – but she somehow recovers the ball, and Stephens misses the volley at the net! Raducanu holds, and is 5-0 up in what has felt like a pretty even set. First set: Stephens 0-6, 6-2, 0-4* Raducanu (*denotes next server) Stephens responds well to a net-cord bounce to edge ahead, but Raducanu moves in on serve to boss the next point. Stephens nets – her 34th unforced error to Raducanu’s 25 – but dominates the next rally, winning with a cross-court volley. An awkward Stephens forehand finds the top of the net, and Raducanu gets the double break with another attacking return! The winner of this match will face Danka Kovinic, the world No 99, in the second round. Get through that, and it’ll probably be Simona Halep in the third round. First set: Stephens 0-6, 6-2, *0-3 Raducanu (*denotes next server) The pattern so far: Raducanu won the first six games, then Stephens won two, Raducanu two, Stephens four, and now Raducanu two and counting. At 15-15, second serve, Raducanu chases down a fierce return and gets enough on it. Another big moment, followed up with a dead-straight winner down the line. She gets the hold, waiting patiently for Stephens to slip up in the next rally, and Raducanu is back on top in this match. First set: Stephens 0-6, 6-2, 0-2* Raducanu (*denotes next server) That felt like a big hold, Raducanu releasing some frustration with a shout to her coaching team. Both players are struggling for consistency, but Raducanu’s defensive work pays off as Stephens slaps a forehand into the net. Break point, converted as Stephens sends a backhand long! First set: Stephens 0-6, 6-2, *0-1 Raducanu (*denotes next server) Raducanu moves 30-love up but a couple of snatched shots let Stephens back in. The Briton is frustrated, and complains to the umpire about crowd noise distracting her. She produces a big first serve, then gets over the line with a superb defensive slice and a winner at the net. Stefanos Tsitsipas got the break he needed in the second set, turning a 30-0 deficit around in the ninth game and serving out. He leads Mikael Ymer 6-2, 6-4, 2-1 with another break in the third. Looking at the scoreline, you might fear that Raducanu has lost her way – but it’s more a case of Stephens finding a much higher level in the second set, having barely turned up for the first. The American will be favourite going into the decider, but will those unforced errors return? First set: Stephens 0-6, 6-2* Raducanu (*denotes next server) Sloane Stephens has found her groove now and offers Raducanu very little here, sealing the second set with a fierce forehand. Game very much on! First set: Stephens 0-6, *5-2 Raducanu (*denotes next server) Stephens continues to blow hot and cold, a clinical return winner followed by a wafted backhand. Raducanu is forced to go for a winner down the line at deuce – and it drifts just long. She hangs on to win another hard-fought rally, but Stephens pings a forehand into the corner. Raducanu goes long again, and Stephens will serve for the second set! “What has become of Sloane Stephens?” asks Dean Kinsella. “Is it injury or Covid or what?” A bit of both in the last year, and she’s had to overcome bereavements – her aunt died of Covid, and her grandparents died within a week of one another last year. She can still be very good on her day, but has struggled badly for consistency in the last couple of years. Second set: Stephens 0-6, 4-2* Raducanu (*denotes next server) This could be a big moment – after toiling to 40-30, Stephens gets the better of a tough 21-point rally and lets out a yell. She’s looking much, much better than that dreadful first set. On Rod Laver, Stefanos Tsitsipas took the first set 6-2 against Mikael Ymer – but it’s been a tougher test in the second, the Greek recovering from a break down to level at 4-4. Alex Popyrin’s hopes are over – he’s lost in five sets to France’s Arthur Rinderknech. Second set: Stephens 0-6, *3-2 Raducanu (*denotes next server) Some wonky first serves allow Stephens in at 0-30, but Raducanu grinds out the next two points. An unforced error each, then a mistimed backhand from Raducanu offers her opponent a break point. She sends her next forehand long, and Stephens edges back in front – although neither player will be thrilled with how the second set has gone so far. Second set: Stephens 0-6, 2-2* Raducanu (*denotes next server) Stephens appeared to have found some rhythm, but offers up two sloppy points on serve to give Raducanu a chance at 0-30. Another loose shot offers up two break points, but a couple of ambitious shots fly wide. Deuce – but Stephens tries too hard on a cross-court winner and then badly miscues a slice. Raducanu breaks back! Second set: Stephens 0-6, *2-1 Raducanu (*denotes next server) Raducanu could use a hold here, to stop momentum swinging any further. A booming, high forehand down the line doesn’t hurt, and the first serve is back on track in a hold to 15. Second set: Stephens 0-6, *2-0 Raducanu (*denotes next server) That game lasted 15 minutes – almost as long as the entire first set. Stephens began to show what she can do there, and she backs up the break with a hold to 15 as Raducanu sends a return long. Second set: Stephens 0-6, *1-0 Raducanu (*denotes next server) Stephens produces a winner to move 30-15 up, then both players have to wait while a ball boy collects a moth from the court. After that, it’s an errant double fault from Raducanu, and two break points – but she saves both with well-placed serves. Stephens wafts a return a mile long, but prevails in the match’s longest (26 shots) and best rally so far. She gets another break point as Raducanu misjudges a volley, but fires an ambitious cross-court winner an inch wide. We go to a fifth deuce – but Raducanu serves up two straight double faults, and Stephens has the break! Sloane Stephens has even less match practice under her belt – she got married, to US footballer Jozy Altidore (once of Sunderland), on New Year’s Day and their honeymoon was spoiled by a bout of Covid. She doesn’t look in the zone today, offering little answer to Raducanu’s attacking style. Plenty of pundits were expecting a one-sided affair today, and so it’s proved – but it’s Emma Raducanu who is dominant, breaking for a third time to take the set 6-0. Stephens hasn’t really turned up, but this is still hugely impressive. First set: Stephens *0-5 Raducanu (*denotes next server) Raducanu races in behind her serve and lands a sliced winner, then powers down two unstoppable serves. Stephens gets the next one back, but it’s smashed back across court. Raducanu leads 5-0 in 13 minutes – a stupendous start. First set: Stephens 0-4* Raducanu (*denotes next server) Sloane Stephens is certainly lacking intensity early on here – maybe still annoyed about having to take her watch off. Raducanu, on the other hand, has been positive from the off and is hitting clean winners – a looping effort down the line earns the double break! First set: Stephens *0-3 Raducanu (*denotes next server) Raducanu lost her only warm-up match in Australia 6-0, 6-1 to Elena Rybakina, so expectations for Melbourne were certainly tempered. From that perspective, this has been an encouraging start – despite a double fault, she holds to 15 against a passive Stephens. First set: Stephens 0-2* Raducanu (*denotes next server) Raducanu starts off aggressively, stepping into the Stephens serve and setting up two break points as her opponent sends a loose forehand long. And she takes it when Stephens nets a backhand! First set: Stephens *0-1 Raducanu (*denotes next server) A solid start from Raducanu, firing down a clutch of accurate first serves to hold to love. We’ll be focusing on this match, but here’s a quick sweep around the courts first – Stefanos Tsitsipas is cruising, 5-1 up on Ymer in the first set. Australia’s Alex Popyrin is a break down in the decider against Arthur Rinderknech. Former champion Angelique Kerber is out, losing 6-4, 6-3 to Kaia Kanepi. An awkward pre-game moment as the umpire advises Sloane Stephens to take off her watch (I think). The American isn’t happy about it, saying a lot of other players have worn one for the warm-up. After that, Stephens wins the toss and elects to receive first. Emma Raducanu is making her first grand slam appearance since winning the US Open, and today’s opponent could probably offer some words of advice on adjusting to life as a slam winner. Sloane Stephens was a surprise winner in New York back in 2017 but backed it up by reaching the French Open the following year. The American has struggled in the last couple of seasons, slipping to world No 65 at present. She’s still a very tough draw in the first round, but perhaps in a way, she’s a better opponent for Raducanu today than an unfancied outsider – the pressure won’t be all on one side of the net. Tsitsipas has an early break, and leads Mikael Ymer 3-1 in the first set. He beat today’s opponent in straight sets on the way to the semi-finals in Melbourne last year. Alex De Minaur wins 3-6, 6-3, 6-0, 6-3! The Australian men’s No 1 looked to be in trouble after Musetti took the first set, but he turned things around, and will face Kamil Majchrzak next after the Polish player eliminated Andreas Seppi earlier on. Next up on Margaret Court Arena: it’s Emma Raducanu v Sloane Stephens! For anyone out there who would like to listen along to matches with commentary specially designed for those with reduced vision, you can do so via Action Audio. They are offering a new audio service for the Australian Open, using real-time ball monitoring technology and spatial sound design. You can try it out here. Alex De Minaur is closing in on victory over Lorenzo Musetti. He goes 5-3 up in the fourth set with a cross-court winner. Over on Rod Laver Arena, No 4 seed Stefanos Tsitsipas is getting started against Sweden’s Mikael Ymer. That was really impressive from Kyrgios, who hasn’t played a Tour match since September – and Liam Broady can be happy enough with his efforts, too. Aryna Sabalenka has got through against wild card Storm Sanders, recovering from a set and a break down to win 5-7, 6-3, 6-3. Angelique Kerber is in deep trouble, though – she’s 4-6, 3-5 down to Estonia’s Kaia Kanepi. Nick Kyrgios: “I had some doubts [if he would play], the last week has been tough in isolation – I couldn’t ask for a better team. I’m so happy to be here again, and to play in front of you guys, it was a lot of fun. “The first couple of days [with Covid] I was bed-ridden, I didn’t know if I’d be able to play,” he adds. On his next opponent, Daniil Medvedev: “He’s a brilliant player, I’m going to have to play well – I’m not looking forward too much, I’ve got doubles tomorrow!” Broady is expecting one more shot at the Kyrgios serve, but his opponent has other ideas, stepping on the gas to set up two break and match points – and he takes the first with a whipped, cross-court backhand return. Job done! Third set: Broady 4-6, 4-6, *3-5 Kyrgios (denotes next server) Broady is able to get one serve back over the net, and that is returned with interest by Kyrgios – now one game away from victory. Third set: Broady 4-6, 4-6, 3-4* Kyrgios (denotes next server) There have been positives for Liam Broady – he holds to love here, and his beard-gold-chain-retro-kit combo is among the strongest we’ll see all fortnight. But the fact remains that he’s running out of time to finally break the Kyrgios serve. Third set: Broady 4-6, 4-6, *2-4 Kyrgios (denotes next server) A pair of holds exchanged, and a couple of trick shots from Kyrgios that don’t quite come off. Kyrgios’ serve wobbled slightly at the start of this set but he’s back in the groove now, firing down aces to move two games from victory. Aryna Sabalenka is also closing in on the second round – she’s now 5-1 up in the decider against Storm Sanders on Rod Laver Arena. Third set: Broady 4-6, 4-6, 1-2* Kyrgios (denotes next server) Broady held off Kyrgios on serve and then forced a break point – but he’s under more pressure here at deuce. He nets, and it’s break point Kyrgios – and after a brutal rally, Kyrgios gets a lucky bounce off the net cord. He offers up a hand in apology, but the end result is that he’s four holds away from victory now. Sabalenka appears to have got herself out of trouble against Storm Sanders – a well-timed break in the second helped her level, and she’s now a break up in the decider. Elsewhere, Alex De Minaur has raced to take the third set from Lorenzo Musetti, winning it 6-0. He leads 2-1, while fellow Aussie Alex Popyrin is 2-1 down to Frenchman Arthur Rinderknech. Third set: Broady 4-6, 4-6, *1-1 Kyrgios (denotes next server) An ill-advised through-the-legs effort from Kyrgios is dispatched by Broady, who then finds a winning return to get to deuce. Signs that Kyrgios has taken his eye off the ball, and it’s advantage Broady as he chases down a fortunate net-cord bounce. Kyrgios lets out a roar as Broady’s return goes long – and he backs that up with a couple more big serves to escape. So, what’s happened in the men’s draw overnight/earlier today? Well, Daniil Medvedev saw off Henri Laaksonen and awaits the winner of this match. His compatriot, Andrey Rublev also eased through against Gianluca Mager. Jannik Sinner beat lucky loser João Sousa in straight sets while Felix Auger-Aliassime battled back from two sets down to beat Finland’s Emil Ruusuvuori. Marin Cilic, Grigor Dimitrov and Roberto Bautista Agut are all through, but John Isner lost in five sets to Maxime Cressy and Ugo Humbert was beaten by Richard Gasquet. Dan Evans eased past David Goffin, and Andy Murray didn’t do badly either. Third set: Broady 4-6, 4-6, 1-0* Kyrgios (denotes next server) In both of the first two sets, Kyrgios broke at the first opportunity and served out the set. Can Broady stop him this time? He’s quickly 0-30 down but holds his composure and turns the game around, finishing off with a cross-court winner. Second set: Broady 4-6, *4-6 Kyrgios (denotes next server) Boom! A cross-court winner. Pow! A brute-force unreturnable serve. Thwack! Another ace to seal the second set. Nick Kyrgios is two sets to the good! Second set: Broady 4-6, 4-5* Kyrgios (denotes next server) Another service hold for Broady, who will make Kyrgios serve this out at least. The Aussie men’s No 1, Alex De Minaur, is back in the game against Lorenzo Musetti, taking the second set 6-3 to level things up. A spot of bother for the 2016 champion Angelique Kerber – she’s 4-2 down in the first set to Kaia Kanepi. First set: Broady 4-6, *3-5 Kyrgios (denotes next server) A Kyrgios ace whacks a ball-boy on the hip, the kid offering up a stoic smile to show he’s OK. Kyrgios pounces on a net-cord bounce to tuck away a drop shot, then powers down two aces while bantering with the crowd between points. They really should mic him up. “The Kyrgios-Broady match is a delight,” says Belinda. “Love the spirit it is being played in – credit to both of them tonight so far.” Absolutely agree, it’s nice to see. Broady has held serve again, and has two more chances to make something happen on the Kyrgios serve. A big chance missed for Storm Sanders, who was a break up in the second set but has allowed Aryna Sabalenka to break back. Still plenty for the Belarussian to do at 5-7, 3-3 and clearly frustrated with herself. Second set: Broady 4-6, *2-4 Kyrgios (denotes next server) The second set has followed the same pattern as the first, with Kyrgios breaking immediately and challenging his opponent to break back. No joy for Broady here, who gets to 15-all and is quickly left behind. Second set: Broady 4-6, 2-3* Kyrgios (denotes next server) Liam Broady picks up just his fifth point on the Kyrgios serve as his opponent stays in front. In the next game, a big ace from Broady draws a grin from Kyrgios. It feels almost like an exhibition match. Let’s have a look at results in the women’s draw today, starting with Garbiñe Muguruza, who eased through early on against France’s Clara Burel. Iga Swiatek outclassed British qualifier Harriet Dart 6-3, 6-0, and Simona Halep was too good for Poland’s Magdalena Frech. No 6 seed Anna Kontaveit is also through after defeating Katerina Siniakova. There was an emotional win for Sam Stosur against fellow wildcard Robin Anderson and Heather Watson beat Mayar Sherif in three sets. Leylah Fernandez, beaten in the US Open final by Emma Raducanu, lost 6-4, 6-2 to Aussie wildcard Maddison Inglis and Petra Kvitova crashed out to Romania’s Sorana Cirstea. Second set: Broady 4-6, 1-2* Kyrgios (denotes next server) The bad news for Kyrgios, who has taken complete control here, is that Daniil Medvedev, the de facto No 1 seed, lies in wait in the second round. Broady gets on the board in the second set with a solid hold. First set: Broady 4-6, *0-2 Kyrgios (denotes next server) Kyrgios races to 40-0 and then tries a quick underarm serve which lands in the net. He offers an apology to the crowd and then, in the next rally, plays a tweener on his way to securing the hold. He’s having fun out there! Second set: Broady 4-6, 0-1* Kyrgios (denotes next server) Broady fends off two break points before Kyrgios powers home a return to set up a third. A well-placed winner down the line saves it but Kyrgios wins the next rally. The break is starting to feel inevitable – and Kyrgios gets it when Broady nets! A potentially big upset brewing over on Rod Laver, where wild card Storm Sanders has taken the first set 7-5 against Aryna Sabalenka. The No 2 seed rallied from two breaks down but lost her serve again at 5-5 and Sanders, who has never won a singles match here, serves it out! First set: Broady *4-6 Kyrgios (denotes next server) At 30-15, Kyrgios takes his time, gathers his thoughts and hammers down a wide, unstoppable serve. He follows it up with an ace, and that’s the first set in the books – an exceptional start from a player who has only just recovered from Covid-19. Not such good news for home hopes on Margaret Court Arena, though – Alex De Minaur has lost the first set 6-3 to Italy’s Lorenzo Musetti. First set: Broady 4-5* Kyrgios (denotes next server) Broady, who is sporting a quite spectacular pair of multi-pastel shorts – perfect for strutting down Brighton Beach later – will make Kyrgios serve it out. There have been no cracks in the Australian’s armour so far ... First set: Broady *3-5 Kyrgios (denotes next server) Broady holds to love – can he cause Kyrgios any problems on his own serve? No, would be the answer – Kyrgios mixing it up and not giving his opponent a sniff. Broady serving to stay in the set ... First set: Broady *2-4 Kyrgios (denotes next server) Broady is hanging in there, but struggling to make any in-roads on the Kyrgios serve as the home hopeful stays a break up. Here’s more on Andy Murray’s terrific first-round victory: First set: Broady *1-3 Kyrgios (denotes next server) Kyrgios has his first serve motoring, clinching the hold with a 225kph ace. On Rod Laver Arena, Aryna Sabalenka had slipped two breaks down to Aussie outsider Storm Sanders – but has one break back to trail 4-2 in the first set. First set: Broady 1-2* Kyrgios (denotes next server) An important hold for Broady, who may not have expected his opponent to start so fluently. Broady beat Russia’s Roman Safiullin in his final qualifer – but Safiullin is in the draw too as a lucky loser, and currently 2-1 down to Alex Molcan in what looks an easier assignment. First set: Broady *0-2 Kyrgios (denotes next server) A straightforward hold for Kyrgios, who looks very much up for this, posturing between points and bossing affairs early on. First set: Broady 0-1* Kyrgios (denotes next server) Kyrgios has been short of match practice but allays any early fears for the home crowd with an immediate break, revving up the fans after a Broady lob goes long. Elsewhere, an impressive victory for Dan Evans, who follows Murray into the second round with a 6-4, 6-3, 6-0 success over David Goffin. Let’s have a quick look around the courts: on Rod Laver, home wild card Storm Sanders has an early break against the No 2 seed, Aryna Sabalenka. More good news for Aussies hopes next door, with Alex De Minaur a break up on Lorenzo Musetti in the opening set. Thanks Mike, and hello everyone. The night session is just beginning around Melbourne Park – and next up on the John Cain Arena, it’s only Nick Kyrgios, up against the British qualifier Liam Broady ... Here’s the full story on that earlier Tennis Australia statement: And with that I will hand you over to Niall McVeigh, who will see you through the opening stages of the evening session. Cheerio. Murray continues: “Obviously when we came back last year to play after the enforced break with Covid, we played with no fans in the stadium. It was tough. It is not loads of fun. You know, we train and practice to allow us to play and compete in atmospheres like this on courts like this to entertain you guys and perform in front of you. It’s an incredible atmosphere and I am so happy.” Asked about what his expectations are for this Open fortnight, he says: “Hopefully keep improving, there are things in my game I can definitely do better. I would love to have a deep run here if possible. It’s tough but I would like to have a deep run. It’s something I have not had in one of the slams since I came back from the injury and it is something that is motivating me. I play some of my best tennis over the years here, I feel comfortable here and I hope I can do it this tournament.” And with that, he’s gone, the day session ends, and the night session begins. Asked about his opponent, who he also beat at the Sydney International in the run-up to the Australian Open: “It was a brutal match in Sydney, we played three hours over three sets. I am sure you guys can tell from watching. He hits the ball huge from the back of the court and I had to do a lot of running today, a lot of defending. He is not the sort of guy whose name you want to see next to yours in the draw very often. Obviously a bit of confidence from the win last week, and thankfully managed to get over the line today.” What a performance from Murray. It was classic Murray, five sets, never making things easy for himself, but a real warrior’s performance. Here he is now, speaking on-court: “It has been a tough, tough three, four years. Put in a lot of work to get back here. I played on this court many times.The atmosphere is incredible. I have always had fantastic support. This is the one where I thought potentially I had played my last match three years ago, but it is amazing to be back winning a five- set battle like that. Couldn’t ask for any more.” And now it Basilashvili’s turn for his radar to fail him, indeed it goes completely AWOL as Murray goes 40-0 up and brings up three match points. He needs all three, but he gets there in the end as Basilashvili puts one final ball into the net! Game, set and match Murray, the wildcard! Fifth set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6(5), 4-5 Murray (*denotes next server) Murray shouts in frustration as his radar fails him and he falls to 30-15 but all his experience shines through as he scrambles back to hold and move within a break of the match and a place in the second round! Fifth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6(5), 4-4 Murray* (*denotes next server) Basilashvili is unlucky on the opening point as the ball clips the tape and bounces out but he fights back and levels at 30-30 as he whips a forehand out of reach of the chasing Murray. A booming serve that Murray can’t return follows, with an ace to finish with! Fifth set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6(5), 3-4 Murray (*denotes next server) Some quick hands from Basilashvili put him 15-0 ahead and when Murray reaches a drop shot only to put the ball out a point later, the pressure mounts on the Scot. His response? The second fastest serve of the day and an ace. But Murray loses the next point - with an unforced error he’s unhappy with himself for making - giving a break chance to the Georgian. An epic, nerve-shredding rally follows which Basilashvili wins with a backhand winner! There is a long way to go still! Fifth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6(5), 2-4 Murray* (*denotes next server) Credit to Basilashvili, he’s refusing to lie down, despite a wobbly moment here at 40-30. He holds his nerve and serve and the spotlight falls back onto Murray. Fifth set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6(5), 1-4 Murray (*denotes next server) Murray returns serve, as it were, with a love service game of his own and that must be a hammer blow for Basilashvili. He needs to find something special now. Fifth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6(5), 1-3 Murray* (*denotes next server) Basilashvili levels the ace count at 12-12 to seal a love service game - sorely needed by the Georgian who had been absolutely steamrolled prior this set. Fifth set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6(5), 0-3 Murray (*denotes next server) Make that nine after a Basilashvili error. Ace - 10. But that’s where Murray’s run ends, as the Georgian finally wins a point with a backhand winner. Still, Murray’s motor is still running and he consolidates that break to open up a three-game lead in the deciding set! Fifth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6(5), 0-2 Murray* (*denotes next server) And Murray’s not messing about here - he breaks to love! That’s eight points straight he’s won since the tie-breaker. There’s life in the veteran’s limbs yet. How does Basilashvili respond? Fifth set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6(5), 0-1 Murray (*denotes next server) So, how will Murray respond to the disappointment of missing the chance to finish this in four? Pretty well, if this love service hold is anything to go by. Fourth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 7-6(5) Murray (*denotes next server) Murray is left visibly frustrated early in the piece after Basilashvili finds the corner with a simply beautiful backhand winner to take a 2-1 lead. The Georgian then throws down an ace, he follows with another forehand winner and all of a sudden he leads 4-1. With it all to do, Murray fights hard but can’t make up the ground and with three chances to claim the set, Basilashvili does so - at the third time of asking and only after Murray finds the net! We’re going into a fifth and final set! Fourth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 6-6 Murray (*denotes next server) We’re heading to a tie-breaker! Murray holds his nerve. Who will hold theirs now? Tennis Australia has issued a more comprehensive statement regarding the Novak Djokovic saga, saying it “deeply regrets” the impact it had on players in the build-up to the Open and that “there are always lessons to learn”. Here’s the full statement: The board of Tennis Australia, supported by its Member Associations, would like to issue the following statement in relation to Australian Open 2022. We would like to make clear from the outset that we respect the decision of the Immigration Minister and the finding of the Federal Court of Australia over the weekend. Australian Open 2022 has now commenced, and our priority has always been to put on one of the world’s greatest sporting events and ensure we are delivering the best possible experience for all our players, the fans, and the community. The Australian Open is a showcase of Melbourne and Australia and much loved by players from all over the world. Tennis Australia has been working closely with both the Federal and Victorian government for the past year to deliver a Covid safe Australian Open for the players, staff, and fans. Embarking on a major international sporting event during a global pandemic that continues to evolve and challenge us all, is profoundly demanding for all stakeholders. The board and member associations commend the Tennis Australia CEO and the entire Tennis Australia team for their hard work and dedication to delivering a spectacular summer of tennis. As the Australian tennis family, we recognise that recent events have been a significant distraction for everyone, and we deeply regret the impact this had on all players. There are always lessons to learn, and we will review all aspects of our preparation and implementation to inform our planning – as we do every year. That process always starts once the Australian Open champions have lifted their trophies. Australia has a strong and proud tennis tradition, and it has been fantastic to see the crowds out cheering for the world’s best players in the lead up to and over the opening days of the Australian Open. We, like the players, and all tennis fans here and around the world, are keen for the focus to now be on the game we are all so passionate about. We are looking forward to a brilliant two weeks of tennis ahead. Fourth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 6-5 Murray* (*denotes next server) Basilashvili keeps his cool, despite the odd wobble. Again the pressure piles onto Murray’s shoulders and he must hold again now or face a fifth set. Fourth set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 5-5 Murray (*denotes next server) This is great tennis! Basilashvili makes a rare sortie to the net, from where he plays a neat volley to kick things off, but his decision-making then lets him down when he opts to play a drop shot a couple of points later, that doesn’t make it over the net. He still manages to bring up a set point, but Murray saves it before going on to hold - with a booming ace! Fourth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 5-4 Murray* (*denotes next server) This has got five sets written all over it, hasn’t it? Basilashvili holds and Murray’s break will have to wait. The pendulum of pressure swings the Scot’s way now and he’ll have to hold to stay in this fourth set. Fourth set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 4-4 Murray (*denotes next server) An anguished shout come from Basilashvili with Murray 30-15 up as the Georgian lashes a crosscourt backhand too wide. He knows that’s going to be costly and so it proves as Murray levels things up. Now would be a handy time for the Scot to come up with another break. Fourth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 4-3 Murray* (*denotes next server) Murray appears to be tiring now but Basilashvili fails to capitalise. A double fault puts the Georgian in trouble at break point and when an attempted lob goes out on the next point, Murray breaks and we’re back on serve in the fourth! Fourth set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 4-2 Murray (*denotes next server) Basilashvili has requested something from the umpire - not quite sure what it is, assume we will find out at the next changeover. The Georgian is moving freely and still hitting his winners on occasion though, notably on points one and two of this game, the second a devastating forehand return of serve. He goes on to bring up break point and another ferocious forehand puts some daylight between him and Murray. Fourth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 3-2 Murray* (*denotes next server) Basilashvili noses ahead again, sealing the deal with an ace -his second of this set, and 10th overall. Fourth set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 2-2 Murray (*denotes next server) Murray has to dig deep to stave off a break here. He saves a break point before advancing to the net and volleying with devastating outcome on the next. And when Basilashvili finds the net, there’s a sigh of relief in the British wildcard’s camp. Fourth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 2-1 Murray* (*denotes next server) The Georgian responds with a relatively comfortable hold of his own. The intensity of the end of the third set has died down a bit for now. Fourth set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 1-1 Murray (*denotes next server) On serve this fourth set as Murray holds. Let’s just check in on the unforced error count: Basilashvili leads 63-29 today, a stat that may well prove critical by the end of this match. The Georgian is also winning the winners count - 41-14. He can’t be accused of not going for his shots. Fourth set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6, 1-0 Murray* (*denotes next server) Murray reaches for his side after stretching on one point in the first game of the fourth set, but he’s continues to move freely afterwards. Basilashvili holds. At the changeover, time to quickly check in with last year’s runner-up, Daniil Medvedev, who was playing Henri Laaksonen of Switzerland on Rod Laver Arena. Medvedev, one of the favourites to lift the trophy a week on Sunday, is safely through after a 6-1, 6-4, 7-6(3) win and will next face the winner of tonight’s clash between Nick Kyrgios and Liam Broady. Third set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-6 Murray (*denotes next server) Murray patiently grinds out a couple of baseline rallies, the second of which brings up two set points. He finishes with an ace! No! It’s a let! They’ll play it again... he goes down the T, but it’s called out. But no bother, on his second service point, Basilashvili hits a backhand wide and the third set belongs to Murray! Wednesday’s schedule is in. Here’s what’s planned for the main showcourts. Rod Laver Arena: Martina Trevisan (Italy) v 8-Paula Badosa (Spain) 1-Ash Barty (Australia) v Lucia Bronzetti (Italy) Yannick Hanfmann (Germany) v 6-Rafa Nadal (Spain) Not before 7pm AEDT/8am GMT Madison Brengle (United States) v 13-Naomi Osaka (Japan) 3-Alexander Zverev (Germany) v John Millman (Australia) Margaret Court Arena: Harmony Tan (France) v 15-Elina Svitolina (Ukraine) Kwon Soon-woo (South Korea) v 14-Denis Shapovalov (Canada) 4-Barbora Krejcikova (Czech Republic) v Wang Xiyu (China) Not before 7pm AEDT/8am GMT Zheng Qinwen (China) v 5-Maria Sakkari (Greece) 17-Gael Monfils (France) Alexander Bublik (Kazakhstan) John Cain Arena: Tereza Martincova (Czech Republic) v 30-Camila Giorgi (Italy) Not before 1pm AEDT/2am GMT Madison Keys (United States) v Jaqueline Cristian (Romania) Not before 2:30pm AEDT/3:30am GMT Stefan Kozlov (United States) v 7-Matteo Berrettini (Italy) 10-Hubert Hurkacz (Poland) v Adrian Mannarino (France) Third set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 4-5 Murray* (*denotes next server) Murray wastes a couple of chances to seal the second set and Basilaschvili comes back strong with a couple of moster winners to eventually hold. But Murray will now serve for the second set... Third set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 3-5 Murray (*denotes next server) Murray’s serve is on point this game - two aces to kick off with and then a third follows before a fourth booming effort proves unreturnable for Basilashvili. Minimum energy expended there. Third set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 3-4 Murray* (*denotes next server) Well, Murray looked exhausted during that last game, but he finds enough energy to break back immediately! He gets some help, again, from his opponent, who adds another three unforced errors to his tally, but it doesn’t matter where the points come from, Murray is back in front. Third set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 3-3 Murray (*denotes next server) Basilashvili breaks and we’re back on serve after another lengthy game - eight and a half minutes to be exact. Facing a third break point, Murray looks absolutely shattered - he leans on his racket and is then sent running all over the court by Basilashvili, who seals the break with a wonderfully deft drop shot that Murray hasn’t got the gas to reach. The Georgian is leading the winners count by a fine margin now - 33-11. Third set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 2-3 Murray* (*denotes next server) This is compelling tennis in what could be a pivotal game in the third set! Basilashvili makes a poor decision as he hits a ball that Murray had no right to recover out and the outlook appears bleak for him as Murray brings up three break points. Yet he pulls out a pair of aces to help get himself out of trouble. From their on it’s a mixed bag - including some terrific winners, a dreadful smash into net - before a topsy-turvy game that lasts 10 minutes is finally brought to an end when he finds the net. Murray breaks! Third set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 2-2 Murray (*denotes next server) Murray now gets a bit vocal, geeing himself up as he takes a 30-0 lead but the wind is taken out of his sails somewhat by some huge hitting by Basilashvili on the next point. But Murray holds his nerve and holds serve. Former finalist Simona Halep is through after a 6-4, 6-3 win over Magdalena Frech on Margaret Court Arena. The Romanian, seeded 14 this year, will play American qualifier Katie Volynets or Brazil’s Beatriz Haddad Maia next. Third set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 2-1 Murray* (*denotes next server) Basilashivili follows suit - he races to a 40-love lead before nosing ahead as Murray’s backhand is an inch too long. Third set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 1-1 Murray (*denotes next server) So, Murray serves for the first time in the third set. Oof, that’s a decent game for the Scot, a comfortable hold. And he looks pleased with himself at the end of it. Third set: Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3, 1-0 Murray* (*denotes next server) Into the third set we go... Basilashvili holds, despite a wobble with a double fault. Big news in the men’s draw: world No 8 Casper Ruud has pulled out after injuring his ankle during a practice session. “I tried everything I could to be ready, but unfortunately I’ve decided that I’m not 100% ready and I will not be able to play 100% like I have to ... That’s the final decision,” said Ruud, who will be replaced in the draw by Roman Safiullin. Second set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 6-3 Murray (*denotes next server) Murray, needing to hold serve to stay in the set, doesn’t make is easy for himself. An attempted slice goes into net to bring up deuce and he doesn’t recover from there. Such a wildly improved set from the Georgian, whose power hitting really began to find its target. Second set: Basilashvili 1-6, 5-3 Murray* (*denotes next server) “Come on Andy” is the cry from the stands as he draws level at 15-15, before Basilashvili is wide on a forehand. But the Georgian’s backhand then takes centre stage as he arrows a ball right into the corner. A huge overhead smash follows - well caught in the deep by a member of the crowd - and a two-game deficit is again opened up. Second set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 4-3 Murray (*denotes next server) Oh no. Are the errors creeping back into Basilashvili’s game? Three in the last game are followed by another two here. To be fair he punctuates them with a wonderful forehand crosscourt winner but a Murray ace and a backhand winner is enough to see the Scot pull back further. Second set: Basilashvili 1-6, 4-2 Murray* (*denotes next server) Murray is not content to concede this set just yet - you wouldn’t expect a champion of his standing to do so - and while he can’t capitalise on an initial two break points as Basilashvili’s serve comes to the rescue, the Georgian double faults on a third and Murray is back in this set. More good news for Australian tennis - wildcard Maddison Inglis is through to the second round after stunning Leylah Fernandez, the runner-up to Emma Raducanu at last year’s US Open, 6-4, 6-2 over on 1573 Arena. Second set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 4-1 Murray (*denotes next server) Basilashvili is a different player this second set. He’s a lot more patient and he’s putting away some terrific winners. He has a break chance - a double break chance at that - and Murray’s forehand flies into the net to hand the Georgian another breakthrough. Second set: Basilashvili 1-6, 3-1 Murray* (*denotes next server) Lovely stuff from Basilashvili now, who is really growing into this match and beginning to show why he’s seeded 21. He secures this service game and it’s Murray who leads the unforced error count this set - 7-5. Second set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 2-1 Murray (*denotes next server) Much, much better from Basilashvili as he fires a tremendous winner down the line to claim another lengthy rally. It seems to be a pattern that is developing - he repeats the trick a point later to bring up three break points! The Georgian’s errors are drying up as he finds his range, and he breaks for the first time! Murray finds himself in a proper contest now. Second set: Basilashvili 1-6, 1-1 Murray* (*denotes next server) Murray, for the first time really, is the first to blink on the latest long baseline rally at 15-15. The error-prone Basilashvili should take some confidence from that little win. And he goes on to secure just his second game of the match, finished off with an ace. Second set: *Basilashvili 1-6, 0-1 Murray (*denotes next server) Murray gives every indication he has no intention of easing off the gas in the second set. He opens with an ace and you know it’s not going well for Basilashvili when he slips on game point, right onto his derriere. He’s OK to continue, thankfully. First set: Basilashvili 1-6 Murray* (*denotes next server) Hang on Andy, I can’t keep up! Murray wastes no further time or energy on the first set, racing to set point before breaking again, to love to seal the opener in just 23 minutes! First set: *Basilashvili 1-5 Murray (*denotes next server) Murray grinds down Basilashvili in another lengthy baseline rally to kick off this next game before finishing it off with a lovely backhand slice. Murray can’t do any wrong at this point and looks extremely comfortable, while Basilashvili... 16 unforced errors now. First set: Basilashvili 1-4 Murray* (*denotes next server) Murray secures a double break and the 34-year-old bounces off towards his chair at the changeover! He’s very much in control of this opening set. At the same time, make that 13 unforced errors from Basilashvili now. First set: *Basilashvili 1-3 Murray (*denotes next server) Murray aces at 30-30 and then again immediately after to consolidate that break. Solid service game from the Scot. But Basilashvili isn’t making things easy for himself so far today - he ends game four of the match with a total of nine unforced errors to his name so far. First set: Basilashvili 1-2 Murray* (*denotes next server) Wahey! Basilashvili attempts to serve but the ball hits the top of the frame of his racket and it pings off skywards! You don’t see that every day in professional tennis. Anyway, it clearly doesn’t help him and a couple of unforced errors give Murray two break points - he grabs his chance as Basilashvili goes long and the Scot edges ahead earlier in this match. First set: *Basilashvili 1-1 Murray (*denotes next server) There are some vocal fans in the arena today. I don’t speak Georgian but am assuming the bloke who is making himself heard from the stands is a Basilashvili fan. Good start from Murray, who ignores the distractions and secures a love-service game. First set: Basilashvili 1-0 Murray* (*denotes next server) Basilashvili kicks off with the ball in his hands, and the pair kick off with a 17-shot rally, eventually won by the Georgian following an unforced error from Murray. Basilashvili holds. More on Petra Kvitová’s earlier exit. The Czech, who lost to Naomi Osaka in the 2019 final, says she was undercooked after playing just three matches - after early exits in Adelaide and Sydney - in the run-up to her match earlier today. “I don’t think I have much to say,” said Kvitová. “It wasn’t really going my way the whole month. That’s how it is. It’s a sport and I just have to fight through and be better at it.” “I didn’t play a lot of matches at the beginning of this year. I did have some health issues the whole month as well, so it was tough to practice. It wasn’t really easy this beginning of the season, but the season is long, so I hope that it will turnaround. “This loss is very painful, in the first round after like a whole month. Yeah, on one hand, I’m not surprised really how everything ended. But on the other hand, of course, when I play a match I always want to win.” There’s a decent crowd over at John Cain Arena as Murray and Basilashvili are introduced onto court. A loud cheer greets the Scot, a popular player at the Australian Open who more often than not has delivered some of his best tennis. Here’s our man on the ground at Melbourne Park, Tumaini Carayol, on Murray’s preparations: In the men’s draw, there were no major complications for fifth seed Andrey Rublev, who enjoyed a 6-3, 6-2, 6-2 win over Gianluca Mager, while there also wins for Diego Schwartzman, Richard Gasquet and Roberto Bautista Agut, the 15th seed. In other results, the former Open finalist Petra Kvitová was sent packing by another veteran, the Romanian Sorana Cîrstea. Kvitová, who was runner-up at Melbourne Park in 2019, bowed out 6-2, 6-2. Women’s third seed Garbiñe Muguruza had few issues in a 6-3, 6-4 win over Clara Burel to set up meeting with Alize Cornet of France, who beat compatriot Viktoriya Tomova 6-3 6-3. There was to be no upset on Rod Laver Arena as Iga Swiatek saw off the challenge of British qualifier Harriet Dart in a 6-3, 6-0 win, while 2020 quarter-finalist Anett Kontaveit beat Katerina Siniakova 6-2, 6-3. Weather update. Play started this morning with the temperature hovering just under 20C. It’s sunny but cool at the moment - around the 22C mark. Without humidity you could say it’s prefect tennis conditions. Around the grounds. Let’s have a quick catch-up on what has already happened today at Melbourne Park. The big news for home fans is that Sam Stosur lives to fight another day. The veteran appeared to be heading towards the exit and retirement from singles tennis when she lost the opening set in her opening match against American wildcard Robin Anderson, but a rousing comeback saw the 37-year-old win 6-7 (5), 6-3, 6-3 and secure a place in the second round. “That was incredible,” she said. “That’s a match I’m going to remember forever. It’s probably one of the best singles matches I’ve played in a very long time and to do it at home today ... I guess it wasn’t going to be the last, so happy to have another one.” Here we go again. Day two of the Open is already well under way following a successful opening on Monday, which was met with a degree of relief – given how much the build-up had been overshadowed by he who’s name must now not be mentioned – and served up the usual mix of intrigue and upsets. Today, the opening round continues with another 60 matches to get through. Coming up is Andy Murray, the five time finalist but never winner at Melbourne Park, who plays familiar foe Nikoloz Basilashvili on John Caine Arena, at 3pm local, 4am in the UK. That clash promises to be the appetiser for a feast in the evening session, when Nick Kyrgios takes his bow at this year’s tournament at 7pm AEDT/8am GMT. The Australian, as always, will be expected to provide fireworks in his clash against Britain’s Liam Broady, also on the often raucous John Cain Arena. At the same time, another Australian favourite Alex de Minaur gets his campaign up and running against Lorenzo Musetti on Margaret Court Arena, before US Open winner Emma Raducanu meets Sloane Stephens of the US to round off the evening session. On Rod Laver, second seeds Daniil Medvedev and Aryna Sabalenka are both in action, with Stefanos Tsitsipas, always a popular figure in Melbourne, to follow. Plus plenty more, of course. Feel free to email or tweet @mike_hytner if you have anything to get off your chest. Otherwise, let’s get into the tennis.Houthi forces who control much of northern Yemen say about 20 people have died in Saudi-led coalition airstrikes on the capital, Sana’a, a day after a Houthi drone attack killed three people in the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia’s coalition partner. Neighbours and doctors said about 14 people were killed when coalition planes struck the home of a high-ranking Houthi military official, including his wife and son. A Houthi official tweeted that in all, about 20 people had died. Early on Tuesday, the coalition said it had begun strikes against strongholds and camps in Sana’a belonging to the Houthi group. Global leaders have rallied around the UAE since the drone attack, which killed three migrant workers and wounded six others. Emirati officials said they were weighing a response to what they labelled a “sinister criminal escalation”, as satellite images were published revealing damage to an oil plant in Abu Dhabi. Houthi officials earlier said they had used two drones and several cruise missiles in an unprecedented strike at the Emirati capital, which drew condemnation from Arab states, Washington, London, and the UN. Liz Truss, the UK foreign secretary, said on Twitter: “I condemn in the strongest terms the Houthi-claimed terrorist attacks on the United Arab Emirates,” while the US secretary of State, Antony Blinken, and the White House national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, also denounced the attacks and promised to coordinate a response with Emirati officials. Photographs of the attack sites showed scorch marks near several oil storage tankers and white streaks that were thought to be firefighting foam. A second site, at nearby Abu Dhabi international airport, was also shown, although damage there was reported to have been slight. In the Middle East, reactions ranged from surprise and indignation to justification for the strike at the heart of the Emirati capital. The attack came at a critical juncture in regional talks between Saudi Arabia and Iran, as well as talks in Vienna, where Iranian officials are due to meet their US counterparts in an attempt to recommit to the nuclear deal. The Houthis are heavily backed by Iran and are seen as one of the proxy forces for the Iranian revolutionary guards. Another Iranian proxy in Iraq, Kata’ib Hezbollah, praised the attack, with its leader, Abu Ali al-Askari, saying: “God was able to strike fear in the hearts of Bin Zayeds by the hands of the mujahideen and brave people of Yemen.” Before Monday’s strike, several pro-militia groups in Iraq had posted social media images purporting to show Dubai’s Burj Khalifa tower being struck by missiles fired from drones, a response to what it said was UAE meddling in Iraqi affairs. The messages have been perceived in the Emirates as a coordinated effort by Iran to destabilise UAE. In recent weeks, a UAE-backed ground force has repelled Houthi advances near the government stronghold of Marib in Yemen, where Abu Dhabi has significantly scaled back its own troops but retains substantial influence over proxies. The Houthis had been intending to take the town of Shabwa, which would have given them proximity to gas and oilfields. However, an Emirati-led force, the Giants Brigades, was moved from the Red Sea to counter them. The war in Yemen, after years of destruction, dislocation and, more recently, stalemate, has become the most potent proxy arena in the region. Saudi troops and its air force remain dominant players in the conflict. On the Houthi side, Hezbollah plays a significant role, with its senior members known to have trained local forces in Yemen and to have helped import weapons from Iran. The UN Secretary General, Antonio Guterres, on Tuesday “expressed his concern and deplored the recent Saudi-led Coalition’s airstrikes in Sana’a that resulted in numerous civilian casualties,” his office said, adding that he called on all sides to return to the negotiating table. In government circles in Iraq, where several rounds of talks between Iran and Saudi Arabia had been held in the past year, conjecture about the attacks in the UAE was swirling on Tuesday. “They are like the scorpion and the frog,” one Iraqi insider said of Iran. “Why would they do this now?” Late last year, the head of Emirati intelligence, Tahnoon bin Zayed, visited Iran to try to establish trade ties, after years of boycotting Tehran. “Do they want to embarrass him?” the insider asked. “This will have consequences.”A part-owner of the Golden State Warriors has backtracked after saying that “nobody cares” about the human rights abuses suffered by the Uyghur people at the hands of Chinese authorities. Chamath Palihapitiya, a billionaire venture capitalist, posted a clarification of his comments to Twitter on Wednesday. “I recognize that I came across as lacking empathy. As a refugee, my family fled from a country [Sri Lanka] with its own set of human rights issues so this is something that is very much part of my lived experience. To be clear, my belief is that human rights matter, whether in China, the United States, or elsewhere.” Palihapitiya’s comments were made on the All In podcast. He was discussing why Joe Biden’s support for the Uyghurs had not helped the president’s poll ratings. “Let’s be honest, nobody cares about what’s happening to the Uyghurs,” Palihapitiya said. “You bring it up because you really care, and I think that’s nice that you care. The rest of us don’t care. “I’m telling you a very hard, ugly truth. Of all the things that I care about, it is below my line.” He added that caring about human rights around the world is a “luxury belief”. “The reason I think that is we don’t do enough domestically to actually express that view in real tangible ways,” he said. “So until we actually clean up our own house, the idea that we step outside our borders, with us morally virtue-signaling about someone else’s human rights record, is deplorable.” The Warriors soon distanced themselves from Palihapitiya’s comments. “As a limited investor who has no day-to-day operating functions with the Warriors, Mr Palihapitiya does not speak on behalf of our franchise, and his views certainly don’t reflect those of our organization,” the team said in a statement. There was also pushback from within the league. Boston center Enes Kanter Freedom, who has previously spoken about human rights issues in China, posted a video of Palihapitiya’s podcast to Twitter along with the comment: “When @NBA says we stand for justice, don’t forget there are those who sell their soul for money &amp; business like @chamath the owner of @warriors, who says ‘Nobody cares about what’s happening to the Uyghurs’ When genocides happen, it is people like this that let it happen. Shame!” Last month, a tribunal in the UK said that the Uyghurs have been subjected to what amounts to genocide by Chinese authorities. “Hundreds of thousands of Uyghurs – with some estimates well in excess of a million – have been detained by PRC [People’s Republic of China] authorities without any, or any remotely sufficient reason, and subjected to acts of unconscionable cruelty, depravity and inhumanity,” the tribunal’s report said. “Sometimes up to 50 have been detained in a cell of 22 sq metres.”Some of the first images have emerged from Tonga’s volcano and tsunami-hit islands, after a New Zealand defence force surveillance flight returned from the cut-off country, as three deaths from the disaster have been confirmed in Tonga. Aerial photography of Nomuka, a small island in the southern part of the Haʻapai group, shows land and trees coated with ash and other damage inflicted by the huge undersea volcanic eruption and tsunami that hit the Pacific nation on Saturday. Satellite imagery analysed by the UN shows similar scenes in Kolomotu’a, Tongatapu, and Fafaa village, Kolofo’ou: while some buildings remain standing, others appear to have collapsed, and the entire landscape is coated with grey ash. At Fua’amotu international airport, the runway appears to have been inundated, and is partly covered by either ash or dirt. Other satellite images show that flooding came in several blocks from the coastline. The eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha‘apai undersea volcano, 40 miles (65km) north of Tonga’s capital, is thought to be the largest volcanic event in 30 years. Initial videos and photographs of the tsunami wave sweeping in were posted on social media, but they were followed by silence, after the main communications cable was damaged. Communications from Tonga have been extremely limited in the days since. Tongans around the world may be forced to wait weeks for regular contact to resume, after testing confirmed that the cable connecting the islands to the outside world was cut in at least one place. A spokesperson for Southern Cross Cable, which operates other undersea cable networks across the region, said that testing by Fintel and Tonga Cable on Sunday afternoon “seems to confirm a likely cable break around 37km offshore from Tonga”. On Tuesday, in its first official update since the eruption, Tonga’s government confirmed three fatalities. In a statement, the prime minister’s office announced the deaths of a 65-year-old woman on Mango island and a 49-year-old man on Nomuka island, in addition to Angela Glover, a British woman living in Tonga whose body was found on Monday. The government said the Tongan navy had deployed with health teams and water, food and tents to outlying islands. The New Zealand foreign minister, Nanaia Mahuta, said on Tuesday the ash could cause problems for getting aid into the country via plane. “Images show ashfall on the Nuku’alofa airport runway that must be cleared before a C-130 Hercules flight with humanitarian assistance can land,” she said. The United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said in a briefing on Monday there was significant infrastructural damage around the main island of Tongatapu. “We are particularly concerned about two small low-lying islands – Mango and Fonoi – following New Zealand and Australian surveillance flights confirming substantial property damage,” they said. In its Tuesday update, the Tongan government said all the houses were destroyed on Mango island, and only two houses remained on Fonoifua – islands with fewer than 200 residents. New Zealand has dispatched two naval ships carrying water and other aid supplies. Mahuta said the New Zealand government had allocated a further NZ$500,000 (£293,000) in humanitarian assistance, taking its initial funding total to NZ$1m. The New Zealand prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said on Monday contact had not yet been established with many coastal regions beyond the capital, Nuku‘alofa. “Nuku'alofa is covered in thick plumes of volcanic dust but otherwise conditions are calm and stable,” Ardern said. “We have not yet received news from other coastal areas.” With communications severely limited, many Tongan diaspora communities are desperately waiting for news from their families. The Royal New Zealand air force Orion aircraft left Auckland on Monday morning, with plans to fly over the Ha’apai group of islands, and then the main island of Tongatapu, to assess damage and see if runways were clear for subsequent planes to land. The Australian defence force also sent a surveillance plane on Monday, to assess damage to critical infrastructure such as roads, ports and power lines.A conservative Maltese lawyer who opposes abortion has been elected president of the European parliament, the first woman in 20 years to lead the assembly. Roberta Metsola, who is celebrating her 43rd birthday on Tuesday, is the youngest-ever president of the European parliament, winning a comfortable majority to serve a two-and-a-half-year term. A former civil servant first elected in 2013, she is the first person from Malta, the smallest member state, to lead any EU institution. Metsola, a member of the centre-right European People’s party, had been serving as interim president after the untimely death of David Sassoli last week. Sassoli, a popular Italian Social Democrat, was due to end his term in this week’s midterm reshuffle of top jobs. As the favourite to succeed Sassoli since her candidacy was announced last autumn, Metsola’s victory was never in doubt after the parliament’s three largest groups made a pact to support her on the eve of the vote. She won 458 of 690 votes cast, easily beating three rivals from smaller groups: the Greens, the radical left and conservative nationalists. The Socialists and Democrats, the second-largest group behind the EPP, threw their weight behind Metsola to gain a bigger number of 14 vice-president posts. Also joining the alliance was the centrist Renew group led by Stéphane Séjourné, ally of the French president, Emmanuel Macron. The support of Renew was significant, as some French MEPs had voiced qualms about Metsola’s anti-abortion stance. The former diplomat won round doubters by promising to represent the position of the parliament, rather than her personal views. “My position is that of the European parliament,” she told journalists. “And on this issue, this European parliament, on all sexual and reproductive health rights, it has been unambiguous, it has repeatedly called for these rights to be better protected.” As vice-president of the parliament, she said, she had delivered a recent resolution condemning Poland’s anti-abortion law. “I promoted it and I presented it … That is exactly what I will do with all the positions that were taken in all this area in all the member states.” Malta is the only EU country that completely bans abortion, a stance more hardline than Poland, which last year passed a law imposing heavy restrictions on a woman’s right to end a pregnancy. In 2015 Metsola signed a statement with other Maltese centre-right MEPs declaring “we remain categorically against abortion”. At the start of the pandemic in April 2020, she voted against a resolution on EU action on Covid-19 that described abortion as a human right. Explaining another no vote on the same issue in 2021, she claimed in an interview with the website Lovin Malta that Malta’s right to legislate for itself on abortion had been at stake. “The report did not respect Malta’s right to legislate itself on this issue and therefore I could not support the final version of it.” Despite misgivings, left-leaning political opponents have praised Metsola’s stance in defence of the rule of law and migrants’ rights. Speaking to MEPs, the co-leader of the Greens, Philippe Lamberts, said Metsola had “many excellent qualities”. He noted their disagreements on abortion and reproductive rights, but “many points of agreement as well”, on democracy, the rule of law and refugees. The Belgian Green MEP urged Metsola to reform European parliament rules by introducing a system of proportional representation to end the backroom deals on carving up top posts. “It’s not a very glorious process,” he told MEPs. “Because once again … there were certain appetites that had to be satisfied and this to the detriment of smaller groups in the European parliament.” Born in 1979, Metsola has said Malta’s accession to the EU sparked her interest in politics. The island nation joined the union in 2004, along with nine other mostly central and eastern European countries. She graduated from the elite College of Europe in Bruges, a training ground for EU officials, before going on to work for Malta’s government in Brussels and then the European Commission. A mother of four, she has described herself as part of the “Erasmus generation”, referring to the EU higher education exchange scheme. Until now, only two women have served as European parliament president, in effect the speaker of the house. The former French minister Nicole Fontaine led the institution from 1999-2002. She was proceeded by another French woman, Simone Veil, a Holocaust survivor and celebrated minister, who led the fight to introduce abortion in France. Veil ran the parliament from 1979-1982. Metsola said a in speech to MEPs in Strasbourg that she was standing on the shoulders of giants. The parliament mattered “to every woman in the union still fighting for their rights” she said, without mentioning the controversy over abortion. She also referred to two journalists murdered for their investigative reporting, Daphne Caruana Galizia of Malta and Ján Kuciak of Slovakia, declaring “to the families of Daphne and Ján … your fight for truth and justice is our fight”.I love all tinned fish, but how can I jazz them up for lunch and dinner? Ben, Sheffield “Tinned fish is such good stuff,” agrees chef and restaurateur Mitch Tonks, who launched his Rockfish tinned seafood range at the start of January. “We have the obligatory sardines and mackerel, as well as mussels and cuttlefish or squid in ink … I’m a bit of tinned fish fan.” And he’s not alone. José Pizarro always has some sardines to hand: “Get sardinillas, the little ones – they’re the best.” The chef and restaurateur chops and uses them, alongside boiled eggs and capers, to fill empanadas. “I can’t get enough of these pastries. It’s a recipe my mum taught me, though she uses tinned tuna.” Alternatively, Tonks puts his sardines to work in a Reuben-style sandwich: “Mix creme fraiche, English mustard and a dash of Worcestershire sauce, spread it on rye bread [buttered on the outside], lay the sardines on top, add black pepper, red onion, sliced dill pickle, capers, sauerkraut and swiss cheese.” Top with another slice of rye buttered on the outside and fry until crisp. You could also turn up the heat with a som tam, Tonks says: “Shred carrots, courgettes and/or green papaya, slice red onion, halve cherry tomatoes and put them all in a bowl with sliced hot fresh chilli. Make a dressing by combining a bashed garlic clove, palm sugar, fish sauce and lime juice, then toss it all together with coriander and mint. Deep-fry some tinned sardines and crumble them over the top to finish.” If Ben has any tinned tuna knocking about, Tonks recommends stirring it through crispy potatoes spiced up with ’nduja, while tinned mackerel signals shawarma: “Shred cabbage, red onion and green chilli, then grate some garlic into yoghurt and mix.” Spread that on flatbread with some hummus, a little za’atar, lemon juice and mackerel, wrap it all up and job done. “Anchovies are also essential,” says chef Angus Cowen, who with his partner Charlotte Dawe founded the East London Canning Co during lockdown. “They’ve got that umami you can’t get from anything else.” While anchovies have myriad uses, you’ll be hard pushed serve them better than simply on toast with “as much butter as you can handle”. Alternatively, “sweat them down with chopped rosemary and garlic to use as a base with chicken stock for a braise, be it lamb shoulder or rabbit”. Cowen is also a great believer in tinned mussels: “We cook and snack on them all year round.” A real winner round his – and especially with his children – is an orzo dish for which he renders smoked bacon, then sweats leeks and garlic, plus a few fennel seeds, until soft. “Add a splash of cider, pop in some cooked pasta and a knob of butter, bring it all together, and the mussels go in right at the end.” If you’ve got some fancy mussels, don’t forget to add a bit of their liquor, too. Or, for a quick fix, use them as a toast topper. Tonks tosses his mussels (“we tin them in an escabeche, which is a light vinegar marinade”) with red onions, capers, shredded little gem and a bit of olive oil and vinegar. Eat on sourdough and spread the joy. • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comFarkhunda’s* mother has run a feminist radio station in her conservative province for the best part of 20 years, in defiance of Taliban threats. She has three children with disabilities who were forced to abandon their wheelchairs when gunmen attacked their home about two months after the Taliban takeover. They are in hiding in a city safe house, but don’t know how they will survive longer term. When the fighting closed in on our city in August we were moving around – one night in one place, one night in another place – staying with different relatives because my mum had received a lot of threats in the past. She had faced some discrimination, as an ethnic minority in our region, and also the Taliban used to ask her: “Why are you, a woman, running a radio station. You should stay home and look after your family.” When we left our home, we took nothing with us – my sister and brothers are disabled and they can’t walk. But eventually our relatives told us that even though the Taliban are in power, everything is normal and we can come back to our home. So in October, we returned to the house after two months living with different uncles and aunts. That same evening, late at night when we were all sleeping, suddenly we heard gunshots all around the doors. We all gathered in one room in the centre of the house that didn’t have windows, so we were able to survive. In the other rooms the windows were shot as well as the doors, there was glass all around, but they didn’t try to come in – perhaps they thought they hit us already. We wanted to leave when the shooting stopped, but it was too late. The next morning our neighbours came and said: “Why did you come back? You should leave immediately.” They thought it was insecure because we had come back and that our family was the reason why there was gunfire at night. We left in such a hurry that we couldn’t even take the wheelchairs – we had to carry my brothers and sisters. They are grown now. My twin brothers are 19 years old, and my sister is 18, so they are heavy. About a week later, the neighbours called and said some gunmen were looking for my mum, so she went to a rural district and all of us split up. My dad went to one place, my brothers went to an aunt, and I took my sister to a cousin’s house. After another month we were reunited in a big city, where we are staying in a safe house, but things are really hard. We were not able to go back for the wheelchairs, and we could only take a couple of changes of clothes, nothing else. We don’t have money to buy anything so we are just living in a bare room with carpets on the floor. We are worried about our relatives at home being in danger because of my mum’s work. My mother has turned off her phone now, but she was getting Taliban threat messages saying things like: “We told you for years to leave your job but you didn’t, now you have nowhere to hide.” And one saying: “We will come and kill you and burn your radio station.” We left our home empty, we left the radio station, now there are no broadcasts or anything. My mum loved her job. She had been running the radio station since 2004, despite getting threats all these years. She only abandoned it now for our security and so she is in a very devastated mental state, she has some problems with her heart and feels sick. We are also in a terrible economic situation, constantly worrying about where our next meal will come from. And because my brothers and sister still don’t have wheelchairs, me, my father and mother are taking care of them, carrying them on their shoulders when they need to move. We are all in shock. We feel like we are living in a nightmare – how did we move from our old life to this situation? A friend has helped us apply to refugee programmes but we did not hear back. We don’t know if we can get out of Afghanistan, but we don’t know what we will do here. *The name has been changed for this article.In 1998 Franka Potente earned her movie-star stripes by taking the lead role in Run Lola Run. Potente spends much of that film, as the title might suggest, in constant motion as her character hares around Berlin trying to find 100,000 deutsche marks to save her imperilled boyfriend. In stark contrast, for her first feature as a writer-director Potente has conceived a story about people mostly stuck in one place, literally and metaphorically. For the last 20 years, protagonist Marvin (In the Valley of Elah’s Jake McLaughlin, impressive enough here to make you wonder where he’s been for the last few decades) has been confined to a prison cell, serving time for a stupid, pointless murder he committed as a young man. Newly released, with only a skateboard for a ride and the tracksuit he went in with, Marvin rolls back to the only place he can go, his childhood home in a crappy California town, somewhere between the Central Valley and the Mojave desert. His mom Bernadette (Kathy Bates) is slowly wasting away with lung cancer, cared for by kindly home help Jayden (Lil Rel Howery). The thoughtful twist Potente has worked into the material is that Marvin truly regrets the crime that destroyed his life. Nearly everyone else in the town, especially the surviving members of Marvin’s victim’s family, are still stuck in the past and resume a pointless game of revenge towards him and Bernadette, with bricks through their window and more. However, Delta (Aisling Franciosi, fantastic here as she was in The Nightingale and The Fall), the granddaughter of the woman Marvin killed is a young woman with her own dodgy secrets, and she starts to see the humanity in Marvin; she regrets the persecution her brother (James Jordan) insists on meting out, a symptom of his own damaged past. The set-up teeters on the edge of cliche, but Potente and the fine cast keep it from toppling over by restraining the emotional torque of the material. It ends up being a film with long stretches of quiet, all the better to add drama to the big scene in the end in a church run by Stephen Root’s sweaty but sweet local priest. • Home is released on 24 January on digital platforms.For the past five years, I’ve been “working from boat”, sailing in a crystal Mediterranean sea, with turtles nibbling at my anchor. Sounds fun. It’s not. I miss the office. There are problems with working in paradise. Imagine spending your tea breaks checking the anchor isn’t dragging your workspace towards treacherous rocks, stupid jet skiers swerving by while you type. Imagine wondering if the sun has provided enough power to charge your laptop, or assessing whether a storm is likely to hit before deadline – should I sail 20 miles to shelter before I file? It makes me realise office life is a luxury: the reassuringly stable desk and chair, reliable wifi and power. Besides, in my experience, offices can be great fun. I managed to turn employment into play, right from the start of my working life. My first “proper job” was at 19, in a London branch of a bank. It was the most boring environment ever, aside from the time I got raided by a woman with a fake gun. I livened it up when I could, affixing a basketball net above the counter to shoot in between serving customers. My final proper job was as an editor on a newspaper, this very newspaper you’re reading now, which was put together by serious grownups in an open-plan, modern media environment. Undaunted by the deadline-focused adults surrounding me, I managed to undermine the professional atmosphere by keeping a lobster creel on my desk and smacking a well-known food critic in the face with a freshly caught mackerel. (I was transitioning to a life at sea at this point. The critic took it well.) I ran food features and decided that this gave me carte blanche to be “enterprising”. Cue an ill-judged attempt to make “Guardian cider”. All my worry about the Guardian lacking a liquor licence was unnecessary; it didn’t make it that far. The feature writers started to notice the musty aroma of fermentation emanating from a bucket of rotting apples in a cupboard. Neither security nor workplace management found out about this, which was just as well, as I had already aroused security’s suspicions after an illicit meat exchange in the office’s underground car park (goat legs). I also sneaked a dog in once, having faked a photoshoot for the purpose. My relationship with workplace management got worse. They had installed one of those hot taps for drinks: an abomination. Its temperature didn’t remotely approach boiling and, as everyone knows, decent tea is impossible to make in such circumstances. It seemed like a suitable hill for a food editor to die on. I waged war for months, in email exchanges, in meetings, in confiscated kettles. In the end I went underground, with a travel kettle. Perhaps this kind of behaviour is why the security staff, who greeted everyone with a respectful tone, used to shout: “Oi, Smillie!” when I came to work. It’s probably just as well I left when I did.Dignity-wise, I see the Johnson administration has moved to the stage of a man in a dirty tracksuit saying he’ll do a polygraph. Dominic Cummings’ insistence that the prime minister is lying, and that he’ll swear to it, makes you wonder if Sue Gray is really the person to run the inquiry into Downing Street parties. In many ways Jeremy Kyle has the more relevant experience, though of course it would be the first time the presenter had stood in judgment on people lavished with every possible economic, educational and social advantage in life. A number of anonymous sources have confirmed Cummings’ account to the BBC, giving rise to the sort of unfortunate news coverage that is in no way behind Boris Johnson’s plan to smash the national broadcaster like a mirror that won’t tell him he’s the fairest of them all. And we’ll come to so-called Operation Red Meat in a second. In the meantime, I am enjoying the dead look in all the ministers’ eyes as they are seconded to defend Johnson in the face of what might soon become the indefensible. Instead of calling this Form a Square Around the Shitster, Johnson’s allies have reportedly gone with Operation Save Big Dog, a name that just underscores the impression of No 10 as a stag do gone badly wrong. You know the plot: some inadequate guys mount a desperate rearguard action to escape the problem of a dead stripper/missing groom/pub crawl that has somehow made them the target of Armenian gangsters. Anyway, on to Operation Red Meat, the attempt to pacify mutinous backbenchers with two minutes’ hate. For more than 10 years, Conservative governments wishing to kneecap the BBC have fallen back on one question they always believe is rhetorical: why does this or that presenter get paid more than the prime minister? Weirdly, no one’s tried that line yet this time. Can’t think why. But we know how these things work, so it won’t be long before secretary of state for culture wars Nadine Dorries is out there demanding to know why Zoe Ball or whoever gets paid more than Boris Johnson. I guess the minor points of difference are that Zoe’s very good at her job, people like her and she doesn’t hold her listeners in total contempt. But given how deeply most politicians struggle with the very basic showbiz concept of “talent”, let’s put it another way: did Zoe’s indecision lead to the deaths of thousands of people, cause the entire economy to be shut down way longer than it needed to be and preside over a multibillion-pound culture of cronyism? Did Zoe’s producer break lockdown rules to drive a 60-mile round trip to test their eyesight? Is Zoe a career liar, whose pathological mendacity is now tearing at the entire fabric of trust in politics, and even the very notion of government by consent, in ways that will last for all of us long past her departure from her current role? In a word: NO. To all of those. Indeed, maybe those political brains who never tire of telling us what moral bankruptcy is “priced in” with Boris Johnson should try to understand that an absence of moral bankruptcy is also priced into the salaries of many of Britain’s best-loved broadcasters. If they still can’t wrap their heads around these market rates, they should at least rest assured it’s the same in other countries – even the most ruthlessly commercial. Donald Trump earned $427m for his years hosting The Apprentice, and a mere $1.6m for his years in the White House, hosting what is starting to look like the penultimate season of the United States of America. On, then, to the rest of the plan to get Boris Johnson out of his latest hole. Alongside the existential attack on the BBC, most of Operation Red Meat sounds like the sort of will-this-do “initiative” you’d come up with when you were too hungover to show any actual initiative. For instance, it’s very difficult to imagine the idea of processing asylum seekers “in Rwanda or Ghana” being floated by someone other than a smirking Westminster ironist who’s just boshed a pint of prosecco and broken a swing. The last time the government tried this tack, the nation of Albania seemed oddly unwilling to play the role of “symbolic shithole”, and declined the chance to be part of the quarter-arsed plan. So let’s hope that Downing Street is quite far down the road in serious discussions with both Rwanda and Ghana, otherwise even mentioning them feels like some imperious ghoul is simply coming up with the sort of countries they reckon the right people will sneer at. Ultimately, though, there is something to the whole of Johnson’s “Red Meat” operation that feels suddenly telling about a man who has hitherto successfully presented himself as a can-do, supremely positive kind of guy. Namely, it’s all desperately negative. Strip away Johnson’s famous boosterism, and you are left with a series of hit jobs on things. All very well for a newspaper columnist – indeed, it is the stock in trade – but he is the prime minister. Even allowing for the pandemic, it is becoming unavoidably clear: Johnson has been unable to make the leap from critic to artist. Destroying the BBC, forcibly repelling migrants, voter suppression when we don’t have a problem with voter fraud, a war on judges, unpicking his own Brexit deal … Johnson is really a wrecker disguised as a builder. I know he occasionally floats the idea of a sea-bridge or an estuary airport, but we all know those never happen. He knows how to break things, but not how to make things. The policies that will actually be his legacy are sunderings and squanderings and underminings, in whose ruins he has failed to make something new and positive. In recent weeks, we’ve seen even plenty of diehard Brexiteers turning on Johnson, and lamenting that the guy who promised them sunlit uplands has failed to capitalise or deliver on any of it. Those who believe the opportunities are there can see that nothing is happening with this prime minister. In the long- and medium-terms, then, Boris Johnson feels pretty done for. But no one should rule out some short-term survival strategies. I keep picturing a scenario in which Gray’s report is harsh but not a horror show, a verdict that Johnson takes on someone else’s chin. At that point, what better move to pull than to appoint one Sue Gray to the vacant position of permanent secretary at No 10 – a role she’d surely prefer to being second permanent secretary at the Cabinet Office. This would allow Johnson to declare that he’d brought an enforcer right inside the tent, to keep him on the straight and narrow. It would be an epic sleight of hand – but then, those are really all he’s ever had. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereThe man who killed the children’s author Helen Bailey in 2016 has gone on trial for previously murdering his first wife after a re-examination of her brain showed she had been suffocated. Ian Stewart, 61, is charged with the murder of Diane Stewart, who died at their Cambridgeshire home in June 2010 in an incident he had initially been able to fool medics into believing was an epileptic fit. On the opening day of his trial at Huntington crown court, the jury was told most of her remains were cremated. But analysis of her brain tissue, which she had donated for research, undermined Stewart’s account. Opening the case, Stuart Trimmer QC told jurors: “His explanation for the circumstances of her death can be disproved by the medical evidence. In short, the crown say, he killed her.” The original cause of death was given as sudden unexplained death through epilepsy, the court heard. But when scientists and a pathologist were instructed to re-examine her death they concluded it was most likely caused by “a prolonged restriction of her breathing from an outside source”, Trimmer said. He added: “The account given by Ian Stewart, the only other person on the premises, is directly contradicted by the medical evidence.” The court heard that Stewart formed a relationship with Bailey, described in court as a “successful children’s author”, after the death of his wife. “In 2016, this defendant murdered Helen Bailey, killed her dog and dumped both dog and Helen Bailey in a cesspit,” Trimmer told the court. “He was convicted of that murder in February 2017.” Trimmer said that while investigating that “particularly callous crime”, police officers and scientists began to look again at the death of Diane Stewart. He pointed out that in each case the victim was a woman in an intimate relationship with Stewart. The court heard Stewart was at home alone with Diane on the day of her death. “There had been some arguing between them in the week preceding her death,” he told jurors. Trimmer said Stewart called an ambulance claiming he had found his wife unresponsive and not breathing. Diane Stewart had no heartbeat when paramedics arrived, jurors heard. The court also heard that Stewart got “really cross” after his sister-in-law, Wendy Bellamy-Lee, called the coroner’s office about her death in 2010. She told the court she had suspicions about her sister’s death and called the coroner’s office asking for more information. Reading from her witness statement, she said Stewart told her that calling the coroner was “inexcusable”. She added: “I think he put the phone down on me, very blunt.” Bellamy-Lee said her sister had collapsed at the checkouts at a supermarket in 1992, but that her epilepsy “wasn’t a major thing”. “She didn’t suffer from epileptic fits throughout her life … She was healthy. She was fit. She was active.” Asked if she could remember Stewart’s demeanour when she saw him in the days after Diane’s death, she said: “Just very calm.” The trial, set to last up to four weeks, continues.The one thing missing from the list of 22 personality traits and accomplishments flaunted in a full-page newspaper advert entitled “Who is Silvio Berlusconi?” was the former Italian prime minister’s talent for singing. But the one-time cruise ship crooner, one of Italy’s most controversial leaders, well known for his myriad legal woes, is hoping his pleasant voice will seduce dozens of parliamentarians into backing his bid to become Italy’s next president. The secret ballot begins on 24 January and Berlusconi, 85, has broken from tradition by shamelessly campaigning for the job, a largely ceremonial role with powers to resolve political crises, even without officially throwing his hat into the ring. His charm offensive, which includes telephone canvassing of unaffiliated parliamentarians whose votes could secure his victory and jokingly inviting them to his “bunga bunga party”’, is stoking tensions in Italy’s ruling coalition, blocking meaningful debate on an impartial candidate who all parties can agree on – and igniting protests among Italians who find the prospect of the scandal-plagued Berlusconi becoming head of state abominable. For the past week, Vittorio Sgarbi, an MP, art critic and a culture undersecretary in Berlusconi’s second of four governments, has been orchestrating “calls with Berlusconi” to establish whether the billionaire Forza Italia leader can muster enough votes to win. “He told me he had 100 votes more [needed from unaffiliated parliamentarians] and I said, ‘OK, let’s try and give the votes a face’, and so we started phoning people,” said Sgarbi. “These are people without a party to call home, and so when you get a call from Berlusconi you feel important. We’ve made 50 calls so far, and 15 seemed ready to vote for him. He’s the one doing the talking, not me, and he has a voice like Frank Sinatra. For me, his voice alone can bring in at least another 20 votes.” Just over 1,000 “grand electors” – MPs, senators and a smaller number of regional delegates – will cast their ballots in a complex process that is likely to go through several rounds before a successor to Sergio Mattarella, who steps down on 3 February, is elected. The majority required to win diminishes on each round. If Berlusconi officially expresses his candidature in the coming days and can prove he has the extra numbers then his rightwing allies, the League and Brothers of Italy, have promised their parties’ backing. If that promise prevails and all parliamentarians from the rightwing bloc support Berlusconi, then he would need about 80 more votes from the unaffiliated pool to secure the 505 required for victory in the fourth round. Berlusconi is doing all he can to augment his public persona as he seeks one final grab at power, mobilising his media empire while hogging the political debate. The attributes highlighted in the advert that ran in his Il Giornale newspaper last week included being “a good and generous person”, a “friend of everyone, enemy of no one”, and a “self-made man, an example for all Italians”. He claims to have successfully ended the cold war between Russia and the US, and describes himself as a “hero of liberty” who first entered politics in 1994 to spare Italy from an authoritarian regime. There is no mention of his tax fraud conviction, which saw him ousted from the senate in 2013, his countless legal woes or the fact that he is still being tried for allegedly bribing witnesses in an underage prostitution case connected to his famous “bunga bunga” sex parties. In fact, he is embracing the notoriety of those. “When Sgarbi put me on the phone to Berlusconi, I thought it was a colleague doing an impersonation,” said Cristian Romaniello, a former Five Star Movement deputy now among parliament’s so-called “mixed group”. “He cracked a joke inviting me to the bunga bunga party, and I must admit, I appreciated his humour. I would never vote for him, but while everyone else is being a bit snobby, he is welcoming, one by one, the parliamentarians who are always snubbed.” Sgarbi said the motivation driving Berlusconi’s campaign is to prove to his detractors that he can do it. “It is a response to all those who have attacked him,” Sgarbi said. “He also maintains that for those doing the electing, they won’t find a better president than him.” If he becomes president, Berlusconi will gain powers to pick prime ministers who can then go on to attempt to form governing majorities, call early elections and approve or scrap laws. Most analysts believe Berlusconi will struggle to garner enough support to win. His main rival for the seven-year mandate is the current prime minister, Mario Draghi, although many oppose Draghi’s shift to the presidential palace as it would bring his government to an early end, undermining efforts to enact the reforms needed to secure instalments from the EU’s post-pandemic recovery fund, of which Italy is the biggest beneficiary. Berlusconi last week threatened to withdraw Forza Italia from Draghi’s unity coalition if Draghi was elected. But the prospect of Berlusconi as head of state is beyond the pale for parliament’s leftwing bloc. “Berlusconi’s candidature is a dead end,” Enrico Letta, leader of the Democratic Party (PD), told TG3 on Sunday. “In the sense that he’s not an institutional figure on which there’ll be unity. Let’s find a name together, we need some super impartial,” Letta urged the rightwing parties. Sgarbi said Berlusconi had tried to tap some PD parliamentarians for support, but without success. Meanwhile, an anti-Berlusconi movement, called The Purple People, has been revived to protest against his campaign, while banners reading “No Berlusconi” have appeared on balconies across Italy. “Berlusconi’s name should be removed from the game completely, as he is totally inadequate,” said Gianfranco Mascia, leader of The Purple People. “He has been convicted, is still being tried, and has offended women many times. I get calls from people overseas asking: ‘How is this even happening?’”Greece has vowed to intensify its campaign for the reunification of the Parthenon sculptures amid “optimistic” signs that British public opinion has shifted markedly in favour of returning the prized “Elgin” marbles to Athens. The Greek government said it would step up pressure for the fifth-century BC antiquities to be enjoyed in their entirety, within view of the Acropolis, after receiving support from an unexpected quarter of the British establishment. “The sculptures are the most important link between the modern Greeks and their ancestors,” said Tasos Chatzivasileiou, an MP who is the Greek prime minister’s top foreign policy adviser. “Our strategy will be to turn up the heat, to keep this issue in the public sphere and to raise it at every opportunity.” An about-turn by the Times newspaper, arguing for the treasures to be returned to Greece, was evidence the campaign was working, he said. Not since the early 1980s – when the former culture minister Melina Mercouri first demanded they be restored to their homeland – has the drive to retrieve the “exiled” marbles been so alive. For close to two centuries, the British Museum has been home to almost half of the temple’s monumental 160-metre-long frieze, considered the high point of classical art. The controversial circumstances in which the sculptures were dismantled from the Parthenon have long stirred debate. Successive Greek governments have argued that the antiquities were stolen at a time when the stateless nation was under Ottoman rule and without a voice. The cultural row has remained the one black spot in otherwise excellent Anglo-Greek ties. “Our bilateral relations go back centuries … but we believe they are also incomplete,” said Chatzivasileiou, who sat in on talks in Downing Street in November when the prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, formally raised the issue for the first time. “We need to work hard together to overturn an injustice that weighs heavy on the hearts of Greeks.” But as Athens has sought to place the issue at the top of its international cultural agenda, people have also rallied to the cause. In a YouGov poll conducted days after the Greek leader’s meeting with Boris Johnson, 59% of Britons said they believed the antiquities belonged in Greece. Increasingly, actors, writers, barristers and politicians have weighed in, calling for them to be reunited with carvings that survived being sawed from the temple when Lord Elgin, England’s then ambassador to the Ottoman empire, sent in workmen to remove “as much as possible” in 1801. Johnson, a passionate advocate of the antiquities’ repatriation as a classics student at Oxford University, contends the artworks were legally acquired upon receipt of a permit from the Sublime Porte. Like his predecessors, he has also said the dispute should be discussed with the museum’s trustees despite Unesco recently ruling that it is a matter for both governments to resolve. On its website, the British Museum asserts the diplomat not only “acted with the full knowledge and permission of the legal authorities of the day in both Athens and London” but that his “activities were thoroughly investigated by a parliamentary select committee in 1816 and found to be entirely legal”. Bankrupt and despondent, Elgin sold the collection to the museum that year for £35,000. “The whole debate has struck a chord,” said Mitsotakis, who has frequently described London’s stance as “a losing battle” at a time when disputed cultural artefacts are being increasingly returned to their countries of origin. Greek optimism was further fuelled last week when a fragment of the Parthenon was returned to Athens from Italy in what was seen as a moral victory for the country. The piece, which portrays a foot peeking out from beneath the robe of a goddess believed to be Artemis, belongs to the frieze’s highly prized eastern section depicting the deities of Mount Olympus. Unveiling the sculpture on the upper floor of the Acropolis Museum, Mitsotakis said the breakthrough deal that had sealed its homecoming offered “a blueprint” for other countries, including the UK. Sculptures that once ornamented the great ancient wonder are exhibited in cultural institutions across Europe although the vast majority are in London. “This agreement paves the way for the British Museum to enter into serious discussions with the Greek authorities in order to find a solution that will be mutually acceptable,” he told reporters. The Times, which had maintained for more than 50 years that the marbles should remain in London, said the deal underscored what had become a “compelling case” for the sculptures’ restitution. The argument that Athens lacked an appropriate place to exhibit the carvings no longer held when “a magnificent museum next to the Acropolis” had been built to house the cultural heritage, it asserted. The human rights lawyer Geoffrey Robertson QC, who chronicled the tactics employed by Elgin to bribe Turkish officials in the bestselling Who Owns History, said the tide was clearly turning. “The lie told by the British Museum and echoed by the British government that the marbles were lawfully acquired is no longer sustainable,” he said. “The marbles were stolen by use of bribery and corruption – even a first-year student can see the evidence … there was no licence from the sultan [to remove the antiquities]. There were military commanders at the Acropolis who were bribed with money and lavish gifts.” The Johnson government’s current difficulties could help, he said. “People are sick and tired of politicians telling lies.” After so many years of failed diplomatic attempts to win back the treasures, Robertson believes that only the threat of legal action will lift the impasse. The Mitsotakis government has so far rebuffed the idea of legal action, preferring instead to pursue the route of offering the UK gems that have never before left Greece in return for the sculptures. Officials cite another pro-Tory paper as evidence that the charm offensive appears to be working. In recent months, the Daily Telegraph has also softened its stance amid reports of disquiet over the discovery that Johnson, a former columnist, had misled the paper by insisting he had never championed the marbles’ return to Athens when in truth he had done just that. Athens’ centre-right administration has stated repeatedly that restitution of the pieces would be a magnanimous gesture post-Brexit. “We are ready to offer the UK rotating exhibitions of antiquities that have never before been seen abroad,” said Chatzivasileiou. “We have told them ‘your rooms in the British Museum will never be empty of Greek treasures’. We want to solve this issue once and for all.”Kazakhstan’s former president, Nursultan Nazarbayev, has made his first appearance since unrest broke out in the country earlier this month, in a stilted video in which he denied reports that he had fled the country, or that there was a split in the country’s elites. Instead, Nazarbayev insisted, he had merely been having “a deserved rest”. Nazarbayev ruled Kazakhstan from independence in 1991 until 2019. When he stepped down, he handpicked his successor, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, and retained the honorific title “Leader of the Nation”. He was also the head of the country’s security council until he was removed by Tokayev during the unrest, which official figures say killed 225 people. In the intervening days, many of Nazarbayev’s relatives have been removed from key positions, and the former prime minister and head of the security services was arrested on treason charges. There have been rumours that members of Nazarbayev’s circle may have used the unrest as a pretext to make a power grab, something Tokayev was able to stymie by persuading a Russia-led military alliance to introduce troops into the country. “Furious negotiations are under way with Tokayev about the redistribution of assets, spoils and rents,” a former western official who is well connected in Kazakhstan told the Guardian over the weekend. Nazarbayev’s complete absence from view during these days had prompted rumours he had fled the country, was under house arrest or maybe even dead. The four-and-a-half minute video released on Tuesday suggests Nazarbayev is still alive, but otherwise answers few questions. Sitting at a desk that is empty save for a gold clock, and with four Kazakh flags behind him, Nazarbayev played down talk of a battle for influence. “There is no conflict or standoff in the elite. Rumours about this are absolutely unfounded,” said Nazarbayev. “In 2019 I handed over my powers to president Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, and since then I am a pensioner. I am currently taking deserved rest in the capital of Kazakhstan and I have not gone anywhere,” he added. Nazarbayev’s whereabouts have been the subject of much speculation and has fuelled jokes and memes in Kazakhstan. The capital city, Astana, was renamed Nur-Sultan in 2019, in Nazarbayev’s honour, and over three decades a huge personality cult built up around him. Early signs are that a newly emboldened Tokayev will move to dismantle elements of the personality cult, but so far he has made no direct reference to Nazarbayev, preferring silence and oblique criticisms of the people close to his former benefactor who became rich. “Negotiations are ongoing, but it is clear the Nazarbayev era is over,” Yermukhamet Yertysbayev, a former minister and adviser to Nazarbayev, told the Guardian over the weekend.For years now I have been living with a chronic condition that I’ve finally been able to diagnose as Privileged Immigrant Derangement Syndrome (PIDS). Let me explain: more than a decade ago I left my native Britain to go and work in New York. I wasn’t fleeing persecution, poverty, or life in a failed state; I just wanted to live in the US. There were more opportunities, I didn’t have to navigate the suffocating class system, and, most importantly, my English accent gave me a competitive edge. Women swooned at my vowel sounds (I’m not making that up: they swooned … OK, I promise at least one woman swooned) and everyone assumed I was on tea-drinking terms with the Queen. Anyway, that’s the PI bit of PIDS. The D bit is this: when you spend extended time away from your home country, it’s easy to build up a romanticised version of it in your head. I became a cheerleader for all things British; I even bought a pair of union jack wellies, and wore them with pride whenever it rained. As my long-suffering American wife can attest, I seized every opportunity to say how much better things were in Blighty than Stateside. We had a superior healthcare system; we weren’t gun-nuts; our infrastructure was better; our political system wasn’t as drenched with money, and was less corrupt. Even our rain was better. On and on I went about how the UK was infinitely superior to the US. Then Brexit happened. Suddenly the US media (and the rest of the world) started looking at the UK with more sceptical eyes. Britain’s global reputation started to plummet, as did the value of my accent. Still, it wasn’t as if the US could feel superior for long: shortly after Brexit, it elected a reality TV star president. Since then both countries have been engaged in a race to the bottom. Even with an acute case of PIDS, it’s hard to deny Britain is an out-of-control dumpster fire; every time I think things can’t get more ludicrous, they do. The other day there were reports that Boris Johnson had concocted a strategy called Operation Save Big Dog to protect him from the fallout from “partygate”. GB News just announced it will – dictatorship style – start broadcasting the national anthem daily at the beginning of its live programming. Today, I read a headline about Prince Andrew allegedly verbally abusing his maids for rearranging his teddy bears. How on earth are these real headlines from a real country? Then again, it’s not as if things are better Stateside: it’s been just more than a year, after all, since they had an attempted insurrection. Back in 2017, reeling from Brexit and Donald Trump, I conducted a very scientific study in this column, looking at whether the UK or the US was more dysfunctional. The US narrowly won that round. Five years and infinite scandals on, it’s worth revisiting that question. I’m afraid that, due to word limit constraints, I can’t dwell on the ins and outs of my highly methodological Global Embarrassment Index™. If you want all the details, you’ll have to wait until it passes peer review (AKA my wife takes a look). For now, we’ll just skip to the conclusion. Which – drum roll, please – is that both sides of the Atlantic are equally dysfunctional. Johnson is undoubtedly more of a buffoon than Joe Biden but, at the end of the day, it’s not gaffes, hypocrisy, and bad hair that matter: it’s the fact that both countries are moving perilously quickly towards authoritarianism. In the UK, Johnson’s government is pushing oppressive measures to criminalise protest, and arbitrarily deprive people of citizenship. In the US, certain states are busy banning books, and Biden’s government is proving ineffectual in the fight to protect voting rights. What is happening on either side of the Atlantic may often be beyond parody but, believe me, the dissolution of democracy is no laughing matter. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistErik van Lieshout’s films are often riotous, comic affairs. Always putting himself in the frame – along with his subjects, collaborators, antagonists and even passers-by – he’s a kind of agent provocateur. He annoys, provokes, and sometimes goes too far. How far can you go? Now 54, Van Lieshout’s latest work focuses on fellow Dutch artist René Daniëls. While retaining Van Lieshout’s talent for embedding himself in situations (often of his own making), and for all the incidental, hilarious interludes, this film, René Daniëls 2021, filmed over a year, has a largely different tenor to previous works. In 1987 Daniëls, then an influential young Dutch painter, suffered a haemorrhagic stroke. He was 37. His career had lasted barely a decade. For a long time, Daniëls was unable to work, and still can barely speak. Slowly, he has learned to paint and draw again, using his left hand. He is now aphasic, and partially paralysed on his right side. Communicating by way of smiles and thumbs-ups, laughter, cryptic drawings and occasionally written words, you’re never quite sure what’s going on with Daniëls. But it would be a mistake to cast Daniëls’ art in the past tense. Not only does he still sporadically paint and make drawings, his art also remains influential and is regularly shown. A prolific painter, his work always bristled with ideas, visual puns, unexpected conjunctions, an impure mix of figuration, abstraction, cryptic signs and an overriding humour and surprise. His paintings have a light, deft touch, both funny and serious at the same time. Younger painters now who don’t know Daniëls’ work might be as surprised and captivated by it as I still am. Daniëls once described his work as “a combination of visual poetry and painting”. Like Van Lieshout, his art can be as provocative as it is tantalising. One large, fairly recent painting, filling a wall in Daniëls’ bedroom, shows a planet with another sweeping round in its orbit. Daniëls often signs his work now with a similar planetary conjunction, alongside his name, initials and date, which he carefully records. In his earlier works there were often paintings-within-paintings, schematic shapes that themselves described walls hung with paintings – which also, somehow, resembled bow-ties. There were playful portraits – a man juggling balls, another whose beard has been caught by the wind and covers his face, and a portrait of the poet Apollinaire with a fish for a moustache. Another has Apollinaire as a ringmaster. There’s a bed floating on the ocean and a skateboard in a landscape. Rats ride more skateboards, in an art world rat race. There are amplifiers on the floor (maybe they’re also sculptures), and a stand in the middle of the room is festooned with microphones. A stage, then, for some kind of performance. Daniëls often returns to this image in his more recent drawings. Among the last works before his stroke, Daniëls painted spring trees blossoming with words (one had a ghostly bicycle trapped among the branches). There were references to Mondrian and to Munch, to early Sigmar Polke; lampoons of the art world and comic pictorial battles between European and American art. His art was zesty, impish and often very beautiful. The film opens with a toy robot wearing a face mask, twirling and careening about, before falling over, lights flashing, the legs continuing to churn. The camera follows Van Lieshout and Daniëls, sitting ruminatively at Daniëls’ home in Eindhoven and in Van Lieshout’s studio in Rotterdam, which he has hung with his own homages to Daniëls’ best-known paintings. Seeing them, Daniëls looks bemused. Van Lieshout’s versions, some of which now also hang at Maureen Paley’s new London space (and in a room at Rochelle School, a mile or so away, where the gallery has its archive), are roughly handled, and mix coloured acetate, oil and acrylics. Van Lieshout says he made them in order to understand Daniëls’ work better. I think they function as a way for Van Lieshout to signal his affection for Daniëls, and to point up their differences in personality. But they’re not much help to us. Van Lieshout has also produced a number of pastel portraits of Daniëls, which do capture his presence and vulnerability. If you don’t know Daniëls’ paintings first-hand, the film is at times confusing. Much as I admire Van Lieshout’s work, several sections of the film, where he talks with younger painters Sam Hersbach and Laurens Stok in their studios, might mislead viewers into thinking that what we are looking at are recent works by Daniëls. They’re not. Van Lieshout is trying to get at the idea of influence, and how a painter’s work lives on and persists in those who come after them. A good idea but one that could have been dealt with better here. What’s valuable in the film is much more human and direct, and largely about how one can communicate with an artist whose utterances don’t go much beyond yes and no. “How much he understands is anybody’s guess,” says Marleen Gijsen, Daniëls’ carer, who has looked after him since his stroke. “Sometimes,” she says, “It feels like he has been harshly punished for his talent.” Van Lieshout sits with Daniëls and Gijsen, participates in their everyday life, takes Daniëls to cafes and museums, encourages him to draw and paint. They sit and drink and eat and draw together. As a portrait of Daniëls and his interactions with Van Lieshout and with Gijsen, this film is extraordinarily intimate, sympathetic and touching, and well worth watching. It is not a documentary. There are long shots of Daniëls smiling to himself and gathering objects on the table before him. Daniëls eating and drinking and giving the camera a mischievous look. The conversation is not always as one-sided as it might seem. He asks for a glass of wine, drawing Van Lieshout a wine bottle. There is a very moving moment towards the end, where Van Lieshout tells Daniëls how important his work has become to him, “... And you too, René. The way you are. Would you rather I didn’t say it?” Silence. “It should be a lark too, right?” asks Van Lieshout. Daniëls smiles and looks away. Erik van Lieshout: René Daniëls is at Maureen Paley, London, until 27 February and the De Pont Museum, Tilburg, Netherlands, until 1 May.Microsoft is to pay almost $70bn to buy Activision Blizzard, the publisher of mega franchises including Call of Duty, World of Warcraft and Candy Crush, in the biggest ever takeover in the tech and gaming sectors. Microsoft said that the $68.7bn (£50.6bn) all-cash deal – which dwarfs its previous biggest, the $26bn takeover of LinkedIn in 2016 – will “provide the building blocks for the metaverse”. It is the biggest deal in tech history, eclipsing the $67bn paid by Dell to buy the digital storage giant EMC in 2015. The deal will see the Xbox maker become the world’s third-biggest gaming company by revenue behind China’s Tencent and Japan’s Sony, maker of PlayStation games consoles. “Gaming is the most dynamic and exciting category in entertainment across all platforms today and will play a key role in the development of metaverse platforms,” said Satya Nadella, the chairman and chief executive of Microsoft. “We’re investing deeply in world-class content, community and the cloud to usher in a new era of gaming that puts players and creators first and make gaming safe, inclusive and accessible to all.” The deal comes after a tumultuous time for Activision Blizzard, which has 10,000 staff globally a market value of about $50bn and three $1bn gaming franchises, which has been affected by a string of allegations of sexual misconduct and discrimination. On Monday, the company said that it had fired more than three dozen employees and disciplined another 40 since July last year to address the allegations. Bobby Kotick, the chief executive of Activision Blizzard, will remain running the gaming business, which when joined with Microsoft will see the overall company run 30 internal games development studios. Microsoft said that the company’s strength in the rapidly growing mobile gaming sector was an important attraction of the deal. Daniel Ives, a tech and media analyst at the US firm Wedbush, said that while a deal of such scale will naturally attract the attention of regulators, Microsoft will ultimately gain clearance as it is not under the same scrutiny and pressure as Silicon Valley rivals such as Facebook, Amazon, Apple and Google. “We expect this deal to ultimately clear regulators,” said Ives, in a note to investors. “However, there will be some inherent speed bumps navigating both the Beltway and Brussels on a tech deal of this size.” Ives said that while Nadella has seen huge success driving Microsoft’s business-to-business offerings, such as the cloud division led by Azure and Office 365, this deal will help turbocharge its consumer strategy which has “been on a treadmill approach”. “Acquiring Activision will help jump start Microsoft’s broader gaming endeavours and ultimately its move into the metaverse with gaming the first monetisation piece of the metaverse in our opinion,” he said. “With Activision’s stock under heavy pressure over the last few months, Microsoft viewed this as the window of opportunity to acquire a unique asset that can propel its consumer strategy forward.” Gaming has been a pandemic winner as the lockdowns across the globe fuelled a boom in playing to alleviate boredom, which in turn has prompted a deal-making boom in the sector. Last week, Take Two Interactive, the maker of hit video games including the Grand Theft Auto franchise, acquired Zynga, best known for its FarmVille and Harry Potter titles, in a $12.7bn deal creating a global console and mobile gaming giant.Boris Johnson has claimed “nobody warned me it was against the rules” for a drinks party to be hosted in Downing Street during the first lockdown, but also refused to deny the possibility he could resign should he be censured by the inquiry into rule-breaking. The prime minister, speaking publicly for the first time in almost a week, said he “hoped people would understand the circumstances we were operating in” at No 10 during the first lockdown. In the interview, Johnson confirmed he had been interviewed by the senior civil servant Sue Gray for her inquiry into lockdown parties. She is expected to report next week. The prime minister also confirmed he had apologised to the Queen after it was revealed staffers held a leaving party – including wheeling in a suitcase filled with alcoholic drinks – the day before Prince Philip’s funeral when the Queen was required by coronavirus restrictions to sit alone. On Monday, Johnson’s former senior aide Dominic Cummings accused the prime minister of lying when No 10 denied the prime minister had been warned against allowing a “bring your own booze” garden party during lockdown. After Cummings’ latest allegations, Johnson explicitly denied he had been warned not to hold the event. “I can’t believe we would have gone ahead with an event that people said was against the rules … nobody warned me it was against the rules, I am categorical about that – I would have remembered that,” he told Sky News. Asked if he would resign should Gray conclude that he had misled MPs about his knowledge, Johnson did not demur. He said: “We’ll have to see what she says. And I think that she should be given the space to get on and conclude her inquiry and I would urge everybody who has knowledge of this and … memories of this to tell her what they know.” Johnson admitted to parliament last week that he attended drinks in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020 but claimed he had not realised it was a social gathering. Cummings wrote a blogpost on Monday challenging that account. He said he told Martin Reynolds, a senior official, that the invitation broke the rules and claimed Reynolds replied: “So long as it’s socially distanced I think it’s OK, I’ll check with the PM if he’s happy for it to go ahead.” Cummings said in his blogpost: “Not only me but other eyewitnesses who discussed this at the time would swear under oath this is what happened.” Looking distressed, Johnson insisted repeatedly he had believed it to be a work event and had not been warned that he should cancel the gathering – but said he would have put an end to the drinks party in retrospect. “I can tell you categorically, categorically, that nobody told me, and nobody said that this was something that was against the rules, or was a breach of the Covid rules, or we were doing something that wasn’t a work event because, frankly, I don’t think, I can’t imagine why on earth it would have gone ahead or why it would have been allowed to go ahead,” he said. “My memory of this event, as I’ve said, is going out into the garden for about 25 minutes for what I implicitly thought was a work event and talking to staff, thanking staff, I can’t remember exactly how many – but for about 25 minutes I was there. I then went back to my office and continued my work. “If I had my time again, I would not have allowed things to develop in that way. And when I went out into that garden, yes, I should probably have told people, I should have looked around and said ‘well, we’ve got to go back indoors,’ or ‘this isn’t the right way to do things.’” When asked how he had apologised to Buckingham Palace over a separate event held for his departing communications chief, James Slack, now deputy editor of the Sun, Johnson took several deep breaths before saying: “I deeply and bitterly regret that that happened.I can only renew my apologies both to Her Majesty and to the country for misjudgments that were made, and for which I take full responsibility.” Johnson, who was asked repeatedly if he would resign, made clear that was a possible outcome after the report’s publication. “I repeat my apologies for any and all misjudgments that were made, for which I take full responsibility, but I think people do need to wait and see the conclusion of the report, and I will draw the necessary consequences and conclusions but then come back to the House,” he said.The Bugle The problem with topical comedy podcasts is that they often find themselves caught between two poles. They are neither as fast and reactive as Twitter, nor as popular and mainstream as a TV panel show. The secret of a good one, then, is largely down to personality. And it’s this that has propelled Andy Zaltzman’s The Bugle for a decade and a half. Originally co-hosted with a pre-megastardom John Oliver, each week Zaltzman pulls apart the news (with help from one of a rotating band of guests) in a manner that is often absurd or angry but never smug. Given the state of topical comedy in general, that last quality is particularly miraculous. The Daily Zeitgeist The miracle of The Daily Zeitgeist, meanwhile, is that it is daily. And while you might assume that filling a podcast with topical gags every 24 hours is the fastest way to be driven to either madness or despair, that happily isn’t the case here. Hosted by Jack O’Brien, co-founder of the comedy site Cracked, The Daily Zeitgeist is smart enough to realise that all days are not created equally. Some days O’Brien and his guest can prattle on entertainingly for more than an hour; on quieter days they wrap up in as little as 15 minutes. It makes for a refreshingly fat-free listen. Page 94: The Private Eye Podcast If, like many (or perhaps just me), you have grown bored of Have I Got News for You, you should welcome Page 94 into your life with absolute glee. In truth, calling it a comedy podcast is a stretch: recent episodes have covered topics such as the sewage-dumping scandal, Covid and dodgy mini-umbrella funds. Episodes become available monthly, which means that all involved have the time and space to get all their ducks in order before shooting them down. The result is less Have I Got News for You and more Last Week Tonight With John Oliver, which is better. The Skewer The Skewer has been described more as a “river” than a podcast, and it isn’t hard to see why. Created by Jon Holmes, it is a hostless collage of news, songs and dialogue, smashed together to reflect whatever has happened over the last few days. It’s a bit like Cassetteboy, and a bit like Chris Morris’s Jam, and the sheer amount of work that goes into creating a new episode sounds genuinely backbreaking. Fortunately, once you’ve attuned yourself to its weird rhythms, The Skewer becomes gently hypnotic. Amazing. Wait Wait … Don’t Tell Me! And then there is this, NPR’s long-running, Peabody award-winning weekly current affairs quiz. Wait Wait … Don’t Tell Me! has a huge and loyal listenership, and for good reason. It is incredibly sharp and perceptive, and rarely gets snagged up in surface level one-liners. It also attracts some legitimately great guests: Stephen Fry, Martin Short, Ilana Glazer and Chance the Rapper have all stopped by in recent months to join the fun. Absolutely glorious.It is perhaps a testament to current UK politics that the survival of a prime minister could come down to a test of honesty between two famously slippery individuals. But while Dominic Cummings very clearly wants to bring down Boris Johnson, it does not necessarily mean he is making things up – at least not always. In an addendum to an earlier post on his Substack blog on Monday, Cummings argued that Johnson’s defence of his attendance at the “bring your own booze” party in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020 – he believed it was a work meeting – was a lie. Martin Reynolds, the senior No 10 aide who sent the invitation, had been warned the event would break Covid rules, and it was inconceivable Johnson would not have known of the exchanges, Cummings wrote. “There are many other photos of parties after I left yet to appear,” Cummings ended, ominously. “I’ll say more when SG’s [Sue Gray’s] report is published.” In normal times, such allegations from a former chief aide would seem career-ending for a prime minister. But Team Johnson will know two things: that Cummings is not renowned as a reliable witness, and that he has a track record of promising evidence that never materialises. For most voters, if they have heard of Cummings at all, it will be for his own lockdown breaking antics in spring 2020, notably his much-mocked “eyesight test” excuse for a family day trip to Barnard Castle. Cummings did eventually concede he had not initially told the whole truth about his travels, arguing this had been because he had decamped with his wife and son from London to Durham for security reasons, something he had not been able to disclose at the time. Similarly, in a marathon, barnstorming performance before a Covid inquiry last May, Cummings promised MPs he would provide evidence to back up claims about misdeeds by the former health secretary Matt Hancock and others, but never did. As ever with Cummings, what he says and his reasons for saying it are often complex, rolled up in a nest of vested interests, ancient grudges and a showman’s instinct for feeding the public just enough to keep them interested. Many of Cummings’ utterances bring in mind the supposed comment of the 19th-century Austrian diplomat Klemens von Metternich when told about the death of his equally wily French counterpart Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand: “What did he mean by that?” To take one example, while Cummings has been unequivocal about the social nature of the 20 May gathering, he is equally adamant that a similar event in the No 10 garden five days earlier was a work meeting. The difference? Unlike on 20 May, Cummings attended the 15 May event – and was pictured there, sitting within arm’s reach of a wine bottle and cheeseboard. Similarly, in his latest blogpost Cummings took the time to reject the idea there was a party at No 10 on 27 November 2020, despite witnesses describing it. One reason could be because it is believed to have been a leaving event for Cleo Watson, a former aide to Cummings, to whom he is close. It is notable too the way Cummings appears to drip-feed information via tweets linked to his Substack blog, where most pieces are behind a £10-a-month paywall. But there is one thing that should worry Johnson: when it comes to information about Downing Street parties, Cummings’ claims have, thus far, tended to be some of his more credible. For example, the blogpost first setting out what he knew about the 20 May party was published on 7 January, three days before ITV obtained a copy of the crucial email from Reynolds inviting 100 or so Downing Street staff to “make the most of the lovely weather” with drink in the garden. Pretty much all of what Cummings set out on 7 January, in some detail, has been corroborated with other evidence, and from different sources. In his latest update, Cummings could not have been more clear: Johnson lied to parliament by saying he had never been aware of attending any rule-breaking parties, and this could be proved. As ever with this most elusive of narrators, only time will tell if he really means it.The six-year-old schoolboy Rikki Neave was murdered 27 years ago by a boy aged 13 with a “grotesque interest” in child murder who lied for decades to cover up the killing, a court has heard. James Watson, 40, denies the murder of Neave, who went missing in November 1994 and whose body was found in woodland near Peterborough the following day. Opening Watson’s trial at the Old Bailey, John Price QC told the jury that Rikki’s mother, Ruth Neave, was charged and acquitted of his murder in 1996 and it is submitted that the decision to charge her was “wrong”. It was in February 2020 that Watson, who had appeared as a witness in the original investigation, was charged with the murder after a DNA breakthrough established he had been in close physical contact with the clothing Neave was wearing when he was murdered, the court heard. “In late November 1994, James Watson was exhibiting a grotesque interest in the subject of child murder generally, including in things said to his own mother,” Price said. “Immediately after the killing, even amidst the widespread local interest, teachers of his noted in him a conspicuous preoccupation with the extensive reporting of the fate of Rikki Neave.” Describing the case as a “whodunnit”, Price told the jury Neave was reported missing by his mother at 6pm on 28 November 1994. At 12.05pm the next day, Rikki’s body was found by PC Malcolm Graham in a wooded area on the fringe of the housing estate in Peterborough where Rikki lived, five minutes from his home, the court heard. Price said: “He had been strangled. The body was naked. It was lying on the ground, flat on its back. It had been deliberately posed by the killer, in a star shape, with outstretched arms and his legs placed wide apart.” It was established that Rikki was murdered when still clothed, in what was “most likely a surprise attack” from behind, with the neckline of his own zipped-up jacket used “as an improvised ligature”, the court heard. A single white shirt button was found perched on a leaf, 18 inches from Rikki’s left hand, the jury was told. At 9.30am the next day, 30 November 1994, the missing clothing was found by a police constable in a wheelie bin on the pavement outside a house on Willougby Court on the border of the wood, 150 yards from where the body had been found, the court heard. Three small white buttons were missing from the shirt, Price said. In May 1995, Rikki’s mother was charged with murder of her son and offences of cruelty towards him and his sisters, the jury was told. She pleaded guilty to the charges of cruelty but has always denied having anything to do with her son’s murder, the court heard. She was unanimously acquitted of murder by a jury at Northampton crown court on 30 October 1996, Price said. A cold case review was opened in 2015 and using techniques not available in the mid-1990s, scientific examination was taken of adhesive tapings applied in 1994 to the outer layer of Rikki’s clothing, the court heard. The results revealed trace evidence of DNA of its wearer, Rikki, and of other people, including a definitive match with the DNA profile of Watson, who was 13 at the time and is now of no fixed abode, the jury was told. On the morning of the day Rikki was reported missing, Watson and the boy had been seen with each other, the jury was told. When police first came to see him, Watson admitted he had met Rikki on that day but made no mention of any physical contact, the court heard. The jury heard Watson told police Rikki was not someone he knew. “This was not true,” Price said. “He knew him well. It was one of many lies James Watson is alleged to have told others about events on the Monday he had met Rikki Neave and Rikki Neave had gone missing. He was still doing so, when questioned under caution by the police 22 years later, in April 2016.” Witnesses saw Watson and Rikki playing together on the morning of the boy’s disappearance, while others saw the pair walking away together in the direction of the wood where Rikki was found, the court heard. For the first time, in 2016 Watson introduced an element of innocent physical contact between him and Rikki in his account of what happened, the jury was told. The trial is expect to last eight weeks.Prince Andrew has plenty on his mind but the latest ignominy following the Virginia Giuffre scandal will not be missed by his mother, whose most fervent passion is horse racing and whose first read in the morning is the Racing Post. York racecourse has decided to rename the Duke Of York Stakes, a prestigious race for sprinters run each year at its May meeting, in a bid to distance itself from the embattled royal and the story will certainly make headlines in Wednesday’s edition. The track’s head of marketing and sponsorship, James Brennan, told the daily turf bible: “The race has been with us in different guises, over different distances and at different times of the year, since 1895. “It was introduced in honour of the then Duke of York, who went on to become King George V, and I think most of the pubs that are wrestling with this question come from the same root. “We don’t want the name of the race to be a distraction from what is a good contest and we’re seeking to clarify the history and connection. The current favourite, though we need to go through the protocol of the European Pattern Committee, is something like the 1895 Duke Of York Stakes. “That clarifies that it is a long-established race and has a connection other than to Prince Andrew.” The current Duke of York is being sued by Giuffre, who is American, and has claimed that she was lured into the service of Jeffrey Epstein, the financier and convicted sex offender who died in custody in New York in 2019. Her lawyers claim Giuffre was “lent out” to Andrew for sex in Epstein’s New York home, his property in the US Virgin Islands and in London while she was a 17-year-old minor, meaning the prince is responsible for her “battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress”. Andrew has strenuously denied the allegations. The Duke Of York was actually appointed York’s initial patron in 2015, and at the time he officially opened the course’s new weighing room. Andrew gave up that role, along with a number of others in 2019, following his disastrous BBC Newsnight interview. York is not seeking to change the name of the May contest completely, not wishing to sow confusion in the minds of the sport’s followers. “Any new race title takes time to settle in and the whole reason we have [major race] titles is to allow everyone to track that highest echelon of the sport,” Brennan said.A woman who may have seen Prince Andrew with Virginia Giuffre at a London nightclub 20 years ago is “willing” to provide testimony in Giuffre’s civil lawsuit against the royal, whom she accuses of sexual abuse, the witness’s lawyer said. “I am proud to represent Shukri Walker, who has bravely stepped forward as a witness and encourages others who may have information to do so as well,” the lawyer Lisa Bloom said in an email. “She is willing to do the deposition Virginia Giuffre’s team is seeking.” Giuffre, now 38, maintains that at age 17 she was coerced into having sex with the prince, by his associates Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell. Andrew emphatically denies all allegations of misconduct. Epstein, a convicted sex offender and financier, was arrested in July 2019 on charges of sex trafficking girls as young as 14. He killed himself in a Manhattan jail a month later, while awaiting trial. In New York in December, Maxwell, now 60, was found guilty of sex trafficking and related counts, for bringing girls to Epstein for him to sexually abuse. Bloom’s statement to the Guardian followed a petition submitted by Giuffre’s lawyers on Friday, asking a Manhattan federal court judge, Lewis Kaplan, to officially request assistance from British authorities in obtaining testimony from Walker. Giuffre’s lawyers noted that Walker has said she saw the royal “with a young girl around the time that plaintiff contends Prince Andrew abused her in London after visiting Tramp Nightclub”. They added: “Because Prince Andrew has denied ever meeting plaintiff or being at Tramp Nightclub during the relevant time period, Ms Walker’s testimony is highly relevant.” Walker’s willingness to cooperate is not a surprise. Bloom, who has represented several Epstein victims, previously told the Guardian: “My client says she was there and she remembers the night clearly because she never saw a royal before or since. “She says Prince Andrew was happy, smiling and dancing, and Virginia did not look happy. My client was a trafficking victim herself and wants everyone to know that sex trafficking is real, ongoing and devastating.” Bloom has also said she has given “the FBI all the details of my client’s story for further investigation”. Giuffre’s lawyers also asked Kaplan to request British assistance in obtaining testimony from Robert Olney, a former equerry, or aide. In court filings, they said Olney has “relevant information about Prince Andrew’s relationship with Jeffrey Epstein”. Olney’s name, the lawyers said, “appears in publicly available copies of Epstein’s phone book”. Giuffre’s lawyers said they want to ask Olney about “any communications with or regarding plaintiff” and about Andrew’s travel to New York City and “to or from any of Jeffrey Epstein’s homes”. The request for assistance came several days after Kaplan refused to dismiss Giuffre’s civil lawsuit against Andrew. The prince’s lawyers argued unsuccessfully that Giuffre’s 2015 settlement with Epstein protected him from her suit. The $500,000 settlement featured a section stating that “second parties and any other person or entity who could have been included as a potential defendant [are protected from] all, and all manner of, action and actions … including state or federal, cause and causes of action”. Andrew, however, was not mentioned. The prince has suffered repercussions from Giuffre’s litigation and from intensifying scrutiny over his connections to Epstein and Maxwell. Buckingham Palace said in a statement on Thursday: “With the Queen’s approval and agreement, the Duke of York’s military affiliations and royal patronages have been returned to the Queen. The Duke of York will continue not to undertake any public duties and is defending this case as a private citizen.” Recent court filings in Giuffre’s now-settled lawsuit against Maxwell have shown that more information might soon be unsealed. In a 12 January filing, an attorney for Maxwell said she was withdrawing her opposition to the unsealing of names mentioned in Giuffre’s litigation, men currently referred to as “John Does”. “After careful review of the detailed objections submitted by Non-Party Does 17, 53, 54, 55, 73, 93 and 151, counsel for Ghislaine Maxwell writes to inform the court that she does not wish to further address those objections,” Laura Menninger wrote. “Each of the listed Does has counsel who have ably asserted their own respective privacy rights. Ms Maxwell therefore leaves it to this court to conduct the appropriate review.”The Israeli police allegedly conducted warrantless phone intercepts of Israeli citizens, including politicians and activists, using the NSO group’s controversial Pegasus spyware, according to an investigation by the Israeli business media site Calcalist. Among those described as having been targets in the report were local mayors, leaders of political protests against the former prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, and former government employees. According to the report, the surveillance was done without the court supervision required for Israeli citizens and without monitoring of how the data was used, a claim denied explicitly by the Israeli police service and a government minister. A separate report in the Israeli daily Haaretz, based on an invoice seen by the paper, suggested the Israeli police was invoiced by NSO group for 2.7m shekels (£635,000) in 2013, apparently for a basic version of the program. While numerous reports have emerged over the misuse of Pegasus, which is designed and sold by Israel’s NSO group to foreign governments, the latest claims mark a major departure in suggesting that Israelis were also targeted for interception. Senior NSO officials have claimed that its software was not authorised for use against Israeli and US telephone numbers. Last July, in an interview with Israel’s Army Radio its CEO, Shalev Hulio, said that his firm “has chosen not to operate against Israeli and American phone numbers”. The Guardian understands from sources familiar with NSO’s licensing that while that means foreign third-party clients to whom it has sold its software cannot target US and Israeli phone numbers from abroad, an Israeli law enforcement client that purchased the spyware – for instance the police service – would be able to target Israeli phones. While the report does not mention its sources, it claims that the order to use the spyware was given by senior officers and carried out by police electronic interception specialists. The claim is highly significant because for the first time it counters assurances given to Israelis that they could not be targeted by Pegasus and would appear to question the understanding that Israelis are protected from warrantless intrusion. Underlining the implications of the story, the Jerusalem Post commented: “[This] astounding report, if true, would blow gaping holes through a number of NSO, police and potentially state prosecution narratives about the proper balance between collecting evidence and respecting citizens’ privacy rights and court protections from unlawful searches and seizures.” Under Israeli law, only the country’s domestic intelligence agency, Shin Bet, has the authority to carry out such cell phone hacking without a court order and only then to prevent impending terrorist attacks from either Palestinians, Israeli-Arabs or Israeli-Jews, with the interception requiring approval from a senior Shin Bet official or the attorney general’s office. The Israeli police service, however, has no such exemption and is required to seek a court order. According to the report, the police may have justified the use of the spyware via a legal loophole that existed because the technology was not covered by existing laws. A statement released by the Israeli police service, while denying that it conducted warrantless interception, declined to discuss whether Pegasus had been used for interceptions. “The Israel police acts according to the authority granted to it by law and when necessary according to court orders and within the rules and regulations set by the responsible bodies,” the statement said. “The police’s activity in this sector is under constant supervision and inspection of the attorney general of Israel and additional external legal entities. “Naturally, the police don’t intend to comment on the tools it uses. Nevertheless, we will continue to act in a determined manner with all the means at our disposal, in the physical and online spaces, to fight crime in general, and organised crime in particular, to protect the safety and property of the public.” A statement from Israel’s public security minister, Omer Barlev, also focused on the issue of warrantless tapping, saying there was “no practice of secretive wiretapping, or intrusion into devices, by the Israeli police without the approval of a judge.” “At the same time, I intend to ensure that no corners are cut on the subject of NSO and that everything will be checked thoroughly and unequivocally by a judge,” he added. Among investigations mentioned by the investigation were the use of Pegasus to target a local mayor during a corruption investigation, with the evidence recovered allegedly whitewashed to cover up how it had been obtained. According to the report the police first acquired the Pegasus software in 2013, which they began using in 2015. Perhaps most shocking for Israelis will be the claim that among targets were the phones of prominent citizen activists in the “Black Flag” protest, which emerged during a surge of coronavirus cases, an economic crisis and an ongoing corruption trial against Netanyahu. In a statement released by NSO following publication of the investigation, it reiterated its longstanding claim that it had no input into how its clients used its spyware. “As a rule, we don’t comment on existing or potential clients. We would like to clarify that the company doesn’t operate the systems held by its clients and isn’t involved in activating them. “The company’s employees aren’t exposed to targets, aren’t exposed to information about them, and aren’t involved or exposed to our clients’ operational activity or any information relating to the investigations conducted by clients. “The company sells its products under licence and supervision to be used by national security and law enforcement agencies to prevent crime and terror in a legal manner and according to court orders and the local law of each country.”First emerging as a surrealist reaction to the horrors of the second world war, the Japanese art of butoh incorporates violence, sacrifice and bodily mutilation: a captivatingly intense form of performance described by its founder Tatsumi Hijikata as the “dance of utter darkness”. For a teenage Tom Heyes, growing up in dreary, small-town Lancashire, it was an escape from the abject mundanity of his life. “When I was first starting out I didn’t really view it as performance art. It was just me being fucked up in my bedroom,” he says, reflecting on his early interpretation of the craft which drew as much from donk (the north-west’s spin on hardcore dance) as it did the Japanese avant garde. Often he would be left bruised and bloodied from these punishing dance routines, “but those ones back then were the most raw shit ever”, he insists. Now 25 and operating as Blackhaine (a moniker partly derived from his love of the film La Haine), the unbridled intensity of butoh seeps into every facet of Heyes’ cross-disciplinary creativity: a blistering combination of drill rap, experimental music and contemporary dance that recently got him hired by Kanye West to choreograph his stadium-sized listening parties. Heyes sips on a Guinness in a salt-of-the-earth pub in Manchester’s Northern Quarter holding its own against a sea of gentrification. “I don’t really have any memories of growing up,” he says with the same endearing Lancashire twang that inflects his music. “I can remember being three and then it’s kind of a blur until I was about 14. Nothing happened for like 10 years. And even when it did, because it was in the context of this dull landscape, it never registered as being exciting. I think I’ve always carried that detachment.” Born in Preston and raised in nearby Chorley, the ubiquitous bleakness that Heyes references has been his inspiration. “Unless you wanna be a footballer or a fucking gangster or summat, then there’s nothing else to do really. So I just started writing.” A two-year stint working a “dead-end security job” at Leyland train station presented him with ample time. Citing a wide range of literary influences – from the drug-induced paranoia of Coil to the dissociative prose of Kafka, and Moor Mother’s radical ruminations – he began jotting down whatever came to mind on a knackered iPhone 3, quickly accumulating hundreds of vignettes that resembled one sprawling stream of consciousness. There were no plans to take it further, until fellow Lancastrian artist Rainy Miller convinced him to bring these musings to life. He sent a cappellas to former classmate Miller, who crafted eerie, metallic drill beats to complement Heyes’ dark meditations and rugged, almost spoken-word flow. The result was Blackhaine’s debut EP Armour: an eloquent exploration of north-western deprivation. “Rigor mortis in my cradle while you’re rocking me to sleep,” Heyes chants on opening track Blackpool, and it’s difficult to think of a better symbol for Blackhaine’s music than the impoverished seaside town; Black Lights on the M6, a nod to the motorway that straddles his native Chorley, has his sparse vocals vying for space amid industrial sounds, conjuring a desolate, monochrome backdrop. “This is what Sleaford Mods think they sound like,” one of my friends playfully suggested. The socio-politics are certainly more oblique than those of the East Midlands duo, but Heyes’ portrayal of provincial working-class despondency is no less riveting. “When I write I’m more interested in an instinct or an emotion,” he explains. “We’ve surpassed the need for really contrived storytelling.” A showstopping contribution to Space Afrika’s acclaimed Honest Labour album followed, and Blackhaine’s second EP, And Salford Falls Apart, dropped in December. The title references the city he now calls home, and it builds on the paranoia and angst of his first release. “What’s the price of England now? With Salford falling apart,” is screamed desperately on the title track, a militant assault of harsh noise reminiscent of power electronics agitators Whitehouse. It’s a candid portrait of someone teetering on the edge, and also a comment on what Heyes regards as a nation in decay. “We’re all brought up with this vision of England,” he reflects. “Then we get a bit older and slowly realise that the country we’re living in is a shithole.” The EP is also semi-autobiographical, with Heyes vaguely alluding to substance abuse (“Me mum’ll read this so I don’t wanna say too much”) and suggesting that he didn’t expect to make it to his current age. The record’s cover art is a photo of his own hospital bed, taken during a close call. “Shaky heart and lungs,” he mutters, deflecting. “But here we are. Happy days.” Miller is again on production duties, alongside Manchester-based Croww, and the three artists make up the Blackhaine live show. “I’m quite an anxious person day-to-day so when I’m up there that’s when I feel like I can really breathe,” Heyes explains, comparing his visceral on-stage performances to that of another north-west iconoclast, Ian Curtis. “I’m not a technical artist by any stretch but if you put me on stage I’ll fucking go for it,” he says. Dance remains crucial: what began as a way of “breaking through the detachment” soon blossomed into choreography commissions for musicians such as Mykki Blanco and Flohio. The video for Vegyn’s Nauseous/Devilish, shot on the roof of a multi-storey car park, summarises Heyes’ dance style: he writhes into the most unorthodox of positions, as if fending off invisible antagonists. He cites an interest in “finding involuntary states of the body” as a guiding principle, and “spice heads” – zombie-like synthetic cannabis users whose presence in Manchester city centre constituted an epidemic in the late-2010s – as an unlikely reference point. “If you put loads of stress on people or interrogate the muscles in a certain part of your arm it will start to shake involuntarily,” he continues. “I find that incredibly interesting. I was researching this and then looking at the spice heads in Piccadilly – while being up to no good in a similar way at the time – and seeing a lot of parallels.” The high point of his fledgling choreography career came in September, when Kanye West’s team requested Heyes’ services. “I’m not trying to sound arrogant but he’s my hero, innit, and I always knew we’d work together,” he enthuses, recalling sleepless nights spent frantically rehearsing in a dilapidated church in Gorton. “I did think it’d be on the next project when I had a bit more weight behind me, but whatever.” Heyes modestly suggests that this rapid ascent is the result of him “filling a quota” – a token working-class northerner drawing praise simply for departing from the trust fund, London-centric arts world stereotype. In reality, it’s difficult to think of another artist from any background whose work currently unites so many media with such urgency and profundity. “I think the urgency comes from me saying how I genuinely feel when I go in the booth to record,” he says. “And now that I’ve got the confidence to actually express how I feel, I’m ready to kick on big time.” And Salford Falls Apart is out now on Head II.When Paco Gento arrived in 1953, he thought Real Madrid were too big for him but that was nowhere near as big as he would make them. He joined a club that had not won the league in two decades, since before the civil war; by the time he retired 18 years later, it was the biggest, most successful in the world and he had set a record still unmatched half a century later and likely never to be beaten. Nicknamed La Galerna, the Gale, after the wind that tore through the Cantabrian coast like he tore through defences, Gento died on Tuesday, aged 88. In a career spent almost entirely at Real Madrid he won 12 league titles and six European Cups. No footballer can match that; only two clubs have won more and one is the institution he helped transform, where he was the honorary president. Gento might not even have been a Madrid player for long. At the end of his first season, the club’s president and patriarch Santiago Bernabéu was minded to transfer him to Osasuna. Raised in the village of Guarnizo, where his family tended to livestock and chicken and he played barefoot with “balls” made of paper or stuffed with feathers, where he listened to Atlético on the radio, Gento had signed for Madrid at 18. “Too young,” he later admitted. He had only played a handful of games for his nearest club Racing Santander, one of them while still underaged at 17, forcing them to forfeit the match and leaving him having to wait to restart his career. The contract to join Madrid was signed hidden away in a garage somewhere to avoid furious fans in Santander and for a while they were not much easier on him in Madrid. The club had seen something that supporters could not yet. “The whole thing was too big,” he said shortly after retiring. “Just their name, the atmosphere, my isolation, my reserved character, the shyness, the fans who had a go at me and rightly so, all meant I walked a bitter road. I lost sleep over the criticism. It made me think that they would transfer me to a team in the provinces.” Alfredo Di Stéfano, who had arrived the same summer, had other ideas, telling Bernabéu that Gento was “untouchable”. There was something there, he was sure. And so it proved. “The lad was an introvert, he came from a small town and he felt out of place,” Di Stéfano recalled. “In the second year he became the best left winger in the world.” Gento would cite a game against Barcelona, where his opponent Josep Seguer asked whether he was ever going to “get off your bike”, as the moment it really started, and then it never stopped. In 1954, Real Madrid won the league for the first time since 1933. The following season they won the inaugural European Cup, the first of five in a row and a run unrivalled by anyone. Gento was there for all of them and still there in 1966, a veteran now when a team made up only of Spaniards won it again. He also lost two finals. The third European Cup was the one he would remember most fondly, scoring an extra-time winner against Milan. The players were exhausted, Di Stéfano telling him: “It’s down to you.” That remark clearly had an impact on him which said something about a personality entirely without presumptuousness, about his profile, and yet also about his significance, the trust they had in him. “His speed was terrifying,” his teammate Ignacio Zoco said. “It was impossible to stop him and as fast as he went he could stop in a metre while the other guy keeps running, skidding past trying to put the brakes on. He’s out the game and Gento’s going the other way.” This was probably the greatest forward line of all, a team that had Di Stéfano, Puskas, Kopa, Didí, Rial, and Canario, yet Puskas wrote of how their “plan was simple: we knew in Gento we had the fastest thing on two legs”. He was too fast for everyone, which had included him at first — he would run out of pitch and Di Stéfano would plead with Héctor Rial not to release him too soon as the rest could not catch up. But the control came, driven by a quiet determination to improve, to emulate and learn without ever considering himself a star, to serve. He did that better than anyone, and the trophies came too of course. The club he thought too big became bigger than anyone else because of him. “Don’t worry sunshine, you’ll be as big as your teammates,” Bernabéu assured him once, and Paco Gento was.Pay for workers in Britain has fallen in real terms for the first time in more than a year, despite signs that employers shrugged off concerns over the Omicron coronavirus variant to continue hiring in December. Average wages, after taking account of inflation, dropped in November for the first time since July 2020 amid growing concerns over the hit to living standards this year from high inflation and surging energy bills. The Office for National Statistics said although average total earnings grew at an annual rate of 3.5% in November, the impact from soaring rates of inflation meant workers suffered a real-terms cut in their pay packets. The official rate of inflation reached a 10-year high of 5.1% in November, effectively meaning a 1.6% cut in pay. Using its preferred measure of consumer price inflation including owner occupiers’ housing costs, it said real-terms pay had fallen at an annual rate of 0.9% in November. However, the latest labour market snapshot revealed steady gains for job creation despite the fallout from Omicron and worsening squeeze on pay. According to figures from HMRC, the number of employees on UK company payrolls rose by 184,000 on the month to 29.5 million, an increase of 409,000 on pre-pandemic levels as the jobs market continues to recover from Covid-19. Reflecting staff shortages across the economy, the number of job vacancies rose for most industries over the three months to December to a record 1.2mi despite a slowdown in the rate of growth in recent months. Employment experts said there were signs that Britain was emerging from Covid-19 with robust levels of employment but a tight squeeze on living standards that was set to persist well into 2022. Hannah Slaughter, a senior economist at the Resolution Foundation, said that falling unemployment was a “remarkable success” but that inflation-adjusted pay was now shrinking for the third time in a decade. Real-terms pay also fell in 2017 after the Brexit referendum, when a hit to the pound drove up inflation, and between 2011 and 2014 after the financial crisis. “Despite widespread talk of returning wage spirals, Britain is instead experiencing the return of shrinking pay packets,” she said. “The latest period of falling real wages – the third in a decade – is likely to have started as a far back as last summer, and is likely to continue beyond next summer too.” Official figures due on Wednesday are expected to show inflation rose in December to the highest rate in at least a decade. The Bank of England has warned inflation could peak close to 6% in April, up from a current level of 5.1%. Labour and union leaders said the government urgently needed to respond to the cost-of-living crisis and was failing to boost levels of pay, despite Boris Johnson pledging to make Britain a “high skill, high wage” economy. Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said: “Years of the Conservatives’ economic incompetence means working people today will not only be paying more in tax under the Conservatives but face heating bills rocketing, prices rising and inflation set to outstrip wage growth.” Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, said that while it was good to see employment continuing to rise, that workers were struggling with a fresh pay squeeze. “Working people deserve a decent standard of living and a wage they can raise a family on. But instead, following the worse pay squeeze for two centuries, real pay is falling, and they now face a cost-of-living crisis,” she said. Despite the fall in inflation-adjusted pay there were more positive signals from the jobs market, with unemployment continuing to fall despite the end of the furlough scheme. Official figures for the three months to November showed the unemployment rate continued to fall, dropping to 4.1%, close to where it was before the pandemic began in spring 2020. The redundancy rate, which measures the number of people being made redundant for each 1,000 employees, dropped to the lowest level on records dating back more than a quarter of century. It comes after concerns that closing the Treasury’s multibillion-pound job support scheme would trigger a wave of job losses. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said the latest figures were “proof that the jobs market is thriving”. “From traineeships for young people to sector based work academies for those switching careers, our plan for jobs is continuing to create opportunity for all,” he said.An initiative in Brighton aimed at helping protect the bee population could do more harm than good, scientists have warned. The council in Brighton has passed a planning condition that means any new building more than five metres high will have to include swift boxes and special bricks with holes known as bee bricks. They will provide nesting and hibernating space for solitary bees. However, scientists have warned that such a move will not make any real difference for biodiversity, with some arguing that it could make matters worse for bees if the holes are not cleaned properly and attract mites or encourage the spread of disease. The idea was first raised in 2019 by councillor Robert Nemeth, and the condition was attached to all planning permissions after 1 April 2020. Dave Goulson, a professor of biology at the University of Sussex, said he had tried a bee brick out and that the holes were not deep enough to be “ideal homes for bees” but “are probably better than nothing”. He added: “Bee bricks seem like a displacement activity to me. We are kidding ourselves if we think having one of these in every house is going to make any real difference for biodiversity. Far more substantial action is needed, and these bricks could easily be used as ‘greenwash’ by developers.” Sebastian Worms, a graduate student from the University of Louvain in Belgium, said that the bricks were more educational tools for children and could have a negative impact if they were too big and not cleaned enough. “To help bees it would be better to introduce more flowers,” he said. Adam Hart, an entomologist and professor of science communication at the university of Gloucestershire, said that sometimes “well-meaning interventions can have unwanted consequences”. “It would be good to have much more research on all of these ‘bee hotels’ so bees can get the maximum benefit from people’s desire to help them,” he said. Not everyone was in agreement that the bricks were a bad idea. Francis Gilbert, a professor of ecology at the University of Nottingham, said that bee bricks did not need to be cleaned. “The mites will leave after one to two seasons and then the bees will recolonise,” he said. “There will be beneficial microbes in the holes as well, so they should not be cleaned. So bee bricks are an unequivocal good thing.” Lars Chittka, a professor in sensory and behavioural ecology at Queen Mary University, said that bees “naturally possess hygienic behaviour that would allow them to mitigate the risks at least to some extent, or that they would assess the holes’ states before using them, which should to some extent counterbalance the risks that come with such long-term nesting opportunities.” He added: “It might well be that the Brighton project provides an opportunity to study the risks and benefits on a reasonably wide scale, and over an extended period – say five years. But I would certainly recommend not copying this project across the country before the long-term benefits and risks are explored.” Nemeth, who is also a beekeeper, said: “There’s a well-known saying in the beekeeping world that if you ask 100 different beekeepers a question then you get 101 different answers. “It’s going to take some years yet to establish the degree of effectiveness of bee bricks but it’s heartening to know that studies are under way. What is definite though is that carrying on with the status quo of ignoring nature in many new-build properties is a biodiversity disaster of the highest order.” Bees in Britain There are about 270 species of bee in Britain, just under 250 of which are solitary bees that live alone, although often nest close to one another. Solitary bees in Britain are highly diverse, and so are their nesting habits. Most British species nest in the ground, excavating their own nest. The honeybee is probably the best-known bee. They live socially and are led by a queen and serviced by male drones and female worker bees. The bee population is thought to have declined in the UK since the 1970s. For example, the number of managed honeybee hives in England dropped by 50% between 1985 and 2005, and 67% of common widespread moth species have declined since the 1970s. Since 1900, the UK has lost 13 species of bee, and a further 35 are considered under threat of extinction. The decline in population is thought to be because of changes in land use, which has led to habitat loss. Other issues affecting bees include disease, pesticides, pollution and climate change. One of the best ways of helping bees is thought to be by planting flowers rich in nectar.Mexico’s embattled press corps has suffered a shattering start to the new year with the murders of two journalists who had dared chronicle their country’s slide into drug- and corruption-fuelled violence. Margarito Martínez Esquivel, a crime reporter and photographer who often collaborated with members of the foreign media, was shot dead outside his home in the northern city of Tijuana on Monday lunchtime. “Unfortunately, I couldn’t do anything for him,” his distraught wife, Elena Martínez, told the San Diego Union-Tribune – one of numerous international outlets the journalist had worked with, including the BBC, the Los Angeles Times and the Washington Post. Martínez’s death came a week after another journalist, José Luis Gamboa, was fatally stabbed in the eastern state of Veracruz, another of Mexico’s most violent regions. Two days earlier Gamboa, the director of a news website called Inforegio, used Twitter to call for the appointment of an anti-drug tsar who might slow the decades-long escalation in bloodshed. Last year he lamented how parts of the government, instead of fighting drug trafficking, had been sucked into “a great criminal association” with the cartels. “The Mexican population still hasn’t grasped how serious this is,” Gamboa tweeted. The two as yet unexplained killings – which follow the murder of nine journalists last year – sparked outrage and mourning in the Latin American country, which is considered the world’s most dangerous country for reporters outside war zones. In some regions journalists have become so fearful of being abducted and killed that they take DIY dental impressions and leave them in the freezer at home before going out to report so relatives can identify their remains. “It’s shocking to have this happen so early in the year and to have one murder happen so shortly after the other,” said Jan-Albert Hootsen, the Mexico representative for the Committee to Protect Journalists. The Tijuana-based press collective Yo Sí Soy Periodista (Yes, I’m a journalist) demanded a swift investigation into the killing of Martínez, who spent more than two decades documenting the border city’s security crisis and worked for the weekly newspaper Zeta. The group said Martínez was the 29th Mexican journalist to be killed since Mexico’s president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, took power in December 2018 promising to pacify the country. Wendy Fry, who reports on Tijuana for the San Diego Union-Tribune and knew Martínez, remembered an industrious and kind colleague who was almost always the first to arrive on the scene of a story. “It’s a risky thing to be a journalist in TJ and he just had a lot of pride in doing it … He worked tirelessly: day, night, afternoon,” said Fry, one of the shellshocked journalists who gathered outside the photographer’s house on Monday. As news of Martínez’s killing spread, the Facebook page where he would livestream murder scenes to tens of thousands of followers was flooded with messages from workmates and politicians. “I feel heartbroken. I can’t believe Margarito Martínez is gone … they murdered him in cold blood,” wrote one friend, Gabriela Díaz. Another journalist friend, Manuel Ayala, tweeted: “The name of Margarito Martínez has this afternoon been typed out in every Tijuana newsroom with tears and with blood. We will never forget because on this day they shot every single member of our community through the chest.” Michael Robinson Chávez, a Pulitzer-winning photographer for the Washington Post, called him “a true professional, brave and tenacious. “He will be missed,” Chávez tweeted. Hootsen said the seemingly never-ending wave of journalist killings was driven by government inaction and impunity. “What it boils down to is that in Mexico if you want to hurt a reporter you can do it and there is a very small chance you will be caught – and an even smaller chance you will be sentenced to jail time,” he said. “The Mexican government kind of makes it easy for people who want to hurt reporters.”A depraved act of violence took the life of the talented and admired Ashling Murphy but such “disrespect for human life” must not be allowed to take root in communities, mourners at the funeral of the murdered schoolteacher were told. The bishop of Meath, Tom Deenihan, said nobody should die like the 23-year-old did when attacked and strangled last Wednesday while jogging. “No family like Ashling’s should suffer as they do now,” he said. Thousands gathered to pay their last respects at the church and the community hall next door where large screens were erected to accommodate the crowds. There was a sense of profound sadness and bewilderment as friends, family and pupils gathered to pay their respects in a community convulsed by her death. “The past few days have been a nightmare. A walk on a mild and sunny afternoon in January should be a happy event, promising the brighter and warmer days of spring and summer,” Bishop Deenihan said. “That, as we know, was not the case. A depraved act of violence which deprived a kind, talented, loved and admired young woman of her life has since united the country in grief and support. “The crime has also asked questions of ourselves and of society. It has questioned our attitudes and, particularly, our attitudes towards women and it has questioned our values and our morality,” he told the packed church in the village of Mountbolus in County Offaly. Police said later on Tuesday they had arrested a man in his 30s on suspicion of murder. More than 20 seven-year-old boys and girls from the primary school class Ashling taught lined up opposite older girls from the Sacred Heart school in Tullamore to form formed a guard of honour as the funeral cortège entered the church to the sound of traditional music. The small children each held a single red rose photos of Murphy’s graduation bearing the words “fly high in the sky” and “our shining light”. Her boyfriend Ryan Casey described her in a statement as an “incredible, loving and beautiful person we were all so lucky to know.” “Ashling was so much more to me than a girlfriend, she was my soulmate, she is my soulmate, she will always be my soulmate. She is the greatest love of my life. I will cherish the last five years we spent together my entire life,” he said Paul Carroll, who lives in the same rural stretch as Murphy’s family described “a terrible sense of distraughtness everywhere”. He added: “It’s like a blackness around us.” Carroll’s son, Ultan, a banjo player, was taught music by Murphy, a talented fiddle player. “I am completely shocked,” said the 17-year-old. “I couldn’t believe it for two days. You hear about bad things but you never think it’s going to happen here.” He was one of about 100 people who turned up with instruments answer to a request from Ashling’s sister Amy to help the community celebrate her life. In a touching gesture, the family also decided it would be a near all-female funeral with all mourners appearing on the altar for readings, songs or prayers of the faithful young women from her family and circle of friends. Her parents, Raymond and Kathleen, her sister, Amy, her brother, Cathal, and boyfriend, Ryan, were the chief mourners while many of her friends from school, college, her local GAA club Kilcormac/Killoughey and musicians from Comhaltas Ceoltóirí Éireann were also in attendance. The Irish president, Michael D Higgins, the taoiseach, Micheál Martin, and the justice minister, Helen McEntee, also attended. Parish priest Father Michael Meade told how her family had been “robbed of your most precious gift – a gift that gave only joy and love, fun and laughter to many beyond your family”. He spoke of the “raw and fierce pain” and “darkness” that has been visited upon them but urged everyone to pray for change. “The issues raised in many ways and by many voices since this horrible act of violence invaded all our lives will, we pray, continue to evolve and bring the change we need so much, to simply give and show respect,” he told mourners. There was a heavy silence and the Irish flag flew at half mast as the chief mourners emerged from the church walking behind the hearse towards the cemetery. Musicians playing fiddles, banjos and tin whistles filled the air with a medley of traditional music as hundreds of remaining mourners filed past. Outside the church, Rosemary Bracken of the local music group Ballyboy Comhaltas summed up the feelings of the townland: “It is something that is going to be written into our history, that we never thought would be – the horrendous death of a young person at the deliberate hand of a stranger.” “We have dealt with tragedy here before, car accidents, deaths, but we have struggled with this. People just can’t process it,” she said.On the first day of 2022 – the hottest New Year’s Day on record – Priti Patel announced that cracking down on eco protesters would be one of her priorities for the year. It wasn’t simply rhetoric. The police, crime, sentencing and courts bill for England and Wales being debated in parliament provides the police with a dramatic extension to their powers to stop or constrain protest. It even contains a provision allowing police to fine protesters for inadvertent breaches of restrictions they “ought” to have known about. It’s remarkable that the government would frame people campaigning about the climate crisis, rather than the climate crisis itself, as the priority problem. But Patel is following a line of thought going back to the dawn of industrialisation, which sees protest crowds as a source of fear. Assembling into crowds gives people power, and allows them to challenge forms of social control. For those accustomed to holding the whip hand, there is nothing more terrifying than that. These fears and fantasies about the crowd were systematised into theories that hold crowd members to be inherently violent, and thus view any crowd event as having the potential to descend into mayhem. This then legitimated repression. One can’t reason with the mob, only dominate them. The irony is that the repressive power of the police, supposedly the means of stopping violence, is actually the source of most violence in crowd events – either directly (the police inflict far more violence than is inflicted upon them) or indirectly (the repression of protesters’ rights inflames previously peaceable crowds). In recent years these dynamics of repression and escalation have been increasingly recognised not just by critics but by the police themselves. In the UK, the turning point was the death of Ian Tomlinson during the 2009 G20 summit protests. This led to a major report, Adapting to Protest, which suggested new forms of public order policing, based on new policing practices. One is facilitation, which entails changing the focus from stopping the crowd, to helping them achieve lawful goals. Another is dialogue policing, where police liaison officers act as mediators between police and the crowd. Recently there has also been emphasis on rights-based policing, which is organised around upholding the right to freedom of peaceful assembly as enshrined in article 11 of the European convention on human rights and article 21 of the international covenant on civil and political rights. The recent Cop26 in Glasgow was heralded by Police Scotland as an event where the principles of rights-based policing would be put into practice. Our team of psychologists, sociologists and legal scholars spent two weeks on the streets of the city examining how that worked out. Certainly there was a lot of protest – a 100,000-strong march was the centrepiece, but marches, vigils, sit-downs and lock-ons occurred every day. And yet there was virtually no violence, and fewer than 100 arrests in total. Much of this has been put down to “firm but amiable policing”. But protesters had no intention to be violent in the first place, even Priti Patel’s bugbears in Extinction Rebellion (XR). This was exemplified for me personally when XR mounted an action outside a Santander bank branch. Two people locked themselves together and blocked the street. Protesters assembled, chanted, danced and painted graffiti on the walls of the bank. Two hours later it was all over, everyone had left and council cleaners had even removed the graffiti. “Was it hard work?” I asked the cleaners. “No,” they replied. “Easy, it was chalk-based paint [designed to wipe off with a cloth].” XR protesters may be awkward and they may be disruptive. But they are certainly not violent or destructive. The only times we saw mounting tension and anger were where protesters did experience the policing as excessive and intrusive – as when police gathered in large numbers, and used surveillance officers to film protesters – or repressive, notably during two kettling incidents. This came down to differences in the sense of threat or danger. While the police committed in principle to enabling peaceful protest, disruptive crowd actions were always seen to compromise official control and hence create danger, and therefore had to be policed robustly. For protesters, however, danger was not on the horizon and hence the policing was seen as excessive. For example, the kettling incident on 3 November occurred when a protester outside the offices of the SSE energy company was said by police to have sprayed two officers with paint. The police characterised this as an assault on their officers and as evidence of the threat posed by the crowd. Protesters saw it as nothing of the sort, and certainly not a reason to treat their protests as threatening. Overall, Cop26 represented an uneasy grafting of rights-based policing concerns on to prior concerns about control. While the low level of arrests seems encouraging, if it comes out of an overall massive use of force that makes protesters feel unable to exercise their rights to peaceful protest it’s hardly something to celebrate. The way forward is to understand that a rights-based approach cannot simply be mixed into an existing public order framework but must lead to a rethinking of traditional policing priorities. Which is why the police and crime bill is a step backwards. It delegitimates protest in the eyes of the police, and delegitimates police in the eyes of protesters. It ditches individual rights, and raises restoring control as the overriding consideration. The bill unambiguously reinstates the police as arbiters rather than facilitators of dissent. It will further erode police legitimacy and give succour to a chant we heard repeatedly on the streets of Glasgow: “Who do you serve? Who do you protect?” Stephen Reicher is a member of the Sage subcommittee advising on behavioural science. He is a professor of Psychology at the University of St Andrews. During Cop26 he was part of a research team, funded by the New Institute in Hamburg, which was studying the dynamics of protest.The government has unveiled plans to crack down on misleading cryptocurrency ads by making them subject to the same regulations as marketing for other financial products such as shares and insurance. The Treasury has responded to rising concern over a surge in ads promoting cryptoassets, which are unregulated in the UK, and the potential for naive investors to lose money given the highly volatile price swings of digital currencies such as bitcoin. The move to change the law will see ads for cryptoassets become subject to rules governed by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) to bring them “in line with the same high standard that other financial promotions such as stocks, shares and insurance products are held to”. The Treasury said the aim was to strike a balance between allowing the booming cryptoasset market to flourish while protecting consumers by making sure ads encouraging investment were “fair, clear and not misleading”. “Cryptopoassets can provide exciting new opportunities, offering people new ways to transact and invest,” said Rishi Sunak, the UK chancellor. “But it’s important that consumers are not being sold products with misleading claims. We are ensuring consumers are protected, while also supporting innovation of the cryptoasset market.” There has been a boom in cryptocurrency advertising encouraging consumers not to miss out on the craze, with about 2.3 million people in the UK now thought to own a cryptoasset. The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) has banned a number of campaigns for being irresponsible, and last month criticised some of the leading players in the sector while declaring the issue of misleading crypto marketing a “red alert” priority. Adding the regulatory oversight of the FCA will mean that companies that break rules can be fined and their ads must pass muster before they launch. This is not the case with the ASA, which only steps in once it receives complaints after a campaign is in the public domain. Last year the FCA warned that more people were chasing high returns and said it was concerned that any new investors were increasingly putting their money into high risk investments which may not be right for them. “The government’s decision to bring these types of advertisements into the scope of regulation will mitigate the risks of consumer harm, ensuring people have the appropriate information to make informed investment decisions,” said the Treasury. Last week the Guardian reported that cryptocurrency ads hit record levels on the London public transport network last year, renewing calls for a ban to protect consumers from being drawn into making risky investments.One’s enjoyment of How I Met Your Father, Hulu’s 10-episode standalone sequel of the popular sitcom How I Met Your Mother, will mostly depend on nostalgia for the original. I don’t have much of it for How I Met Your Mother (often styled HIMYM), a successor to Friends about a group of white twentysomethings, then thirtysomethings, living and dating in Manhattan which ran on CBS from 2005 until 2014. Everyone has their taste in TV comfort food (I just inhaled Emily in Paris) but HIMYM and its hopeless romanticism was too corny for me, too sweet. Its central conceit, of a middle-aged Ted Mosby (Josh Radnor, with the late Bob Saget as narrator) telling his children the story of meeting their mother in the most convoluted way possible, might have started out fresh. But by the early 2010s it felt overdone, even for a multi-camera network sitcom with a laugh track. This sequel, starring Hilary Duff as the central hopeless romantic, freshens up the cast’s diversity and the timeline – Duff’s Sophie is bumbling through 2022 – but barely warms over anything else, laugh track included. The pitched, jovial performances and homey sets recall the original (there are other, more overt connections, which Hulu has requested not to spoil), and so, unfortunately, do the anodyne punchlines, maybe two of which land an episode. The four 25-minute episodes made available for review sprinkle in the likes of Tinder, Uber and the ghosts of viral videos past, but it’s a mechanical, stale simulacrum of friend hangs and dating in 2022, a relic of a bygone era that enters the sitcom uncanny valley. There’s not much reason to continue through unless the beats recalled some past time of curling up with the TV. The pilot of HIMYF, written by creators Isaac Aptaker and Elizabeth Berger and directed by Pamela Fryman (who directed all but 12 episodes of the original), opens, like HIMYM, in the future. In 2050, the older Sophie, played with vigor by Kim Cattrall, regales her son (a disembodied voice on the phone) with the story of how she met his father in 2020s New York (with help from an uncooperative digital assistant and wine). Back in 2022, Sophie is a 29-year-old photographer living in Queens with her fashionable, libidinous roommate Valentina (Francia Raisa) and Valentina’s brand-new hunk boyfriend Charlie (Tom Ainsley), a posh and cartoonishly naive Englishman she convinced to hop the pond on a whim. (Sophie turns 30 in the fourth episode with a party she hastily classes up to impress a suitor played by Josh Peck, a familiar face to the Buzzfeed Where Are They Now?-era millennials this show appears to target.) Sophie is singularly focused on finding her future husband and singularly unlucky at doing so, having struck out on 87 straight Tinder dates. While Ubering to a first date with promising suitor Ian (Daniel Augustin), Sophie – exasperated and starry-eyed, convinced she’s found the right guy after two weeks of Tinder messaging – hits it off with handsome driver Jesse (Chris Lowell), the Robin to Sophie’s Ted. And as with the original, HIMYF contains both a marriage proposal – Jesse’s best friend Sid (Life of Pi’s Suraj Sharma), a bar owner, to his long-distance girlfriend Hannah (Ashley Reyes) – and a grand romantic gesture. The episode ends with the mishmash friend group walking the Brooklyn Bridge, something Sophie swore she’d only do once she met “the one” but has revised based on whimsy. For those unfamiliar to the rhythms of HIMYM – and, again, I don’t know why you’d become invested in this otherwise – thus begins a soft-boiled knot of entanglements. Jesse and Sophie become will-they-won’t-they friends; Valentina and Charlie fight and make up (the two enjoy sex in enclosed spaces, a running gag); Valentina and Sid flirt; Charlie befriends Jesse’s adopted sister Ellen (Tien Tran), a recent arrival from Iowa, divorced, and the only queer member of the core group (at least so far). All work to upgrade Jesse’s dating life in the aftermath of a rejected marriage proposal that goes viral. I’m inclined to root for Hilary Duff as an OG Lizzie McGuire fan, but as endearing as she can be, there’s only so much an actor can do with a character whose personality basically boils down to finding the one; the show mostly served to remind me how disappointing it is that Disney kneecapped to the point of cancellation a planned reboot of Lizzie as a 30-cusp woman dating in New York. Still, what charm this sequel does have it largely owes to Duff – doe eyes, open face, innocent – grounding the shallow Sophie as much as she can, and Lowell, as the warm-eyed, protective Jesse; their sparks provide the show’s little heat. That might be enough to warm viewers to a couple of episodes, but unlikely to persuade those neutral to HIMYM’s flavor to buy in. When the appreciation depends on memories and old routines, past phases, why bother? There’s a lot of light and snacky fare out there, but HIMYF feels more akin to a reheated, juiced-up leftover. How I Met Your Father is now on Hulu with a UK date to be announcedAnders Breivik, the Norwegian far-right mass murderer behind the country’s worst peacetime massacre, has appeared in court asking to be released on parole after serving 10 years in prison in near isolation for killing 77 people in a double bomb and gun attack in 2011. Breivik – who legally changed his name to Fjotolf Hansen in 2017 – attacked the country’s government quarter in Oslo with a van bomb before heading to a youth camp being held by the country’s Labour party on the island of Utøya where he killed 69 people, most of them teenagers, in a gun attack. During an hour-long speech at the hearing, in which Breivik flashed a Nazi salute, he said he had put violence behind him, offering to give up far-right politics and live abroad if he were released. “Today, I strongly dissociate myself from violence and terror,” said Breivik. “I hereby give you my word of honour that this is behind me forever.” If granted parole, which experts say is highly unlikely, he offered to live in the Arctic or a non-western country. Breivik also attempted to disavow responsibility for the massacre he perpetrated, claiming he had been radicalised ahead of the attack, a claim rejected in the aftermath of his killings when he claimed he had been recruited as a “commander” in a far-fetched conspiracy involving a secret Christian military order plotting an anti-Muslim revolution. According to his lawyer, Breivik is seeking to call only one witness, Per Öberg, a Swedish neo-Nazi. Despite the gravity of his crimes, Breivik, 42, is entitled under Norwegian law to apply for parole after serving a decade in prison of his 21-year sentence, and can reapply each year for a parole hearing. The hearing, being held in a gymnasium at Skien prison to the south-west of Oslo under the auspices of Telemark district court, is expected to last three days and is being livestreamed. Appearing on the first day of the hearing in a black suit and gold tie – in his first public appearance in five years – Breivik entered the court with a white supremacist message attached to his lapel and pasted on his briefcase. Breivik was led into the hearing without handcuffs by officers, clutching a sheaf of papers. During the opening presentation by the state prosecutor, Breivik held up the message on his briefcase, drawing a reprimand from the court. Few observers in Norway believe Breivik has any realistic prospect of being released following the hearing, instead voicing their concern he would use the occasion to broadcast his extremist views. Families of the victims and survivors had feared Breivik could inspire likeminded ideologues and grandstand his extreme views during the hearing. “The only thing I am afraid of is if he has the opportunity to talk freely and convey his extreme views to people who have the same mindset,” said Lisbeth Kristine Røyneland, who heads a family and survivors support group, before the hearing. Since being in prison, Breivik has continued to try to represent himself as a far-right European leader, attempting to rally support for his views. He has been trying to start a fascist party in prison and reached out by mail to rightwing extremists in Europe and the US. Prison officials seized many of those letters, fearing Breivik would inspire others to commit violent attacks. Opening the proceedings, Hulda Karlsdottir, a prosecutor for the Norwegian state, chronicled the murders Breivik committed and told the court that the hearing was not related to Breivik’s prison conditions but the “danger” Breivik would pose should he be released. Karlsdottir, who started the hearing by stating the conditions of Breivik’s imprisonment, told the court: “The main topic here is the danger associated with release.” Among commentators writing ahead of the hearing was Øystein Milli, of the Norwegian tabloid VG. “Usually I do not predict the outcome, but this time I am as sure as one can be. He will not be released. From what we know, there is little indication that Breivik has moved anything when it comes to his position, and that there is zero remorse to be found,” wrote Milli. Aftenposten’s legal commentator, Inge Hanssen, was no less sceptical after Breivik’s appearance. He said: “It started in familiar style with the Nazi salute to the press and to the judge. And we quickly recognised Anders Behring Breivik as soon as he opened his mouth. “He has not changed much after 10 years in isolation in prison, the terrorist with 77 lives on his conscience.” Among the state’s witnesses at the hearing is psychiatrist Randi Rosenqvist, who has assessed Breivik on a number of occasions as to the risk he poses. Rosenqvist said before the hearing that she could “not detect great changes in Breivik’s functioning” since his criminal trial when he bragged about the scale of his slaughter, or his human rights case in 2016, when he raised his hand in a Nazi salute. “In principle and practice someone seeking parole would have to show remorse, and to show that they understand why such acts cannot be repeated,” she said. Agencies contributed to this articleA bargain-bin version of Scott Pilgrim Vs the World, this Kickstarter-funded feature debut by Scott Conditt and Jeremy Tremp has a similar video game veneration and chirpy tone. But their sci-fi/fantasy action-comedy engages more frontally with gaming culture, specifically the intersection between ye olde pixellated times and the all-streaming, all-dancing, eternally online new generation. Max Jenkins (Tom Plumley) is a cocky online gaming hotshot who, when not rampaging around in barbarian avatar guise, works as a clerk at local emporium Fallout Games, along with fellow virtual squadmates Liz (Hassie Harrison) and Reggie (Joey Morgan). Left alone on the evening shift, he is flabbergasted when a mysterious stranger leaves a package on the counter containing a cartridge of Nether Dungeon, a legendary 80s title lost to history due to a beef between its two creators. He uploads the game for the internet faithful – unaware that its source code contains an incantation from an ancient sect with designs on enthralling (in both senses) mankind. Max Reload and the Nether Blasters clings to the lightweight adventure-romp template to perfectly amiable effect. Max and pals flee possessed, red-eyed evil ex-boyfriends and run around town trying to locate the bad-boy designer (Greg Grunberg) and estranged business partner (Joseph D Reitman) who hold the key to defeating these malign gamemasters. Plumley leads from the front with fresh-faced YouTuber zeal and the film’s energy bar never flags, even if the geek-world humour is sometimes clunky and forced. Conditt and Tremp root their plot in the contrast between the lone-wolf bedroom-coder ethos and the hyper-garrulous internet co-op play era. But the former now has touchstone status for the latter, as the directors’ fetish for 16-bit aesthetics make apparent: we get pixellated inserts of Max BMXing around town and fantasy-cover-art-apeing colour bursts. While its nostalgic bent means it doesn’t dare modify the 1980s film template either, it also means it has a true aficionado’s attention to detail regarding gamer lore – cheerled by a bellowing cameo from the high priest of geek, Kevin Smith, as Fallout Games’ VR-obsessed owner. A slight but eager tribute to the home-computing heyday. • Max Reload and the Nether Blasters is available on digital platforms on 24 January.More than two-thirds of the common side-effects people experience after a Covid jab can be attributed to a negative version of the placebo effect rather than the vaccine itself, researchers claim. Scientists in the US examined data from 12 clinical trials of Covid vaccines and found that the “nocebo effect” accounted for about 76% of all common adverse reactions after the first dose and nearly 52% after the second dose. The findings suggest that a substantial proportion of milder side-effects, such as headaches, short-term fatigue, and arm pain are not produced by the constituents of the vaccine, but by other factors thought to generate the nocebo response, including anxiety, expectation and misattributing various ailments to having had the jab. In view of their results, the researchers argue that better public information about nocebo responses may improve Covid vaccine uptake by reducing the concerns that make some people hesitant. “Telling patients that the intervention they are taking has side-effects that are similar to placebo treatments for the condition in randomised controlled trials actually reduces anxiety and makes patients take a moment to consider the side-effect,” said Ted Kaptchuk, professor of global health and social medicine at Harvard medical school, and a senior author on the study. “But we need more research.” Kaptchuck and Dr Julia Haas at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston analysed adverse events reported during a dozen clinical trials of Covid vaccines. In each trial, those in the placebo arm were given injections of inactive salt solution instead of vaccine. The study did not look at severe, rare side-effects such as blood clots or heart inflammation. Writing in the journal Jama Network Open, the researchers describe how after the first injection more than 35% of those in the placebo groups experienced so-called “systemic” side-effects, such as headache and fatigue, with 16% reporting site-specific ailments including arm pain or redness or swelling at the injection site. As expected, those who received a first shot of vaccine were more likely to experience side-effects. About 46% reported systemic symptoms and two-thirds experienced arm pain or other localised symptoms at the injection site. When the researchers looked at side-effects after the second jab, they found the rate of headaches or other systemic symptoms was nearly twice as high in the vaccine group compared with the placebo group, at 61% and 32% respectively. The difference was even greater for local ailments, reaching 73% among those who had the vaccine and 12% in the placebo group. Overall, the researchers calculate that about two-thirds of common side-effects reported in Covid vaccine trials are driven by the nocebo effect, in particular headaches and fatigue, which many Covid vaccine leaflets list as the most common adverse reactions after a shot. While evidence suggests that information about side-effects can cause people to misattribute common ailments to the vaccine, or make people hyper-alert to how they are feeling, Kaptchuk argues for more information about side-effects, not less. “Most researchers argue that patients should be told less about side-effects to reduce their anxiety,” he said. “I think this is wrong. Honesty is the way to go.”Stephen Colbert Stephen Colbert observed the federal holiday for Martin Luther King on Monday evening, “a day in which we all celebrate Dr King’s legacy by taking his words out of context to make it look like he agrees with whatever we’re saying”. The US Senate marked King’s birthday, the Late Show host continued, by “doing what they do best: nothing”. Hopes for a voting rights protection bill were dashed on Monday by the Arizona senator Kyrsten Sinema, who opposed lifting the filibuster that would allow Democrats to pass the measure without Republican support. “What is the legislative filibuster other than a tool that requires new federal policy to be broadly supported by senators representing a broader cross-section of Americans?” she said on the Senate floor. “No. No. Not representing a broader cross-section of Americans? The 50 senators who are currently filibustering the voting rights bill represent 41 million fewer Americans than the senators who support it,” Colbert protested. “Stop acting like the filibuster is anything other than an anti-democratic tool – which is also a pretty good description of Kyrsten Sinema.” To illustrate the point more eloquently, Colbert summoned an actually full quote by King from 5 July 1963: “I think the tragedy is we have a Congress with a Senate that has a minority of misguided senators who would use the filibuster to keep the majority of people from even voting. They won’t let the majority of senators vote, and certainly they wouldn’t want the majority of people to vote because they know they do not represent the majority of American people. In fact, they represent in their own states a very small minority.” “The sad thing is Dr King could make the exact same statement today, and it would be just as relevant,” Colbert noted, “as long as he mentioned Wordle.” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers also mocked Republican figures for bending King’s words to their own ends, such as Florida senator Marco Rubio, who tweeted a conveniently partial quote: “When the architects of our republic wrote the magnificent words of the constitution and the Declaration of Independence, they were signing a promissory note to which every American was to fall heir.” “Did you read any further than that?” Meyers fumed, “or did you just pull up the text of the speech and do a control-F for ‘things that make it sound like he agrees with me’? Because dude, you gotta read just two more lines” to see that the rest of the quote condemns American racism and notes the country “has defaulted on this promissory note insofar as her citizens of color are concerned”. “Man, it’s times like these where you just wish Rubio would go back to his old job as the picture that comes with the frame,” Meyers joked. “I know they’re liars and con artists, but Dr King was essentially saying ‘you made a promise, and you didn’t keep it,’ and Rubio just quoted the ‘you made a promise’ part. “That would be like quoting Since U Been Gone, but not the chorus,” he added, mocking Rubio: “As Kelly Clarkson said, ‘and all you’d ever hear me say, is how I picture me with you. That’s all you’d ever hear me say’ – moving words about a love that lasted forever.” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel checked in on the former president, who held a conspiracy-fueled rally over the weekend in Florence, Arizona. “Fatty LaBelle himself took the stage to scream about being cheated out of the election and to lash out at all the networks who refuse to go along with that,” Kimmel summarized. More specifically, Trump called coverage of his big lie of election fraud “a lot of bullshit, that’s what it is”. “Yeah, that’s what it is,” Kimmel laughed. “Somehow he went from bigly to big lie.” Trump also offered a Covid conspiracy theory Kimmel called “outlandish even by Trump standards”: that Democrats are “denigrating white people” in Covid treatments to “determine who lives and who dies … it’s unbelievable to think this.” “Yeah, it is. It’s super unbelievable to think this,” Kimmel retorted. Trump also claimed that when it comes to Covid treatments, white people are “being sent to the back of the line.” “Where does he even get this stuff?” Kimmel marveled. “This is a man who hasn’t waited in a line since like hot lunch in the fourth grade. White people are being sent to the back of the line? I guess Martin Luther King’s dream has been realized at last.”SPECIALLY SELECTED The wonderful world of football hadn’t held a big pointless awards ceremony for 49 days. That’s seven long weeks since the stilted vacuity of the Ballon d’Or, and the best part of two months without any of us having to go along with the patently absurd premise that Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo are the same players they were in 2011. The sweet gaslight-free relief couldn’t last, though, and last night Fifa staged their The Best awards, the most prestigious of all the football awards that also sound like a premium ready meal. Can you taste the difference? No, not really. Alexia Putellas won the women’s prize, while Robert Lewandowski scooped the men’s version, just as they both did at the tail end of November in that other one. The latter proved to be something of an awkward outcome, as Ronaldo was also in attendance at the Zurich ceremony, but didn’t even make the shortlist. Something had to be done, so he was given a special gong, the Fifa Asda Extra Special Award For Surpassing Ali Daei’s Long-Standing 109-Goal Men’s International Record For Iran. Number one in a field of one. The Finest. Ronaldo described his bulbous silver consolation prize as “bling bling”, an aesthetic judgment that can be viewed either through the prism of his rather fetching bebop turtleneck sweater, or the double-breasted jacket that Jacob Rees-Mogg might think twice about wearing at the dispatch box, but not both. He also took the opportunity to announce his hope to play for “four or five years”, though the 36-year-old stroller at least had the good grace not to append “at the top level” to the statement, which would have further raised questions/encouraged cheap jokes about his immediate Old Trafford future, while pushing the concept of chutzpah to its very limit. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE East meets west in the Africa Cup of Nations: join Nick Ames for piping hot MBM action of Malawi 1-2 Senegal RIGHT NOW, before Paul Doyle brings your all the glitz and glamour of the Tariq Lamptey Derby: Brighton 1-1 Chelsea from 8pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “If I’ve learned anything in my career so far, it’s that leading with action rather than empty words is what counts in making a difference. It’s important to me to use my platform to be part of the solution. All too often in football the headlines are stolen by racist actions” – Adama Traoré, terroriser of full-backs, pledges 1% of his Wolves salary to Common Goal’s anti-racism project ARP. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your listening gear around the latest Football Weekly podcast. RECOMMENDED VIEWING It’s ya boy, David Squires with his latest take on Rafael Benítez, National Rail employee, and Club Tropicana’s Steve Bruce. FIVER LETTERS “I’d like to nominate Niko Kovac as a decent shout for Everton’s next long/short-term manager. I think after an initial tear up in the car park with Big Dunc – declared a 2-2 draw by Jimmy the parking attendant – a mutual respect would be forged . Then with his actual managerial experience with Bayern, and most recently with Monaco (where he managed to be influential in the development of some of their youngsters, and hard nosed towards those who were just in it for the ride) he would provide a perfect tonic to Everton’s manager knack” – Stephen Rea. “With the let-off of not having to face Arsenal last Sunday, let’s hope Antonio Conte doesn’t start Matt Doherty again in Spurs’ next match. Nothing against poor Matt, it’s just that, as I said before, at 67 I can do what he does with a happier-looking face” – Marcio Aquino. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Marcio Aquino. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS In a career spent almost entirely at Real Madrid, Paco Gento won 12 league titles and six European Cups. No footballer can match that; only two clubs have won more. Nicknamed La Galerna – the Gale – Gento has died at the age of 88. RIP. Shrewsbury Town have banned two people from all games for a total of eight years after video clips emerged of some supporters singing a song about the Hillsborough disaster. Antonio Conte is … wait for it … feeling disgruntled about the postponement of Sunday’s NLD. “This is the first time in my life that there is a league that has postponed the game for injuries,” parped Conte. “It is very strange and surprising for this.” Why would anyone want to swap managing Kevin De Bruyne at a World Cup for a relegation battle with Fabian Delph? Perhaps Bobby Martínez has the answer. Anthony Martial’s hopes of walking through an Old Trafford door marked Do One this month could rest on whether Manchester United are willing to pay a portion of the France striker’s £150,000-a-week wages. Roma’s Robin Olsen – briefly Sheffield United’s Robin Olsen – will soon be Aston Villa’s Robin Olsen, until the end of the season at least. In a blow to MBMers around the country, Burnley v Watford is OFF. STILL WANT MORE? Click here for a big picture of Big Andy Carroll (and a piece by Ben Fisher on Reading). Andy Hunter on the absolute state that is Everton. Chelsea’s plan to start Mason Mount on the bench at Manchester City was actually a cunning ploy, according to Thomas Tuchel. Jacob Steinberg has more. Rumours, get ya rumours! Our men’s and women’s transfer window interactives have just got a whole lot shinier. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! DAVID STOCKDALE, LADIES AND GENTSEvery morning since January 2004, Rebecca Sharrock crosses off the date on a calendar in her room. Like many people, the 31-year-old uses it to keep track of time, distinguishing the present day from the ones that came before. Unlike many, Sharrock can remember what happened on specific days five, 10, 15 years ago. What day was it on 21 July 2007? A Saturday, Sharrock can recall when asked. An avid Harry Potter fan, Sharrock remembers her stepdad going to the shops that day to buy a copy of the newly published Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. The sensation of a warm breeze evokes positive experiences from childhood, as does a vocal workshop Sharrock attended at school when she was 13. “Coincidentally, on that day in late October in 2003, that’s when the US president visited Australia for the first time,” she recalls. (After we speak, I check this: George Bush Jr arrived in Australia for his first presidential visit on 22 October 2003.) Sharrock remembers her mother watching the news that day. “Even though it didn’t mean anything to me, him coming here, that memory [of the vocal group] brings back that whole day,” she says. Sharrock, who lives in Brisbane, didn’t realise there was anything unusual about her memory, until – on 23 January 2011 – her parents showed her a TV news story about people with an extraordinary ability to recall events from their own lives. The segment featured Prof Craig Stark, a neurobiology and behaviour researcher at the University of California, Irvine. Stark’s lab studies a condition called highly superior autobiographical memory (HSAM), also known as hyperthymesia. Sharrock is one of about 60 known people in the world with the condition. In studies, Stark and his colleagues have asked people to recall memories from a particular day one week earlier, and also longer – one year ago, say, or a decade. People with HSAM are significantly better at recalling both personal and public events, and the exact days and dates on which they occurred. “They don’t remember everything,” Stark says. People with HSAM do forget things – but compared to people with ordinary episodic memory, “it’s very, very gradual”. Their extraordinary ability to recall lived experiences results from a type of remembering known as episodic memory. People with HSAM don’t, however, perform any better at standard laboratory memory tests such as rote memorisation tasks. HSAM was first recognised as a condition in 2006, after American woman Jill Price contacted Dr James McGaugh, a collaborator of Stark’s at UCI. “Whenever I see a date flash on the television (or anywhere else for that matter), I automatically go back to that day and remember where I was, what I was doing, what day it fell on,” Price wrote. “Most have called it a gift but I call it a burden. I run my entire life through my head every day and it drives me crazy!!!” Many people with HSAM describe a similar tendency to revisit days and test their recall of events, Stark says. “They describe things like, when being young, forgetting something and being really traumatised by it, not wanting to have that happen again.” Some structure their days using calendars, because they are able to remember the experience of marking off a specific date. “I’ll continue to have a calendar in my room until my last day of life,” Sharrock says. “I fear that I won’t know the exact date [otherwise] … Blurring days together – the possibility of that happening just scares me.” To a person with average memory, perhaps Sharrock’s fear feels something like the discombobulating sensation when a friend reminisces about a shared experience of which you have no recollection. “One of the things we don’t really know on these folks is how much of it is an inherent biological thing that makes their memory … better in this domain,” Stark says. His lab has looked at the brains of people with HSAM, but didn’t find major differences in structures important for memory, such as the hippocampus and amygdala. “We found some things in terms of the morphology and in terms of some functional conductivity [of the brain] that actually were more consistent with OCD than anything else,” Stark says, adding that people with HSAM also score highly on scales for obsessive-compulsive traits. While having HSAM can come in handy – Sharrock’s mum checks with her whether purchases are still under warranty – it also has its downsides. “I need to have distractions such as noise and light around me to get to sleep,” Sharrock says. “If everything’s quiet, memories just flash into my mind and that keeps me awake.” For Sharrock, who also has OCD, anxiety and autism, it makes bad memories difficult to deal with. “If I’m remembering something negative, my emotions of that experience will come back,” she says. “Sometimes people will say that I’m just deliberately not letting go, and I’m just like dwelling on the negatives in my life. “It’s awful to be a medical exception because very few people understand what you’re going through and there just aren’t many treatments designed for it. “Remembering this way just seems so normal to me.” • This article was amended on 1 February 2022. In an earlier version, Dr James McGaugh was incorrectly referred to as “the late Dr James McGaugh”.Nazeem Hussain will bring a new standup comedy show to the Adelaide Fringe festival in February – just don’t ask him to tell you what it’s about. “I’m really bad at describing my standup shows,” he says, trying to explain it. “Australia? My existential crisis? Australia’s existential crisis? It’s a lot of questions that I have and no real answers.” “I think there’s a refund policy but I’m hoping no one exploits that.” The Adelaide Fringe shows are part of what will be – Covid-willing – the comedian’s first national tour since the pandemic struck. Over these past two years at home, one purchase has delighted Hussain above all others: a massage gun, which quickly became the highlight of his evenings. Here, he tells us about the life-improving qualities of that “nonsexual” device, as well as the story of two other important personal belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire I’d save my massage gun. I bought it on a whim in 2020 from an ad on either Facebook or Instagram. There’s usually a huge endorphin rush with purchasing things online and it’s all downhill from there – when it arrives, it’s meant to underwhelm you. But this was the opposite – the massage gun has made every night happier. I know that sounds wrong – I don’t mean it that way! I just sit there on the couch, watching TV, massaging either my jaw muscles or my foot or my leg, or any other nonsexual part of my body. Please don’t make this sound sexual! My most useful object Noise cancelling headphones. I feel like you’re in two worlds wherever you are – the place you are physically, but then also in your head. I feel like I’m “in” the music when I have my headphones on, and they also mean you don’t have to have unnecessary conversations with people as you walk down the street. I know it sounds like I don’t like people – I do. But sometimes having something like that visibly on your head means you don’t have to engage in small talk when your energy is low and you haven’t used your massage gun yet. They’re also good for work. I’ve got a nice home office setup now, but I used to like working in cafes and libraries. And the one thing that quarantines my space is the headphones. The item I most regret losing A bike. When I was in year six or seven, I saved up all my pennies over maybe two years and bought this brand new bike. It was a Malvern Star, and it cost $350. For my first ride I thought, I’ll go and buy my mum something. So I went to Woolworths to get her some milk and eggs. I got to the supermarket and parked the bike out the front. As I arrived, there were two people sitting next to me, looking at the bike. One of them goes, “Ooh, look at that shiny bike. Still got the tags on it. Those are some really chunky wheels.” They were just talking to each other, not really talking to me. And I think absentmindedly – I was kind of nervous, because they seemed a bit dodgy – I didn’t put the chain on properly. I went into the shop for five minutes, came out and there was just a chain hanging there. My bike was gone, and so were those two people. I had to walk home with the milk and eggs and the helmet still on my head. So I just hope they didn’t injure themselves riding home without a helmet on my brand new bike.A NSW GP whose family developed a close relationship with an elderly patient and allowed her to pay for his child’s school fees, buy him expensive medical equipment and build a small dwelling on his property for her care, and then benefited from her substantial will when she died, has had his registration cancelled. Dr Michael Cleary, who had been a GP for 40 years with an unblemished record before his treatment of an elderly woman known as Patient A, had his registration as a medical practitioner cancelled last month by the NSW civil and administrative tribunal. Cleary was found by the tribunal, which was ruling on NSW health care and complaints commission (HCCC) allegations, to have “exploited” and committed “longstanding” and “recurrent” unsatisfactory professional conduct during his 15-year treatment of Patient A, who died aged 87 in January 2019. Guardian Australia reported last month on the case of Peter Alexakis, another NSW GP which the HCCC alleges breached professional boundaries with an elderly patient shortly before their death, something Alexakis denies. In the Cleary case, the tribunal found the conduct related to “boundary issues”, care and treatment issues and record-keeping issues dating back to 2009. The tribunal found the “boundary issues” included allowing Patient A to buy him a $40,000 device Cleary used for homeopathy, pay almost $140,000 for his children’s school fees, and provide $36,000 in other amounts, sometimes seemingly in the form of loans. Patient A, who Cleary described as like a grandmother to his children, made the payments to Cleary, his wife, and children. They visited each other’s houses for social visits, and he admitted inviting her to school functions and on family holidays. The tribunal also found she once lent Cleary her car for six weeks, which he and his wife used, but did not pay for the road tolls they incurred. According to the tribunal, Cleary told the HCCC that Patient A had wanted to become involved in paying the school fees, and had mostly discussed it with his wife, but he knew that she had been generous to his family in this, and other ways. “The real issue was that for many years she was part of the family and I accept I should have ceased providing her with medical treatment in these circumstances,” Cleary told the HCCC. The tribunal found that Cleary had given no indication of why he did not stop treating Patient A when it became clear the nature of the relationship had changed. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He was represented at the hearing by senior lawyers but did not give evidence, instead providing two statements, with the tribunal characterising this as engaging “in the most superficial” way. “Nothing … implies that the respondent regrets that he allowed his family to benefit from Patient A to the extent and for as long as they undoubtedly did, or reveals any insight into the inappropriateness of his conduct in continuing his professional relationship with Patient A in those circumstances,” the tribunal found. “In the absence of any explanation from the Respondent [Cleary], it can reasonably be inferred that only the death of Patient A terminated the Respondent’s family’s receipt of financial benefits from Patient A.” The tribunal also found that in 2013, Patient A arranged to have a small dwelling built on Cleary’s property, which would enable him to care for her if she became too frail or unwell to live on her own. It heard evidence the dwelling cost about $100,000 for Patient A to build, and “constitutes a not insignificant … benefit” to Cleary and his wife, but there was no evidence they had “any intention of reimbursing the estate of Patient A”. Cleary was also found by the tribunal to have failed in providing adequate treatment to Patient A, including by prescribing homeopathic remedies in place of other evidence-based treatment, failing to treat recurrent nausea and urinary tract problems, and prescribing oxycodone, a powerful opioid, without any clinical indication she needed it. The tribunal found he then failed to manage long-term opioid addiction concerns, despite her suffering numerous side-effects that could be attributed to chronic opioid use, and knew (or ought to have known) that she was at risk of becoming dependent on the drug and was likely to abuse it. After Patient A was found dead in the bath by Cleary, the doctor then signed her death certificate and cremation certificate, stating that the cause of death may have been due to natural causes, or from a stroke-like attack or uncontrolled hypertension. The commission alleged that in doing so Cleary had failed to observe proper professional boundaries because other causes of death were plausible, and Cleary should have sought a second opinion from a medical colleague, given his close personal relationship with patient A. There is no suggestion the death was suspicious. But Prof Vicki Kotsirilos, an experienced GP who acted as an expert on behalf of the HCCC, found Patient A may have suffered from natural causes of death, including those stated by Cleary, but other plausible causes had not been ruled out, such as overdose of oxycodone or another drug, pregabalin, which could have been accidental or intentional. Cleary also said he did not know he or any member of his family would benefit under patient A’s will until after she died, and the tribunal found there was no evidence to the contrary. No findings of misconduct were made regarding the 2015 will, under which Cleary’s family received four-fifths of her residuary estate. Guardian Australia understands the estate was worth about $1m. Cleary did not object to his registration being cancelled and the tribunal heard that he planned to retire. He will not be able to reapply for registration for five years. No orders were sought with respect to his ability to continue practising homeopathy.Facebook ads were used to push unapproved rapid test kits to Australians, prompting a warning from the regulator, while users offered large volumes of rapid tests on Facebook marketplace, contrary to its rules. Facebook has a strict policy prohibiting the sale of health-related products on its platform, and closely controls the way companies can advertise medical products to its users. But a search of Facebook’s marketplace and buy, swap, sell groups shows users are easily skirting around the ban, sometimes selling significant volumes of rapid tests. One user based in Sydney’s northern beaches, for example, is using Facebook marketplace to take orders for the JusChek brand rapid test, an approved brand, which will be met by placing a “bulk order through my business”. Users are asked to pay upfront for a future delivery that may arrive in “mid-February”. Three others were using Facebook to sell 20-packs of Panbio-branded tests, which are approved, in Sydney for between $200 and $300. Another listing offers unboxed kits on Facebook marketplace for $20 per test. It is against the law to sell tests without the proper instructions and it can be illegal to repackage and relabel kits. All of the marketplace listings were removed by Facebook after questions from the Guardian. Facebook has also pushed paid ads from foreign companies to Australian users which advertised unapproved rapid test devices. The Guardian found two separate ads marketing the BinaxNOW rapid test to Australians. That device has not been approved by Australia’s Therapeutic Goods Administration. The advertising of medical devices is strictly regulated by law in Australia, including on Facebook. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A TGA spokesperson said it would investigate “alleged non-compliance and take appropriate compliance action, if required”. “The advertising of rapid antigen tests, whether that’s through Facebook, an online marketplace such as eBay, or any other means, must comply with the Act, the Therapeutic Goods Advertising Code (Instrument) 2021 and the advertising requirements set out in the Therapeutic Goods (Restricted Representations – Covid-19 Rapid Antigen Tests) Permission 2022,” a TGA spokesperson said. Another small company, based in Australia, was paying Facebook to push ads for the sale of the Clungene rapid test device, which is approved. The ads linked to a sales website that uses the TGA logo to help promote the device, something also prohibited by the regulator. The website included reviews from two customers. Reverse Google image searches reveal the pictures of both customers are stock images used across multiple unrelated websites for reviews. A spokesperson for the website denied the reviews for its rapid tests were fake: “Customer reviews are not fake, however the images used are. The customers leaving the reviews did not want their photos on the website whatsoever, which is fair enough to us!” The TGA logo was removed after the Guardian’s questions. A spokesperson for Meta, the company behind Facebook, said it had removed the advertisements and marketplace listings identified by the Guardian. “We’ve removed these ads and Marketplace listings because we prohibit anyone from selling Covid-19 test kits on our platform and are always working to stop efforts to circumvent our rules,” the spokesperson said. “While enforcement is not perfect, we have put several automated detection mechanisms in place to block or remove this material from our platform. We strongly encourage people to report any content that violates our policies.” The shortage of rapid tests has undermined Australia’s response to Omicron and led to price gouging. None of the Facebook listings seen by the Guardian appeared to be advertising tests for more than the permitted amount. On Monday, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission chair, Rod Sims, said the watchdog had referred retailers charging “beyond outrageous” prices to the federal police for investigation. “We have also had reports that look as if people have bought the goods … and then on-sold them at more than 20% markup and that is illegal under the government’s recent announcement, and we are referring anything that looks of that nature to the Australian federal police,” Sims said. Union leaders have accused the federal government of putting workers in harm’s way by failing to provide free and accessible tests. They have threatened industrial action, prompting a scathing response from the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, on Tuesday.Environmental groups have accused the federal government of paying a record price to retrieve water for the environment by funding irrigators to make savings through efficiencies. The water minister, Keith Pitt, has announced the government will allocate $126m to Murrumbidgee Irrigation for works that it says will save just 7.4 gigalitres of water, and return 6.3 gigalitres to the environment. But environmental groups say this amounts to paying a record $20,000 per megalitre for water in the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area, almost eight times what would be paid if the government was to buy water rights on the water market. The latest grant, made as part of the $1.3bn off-farm efficiency program, highlights the problems of the Murray Darling Basin plan as it reaches its final stage. When the Nationals’ leader, Barnaby Joyce, was water minister he put a stop to water purchases on the open market, citing the economic damage it was doing to rural towns. Instead the government is now relying on two programs: the so-called supply projects, which are meant to deliver 605 additional gigalitres of water savings for the environment; plus the off-farm efficiency program which is supposed to deliver a further 450 gigalitres for the environment. But, as the Productivity Commission highlighted in its five year review in 2019, these two mechanisms face real risks of failure, and may not deliver the water savings for the environment. It said the supply side projects were “highly ambitious” and could fail to deliver the promised water savings at a potential cost of half a billion dollars. The efficiency program was also criticised as it had achieved only a small fraction of the 450 gigalitres of water savings it was supposed to deliver – just 1% of its target – and did not take account of climate change. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The commission said both were far more costly than the alternative of buying back water from farmers. Acknowledging the failure of the $1.3bn efficiency program, which was originally to be spent finding water savings on-farm, Pitt directed $1.3bn to off-farm efficiency projects – mainly to the benefit of irrigation consortiums. Murrumbidgee Irrigation says the $126.48m grant will enable it to complete an almost decade long project to halve its water losses by reducing seepage and evaporation from open channels and automate its irrigation system. “This is the last component of all the works done to make our system as efficient as possible,” CEO, Brett Jones, told the ABC. But acting chief executive of the Nature Conservation Council, Jacqui Mumford, said it was “a scandalous waste of taxpayers’ money”. “There are far cheaper and more effective ways to meet the targets of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan,” she said. “If all water cost this much, the $13bn Murray-Darling Basin fund would only buy 647.5 GL, about 20% of the 3,200 gigalitres required to be recovered under the Basin Plan. “That’s almost eight times the most recent price paid for the permanent trade of general security access to water on the open market in the Murrumbidgee.” She said it could be the most expensive water ever bought by the federal government. “And where is the government’s cost-benefit analysis to show value for money? Or how about its water recovery calculations? “Water buy-backs are a far cheaper way to achieve the same result, and the result is more certain than forecast gains from water efficiency measures, which are highly uncertain. “With climate change making less water available, such large sums should be used to diversify regional economies rather than subsidise already planned works of private irrigation schemes,” Mumford said.A new campaign targeting the 2.4bn litres of sugary drinks consumed by Australians each year is being launched by the Australian Medical Association as it steps up its calls for a sugar tax. The “sickly sweet” social media campaign, launched on Wednesday, highlights the role sugary drinks play in Australia’s obesity epidemic, with the average 375ml can of soft drink containing between eight and 12 teaspoons of sugar. AMA modelling suggests a tax of 40 cents per 100 grams of sugar – meaning a can of Coke would cost 16 cents more – would reduce sugar consumption via sweet drinks by 12-18%. Frequent consumption of sugary drinks is linked to poor dental health and illnesses associated with obesity such as type 2 diabetes, heart disease, stroke, and cancer. The AMA says Australians drink the equivalent of 960 Olympic-sized swimming pools of sugary drinks each year. The association’s president, Dr Omar Khorshid, said what was once a special treat had become an everyday product fuelling addiction and major health problems. “It’s a staggering figure, and we think Aussies need to know what they are consuming and the impact it can have on their long-term health,” Khorshid said in a statement to mark the campaign launch. “Sugary drinks are a ticking timebomb for the nation’s health and we urge Australians to choose water whenever they can.” The AMA is pushing Australia to follow the UK’s lead and introduce a tax on the sugar in the drinks – but only those that have no nutritional benefit. This would be all non-alcoholic drinks containing free sugars – excluding 100% fruit juice, milk-based drinks and cordials. The AMA modelling on such a tax suggests that sugar consumption could be reduced by up to 43,804 tonnes a year. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The tax excise is in line with World Health Organization recommendations for retail prices to increase 20% to have a meaningful health effect. Rosemary Stanton, a visiting fellow with the School of Medical Sciences at the University of NSW, said she had been calling for sugar taxes since the late 1960s, and while some progress had been made, it was slow in the face of resistance from the drinks industry and sugar farmers in Queensland. She said targeting sugary drinks made sense as they accounted for more than 50% of sugar consumed in Australia. “I don’t believe that people need to give up every grain of sugar, but 52% of the free sugars [consumed] come from beverages, so it is by far the biggest thing,” Stanton said. Jane Martin, the executive manager of the Obesity Policy Coalition, said that more than 50 other countries had introduced similar sugar taxes. She said not only were they working to reduce sugar consumption, but manufacturers were reformulating recipes to reduce the amount of sugar in products. In the UK, a tiered levy on sugar in soft drinks resulted in sugar levels in lemonades, colas and other soft drinks falling by 44%, with many companies taking out sugar to avoid the tax. Martin said sugary drinks, including slurpees that were targeted at kids, were cheap to make and had high-profit margins for manufacturers, but there was little awareness of the amount of sugar being consumed. “There’s so much pushback from the sugary drinks industry. They are making a huge profit out of this, and they don’t want that profit to be impacted, but it is profits over health right now,” she said. “Isn’t it time really that we put the health of Australians first and not the profits of sugary drink companies.” The AMA says previous modelling estimated that such a targeted tax would lead to a reduction in the prevalence of obesity by about 2%, leading to annual healthcare savings of between $600m and $1.73bn. It also estimated that the tax could, over a 25-year period, result in 16,000 fewer cases of type 2 diabetes, 4,400 fewer cases of heart disease and 1,100 fewer cases of stroke. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, has previously ruled out a sugar tax after the 2020 Australian of the Year, ophthalmologist James Mueke, made it a key focus of his time in the role. “We don’t think that driving up the price of household goods for families is the way of achieving this particular outcome,” Hunt said at the time. The Australian Beverages Council opposes a sugar tax, claiming there’s not enough evidence it would reduce obesity. “While sugar can play a part in poor diet, the causes of overweight, obesity and associated chronic disease are highly complex, and the key determinants include, but are not limited to, interactions between genetic, metabolic, cultural, environmental, socioeconomic and behavioural factors,” the council claims.Overworked paramedics across Sydney are being asked to drive ambulance vehicles home after their shifts so they can respond to emergency calls when they are clocked off as part of a crisis strategy during the Omicron outbreak. Paramedics in the city are already “drunk on fatigue”, said Chris Kastelan, New South Wales president of the Australian Paramedics Association, with many working 13-hour shifts in recent weeks. Now, as demand for medical care soars and workers are caught up in isolation requirements, NSW Ambulance has begun placing paramedics across metropolitan Sydney “on call” – a practice traditionally only used in rural settings where smaller populations don’t require permanent overnight staffed shifts. In an interview with Guardian Australia’s Full Story podcast, Kastelan suggested it was unprecedented for paramedics to be on call in Sydney, where there were already designated overnight shifts. He warned that the conditions paramedics were working in now were becoming unsafe. “People will have done a 12- or 13-hour shift and then they’ll go home on call, so they’ll take an ambulance and equipment home. And normally on call in the Sydney metropolitan area is not something that gets utilised very often, you know, hardly ever at all … but in the last month or two, it’s become very common for people to be asked to take ambulances home,” he said. “They’ve just done a 12-hour, 13-hour shift, they’re just about to jump in the shower to debrief, to have a meal, to spend some time with their family, and then the phone rings again. “Then they’ve got to go straight back out … and they’re out for another four or five or six hours doing multiple calls. Now these people are, you know, they are drunk on fatigue. They are tired. They’ve got to back up and do it all again the very next day,” he said. A NSW Ambulance spokesman confirmed the agency had been forced to resort to on-call practices across metropolitan Sydney. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Kastelan said he knew of paramedics in Sydney suffering sleeping disorders, gastric upsets and migraines as a result of the heightened workload in recent weeks. “I’m just not sure whether that’s a safe workforce. “They want to help the community, and it’s very hard to turn off sometimes and particularly when there’s nobody left to do it.” Kastelan said he believed NSW Ambulance, the state government provider of ambulances, had leaned on the tactic in Sydney as a last resort. “I would suggest that the fact that that’s happening shows that the rostering or the staffing levels for both metropolitan Sydney and regional NSW is just not enough for the workload at this point in time,” he said. Pleas for paramedics to be on call while they rest are now common across Sydney, Guardian Australia understands. This masthead has seen requests from the north, south-east and western suburbs of Sydney, as well as in the Blue Mountains. An NSW Ambulance spokesman told Guardian Australia that “as we continue to respond to the surge in cases associated with the Omicron variant of Covid-19, opportunities for on-call rostering have been offered to staff in metropolitan areas who have expressed an interest and are willing to assist”. “On-call has been offered in line with the NSW Ambulance fatigue policy, to ensure staff are provided the opportunity to rest and recover, before and at the conclusion of their shift,” the spokesman said. The spokesman also urged the community “to ‘save triple zero for saving lives’ to ensure we can assist the most urgent patients as quickly as possible”. Last week, NSW Ambulance’s seven-day rolling average for triple zero callouts was nearly 4,500 per day. Prior to the Omicron outbreak, there had never been more than 4,000 calls recorded on a single day. Paramedics in Victoria were also under significant strain, following the red alert issued by Ambulance Victoria last week. However, Guardian Australia understands that authorities in Victoria have not resorted to placing paramedics in Melbourne on call. “We would never ever see that sort of arrangement happening in a regional centre in Victoria, let alone metropolitan Melbourne. So if they’re doing that in Sydney to cope that’s pretty bad,” a source with knowledge of the ambulance system in Victoria said.Shoulder and neck pain can result from traumatic events such as a car crash, but one of the most common causes for non-traumatic shoulder and neck pain is a head-forward posture many people adopt in their workstations, says Phillip Hughes, a physiotherapist and president of Musculoskeletal Physiotherapy Australia. Athletes whose sport involve throwing and tradies whose jobs require them to hold their hands over their head for a long time are also at risk of neck and shoulder pain, he says. “Excessive overhead activities can cause what we call a tendinopathy of the rotator cuff tendons, and that can lead to tearing of those tendons and significant pain.” Pain can be a barrier to exercises, says Prof Michele Sterling, a physiotherapist and researcher at the University of Queensland. “But often, once people get moving – it can be quite a low-level or low-load type of exercise – their pain feels better.” She says people’s natural inclination when something is sore is to rest but avoiding movement can often be counterproductive. Sterling says there is no robust evidence that one form of exercise is better than another but research shows that exercise – as part of physiotherapy treatment – should be the first treatment approach. There is no fixed recipe for shoulder and neck pain treatment, and every person has to be assessed and prescribed exercise therapy by a physiotherapist, but here are some tips that can help you get moving. The class: yoga, pilates and tai chi In a 2020 systematic review published in the British Medical Journal of Sports Medicine, Sterling and her colleagues compared the effectiveness of different physical exercises for chronic neck pain. The review included 40 randomised controlled trials. “We found that low-load motor control exercises and classes like yoga, pilates and tai chi are somewhat more effective than things such as stretching exercises,” Sterling says. Classes that have a strong focus on improving head, neck and shoulder posture can be highly beneficial in relieving neck and shoulder pain, agrees Hughes. If you have never tried these classes before, Sterling suggests to approach them with caution. “Listen to your body,” she says. “Start at a lower load, with pain-free movement. Then gradually work up to higher loads and stronger exercises, and as in the case of yoga, pushing more into the range of movements.” The move: the chin nod Lie down with a soft pillow under your neck. Flatten the back of the neck against the pillow very gently, nodding your head forward as if to say yes. You might feel the muscles at the back of your neck slowly extending but stop before you feel the front muscles hardening. Hold the nod position for five seconds, then return your head to the start position. “[The chin nod exercise] is really important for giving stability to the neck and supporting the neck by strengthening the muscles very close to the spine, at the front of the spine,” Hughes says. He says building up strength and endurance in this exercise is crucial, and the final goal should be 10 holds of 10 seconds. “Everybody could benefit from strengthening those muscles, but especially those who spend a fair amount of time on the computer.” The activity: swimming Swimming is a great activity to promote stability and strengthen the neck and shoulders, says Hughes. But he warns that it might not be for everyone. “Swimming is certainly not for people with more severe or acute conditions.” Sitting and spending many hours in front of a computer are significant contributors to neck and shoulder pain. “Even just getting out of that position – walking, swimming, cycling or anything that gets you moving – can be enough to relieve the pain,” Sterling says. “It’s important the person enjoys it.” The hard pass: lying on your stomach Hughes says lying on your stomach with your head twisted to one side can harm the neck. He also suggests choosing the right pillow for your sleeping habits. “If you lie on your back, you need a flatter pillow,” he says. “If you lie on your side, you need a higher pillow.” The focus remains a correct posture of the head, maintaining the back of the neck in line with the rest of the spine.Just before I opened up a new document to write this, I set up a monthly donation to a charity. It took about 50 seconds. I opened up the webpage of a charity, clicked on ‘Donate Now’, selected the value of my monthly donation, autofilled my contact details and card information and – done. I had been intending to support this charity for a while, but had not for the simple reason that I had not. And now that I have, there will be a small reduction in my bank balance every month and in truth, in time, I’ll probably forget it’s there. All the while, that money may be doing something good for someone else. Maybe you already give to charity – 80% of us do – nevertheless, there’s a very high chance that you could give more, and probably without even noticing it. Setting up a monthly donation represents excellent philanthropic bang for your time-spent buck. It also is often the preferred way for charities to receive money, in that it is stable and predictable. Setting up a donation within your pay cycle takes a little more time, but means that the tax is instantly removed from the donation, so it is maximum money to the charity, and minimum from you. The trick might be in choosing the right charity for you. Philosopher Peter Singer has his own suggestions for what makes for effective altruism, but other experts suggest doing some due diligence but giving to causes and charities which are meaningful to you. And while giving to organisations and people who are doing good work, or need it, is good in and of itself – there is a selfish kicker: studies show that people who spend money on others are happier. Literally, everybody wins (easily).Christine Walker has seen the politicians on her television continually repeating the same message. “They’re … saying, ‘Go and get vaccinated. Get your children vaccinated,’” says Walker. “They’re telling us all to go and do it … What are they doing to make it easier for the most vulnerable?” Walker, 56, is at a loss. Her 21-year-old son, who Guardian Australia has chosen not to name for privacy reasons, has a rare genetic mutation that causes epilepsy, an intellectual disability, autism and a global developmental delay. He does not leave their family house in Melbourne except to go to the supermarket, which is the one place he feels comfortable. “At the moment we’re working on getting him to go to his sister’s house,” Walker said. “He becomes overwhelmed, overstimulated, and he goes into a meltdown. It’s too much for him. Eventually, because he can’t cope, he becomes aggressive.” In the past he has needed to be hospitalised to get other injections, so the idea that Walker could take him to a vaccination hub or a GP clinic is almost inconceivable. Last year, she called local GPs, who all said they could not do home visits, before the disability liaison at a Melbourne hospital put her in touch with Aspen Medical, one of the private companies contracted by the federal government to carry out “in-reach” vaccinations in the aged care and disability sectors. But Walker’s experience this time around is eerily similar to the damning finding of the disability royal commission, which said the federal government’s in-reach vaccination rollout had “deprioritised” people with disability in favour of those in aged care. “Last time around we were able to get a team to come out and do the vaccination at home where he’s obviously more comfortable,” Walker said. “I called [Aspen Medical] again this week, to ask them to do the booster. “They were really lovely, very nice, but they said they’re trying to do all the nursing homes right now. So they can’t do him for another month or two.” Experiences like Walker’s may some provide insight into why vaccination rates for National Disability Insurance Scheme participants – some of whom are more susceptible to the virus and were meant to be prioritised for jabs – remain lower than the general population. In August, Guardian Australia reported the story of a Sydney woman who managed to secure a vaccination appointment for her daughter, who has Down’s syndrome, from a private provider through Twitter. At the weekend, Guardian Australia revealed leaked data that showed people with intellectual disabilities and autistic people were less likely to be vaccinated than other national disability insurance scheme participants. They are even less likely to be vaccinated than the general population. And according to figures from last week leaked to Guardian Australia, only 14.8% of all national disability insurance scheme participants have received a booster. Overall, only 83.8% of NDIS participants have received two doses, compared with 92% of the general population. That’s despite NDIS participants becoming eligible much earlier than most people. On Tuesday, Labor’s NDIS spokesman, Bill Shorten, said those figures pointed to a “roll call of failure by the Morrison government”. “In particular, today, I’m calling upon the Morrison government to put from the back of the queue to the front of the queue people living with intellectual disabilities and people diagnosed with autism,” he said. Walker said she was particularly worried about being unable to get a booster for her son because he was immunocompromised. “Even a summer cold is enough to lay him out,” she said. “A flu can see him admitted to hospital. Covid would be so much.” Heather Renton, the chief executive of Syndromes Without a Name, has been supporting Walker to try to find her son a vaccination. Renton said there was not enough clear information to direct people like Walker about where to go. “It’s difficult when you’ve got a child who won’t even leave the house, when they’ve got a fear of vaccination,” said Renton. Guardian Australia approached the federal Department of Health and Aspen Medical for comment but did not receive a response by deadline. The Victorian Department of Health runs an in-home vaccination service for people with disability, via its disability liaison, though its website states the service is “currently not available for third doses”. The Victorian Department of Health said it would contact Walker to see what assistance could be provided. A Victorian government spokesperson added: “While the NDIS and the Covid-19 vaccination program is the responsibility of the commonwealth, our team is supporting clients and carers to determine the best way to get people vaccinated through specialist care at our state-run clinics or our at-home vaccination service. “We encourage carers or people with mobility issues, a disability or special requirements to consider contacting our disability liaison officers should they need support.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Walker planned to once again try with local GPs in her suburb of Mernda in Melbourne’s outer northern suburbs, but was dismayed at the process. “There are advocates in the community doing their best to help,” she said. “I don’t think the people that are supposed to be helping are actually doing that much. “It shouldn’t be this hard.”A “clash of two crises” is looming when students return to New South Wales schools, as the Omicron wave adds pressure to a system that already faced severe and prolonged staffing shortages before the pandemic. As the state government prepares to release at Thursday’s national cabinet meeting its long-awaited plan for the return of students, school administrators have been warned up to 20% of staff could be forced off work because of Covid infections and isolation rules once classes resume early next month. Despite the NSW premier Dominic Perrottet insisting schools will be able to return safely on “day one, term one”, the scale of potential teacher shortages has prompted concerns from unions and education groups about the ability of schools to function given existing staffing shortfalls. Documents seen by Guardian Australia reveal that at the end of 2021 more than 70 public schools across NSW had staff vacancy rates of 20% or higher. While many of those were smaller regional schools where a single teaching vacancy can disproportionately affect overall vacancy rates, the list also includes larger schools across metropolitan and western Sydney. At Barramurra Public School in Macquarie Fields in Sydney’s south west, for example, there were seven staff vacancies as of November last year out of a funding entitlement of 16.17 full-time equivalent positions – a vacancy rate of 43.29%. At the new high-rise Inner Sydney High School in Newtown, the 6.6 full-time equivalent vacancies amounted to a staff shortfall of 23.40%. There were also significant shortages at some larger regional schools. At Wilcannia Central School 8.4 of the 15.1 full-time equivalent positions were vacant at the end of 2021, meaning 55.63% of positions at the school were not filled. Walgett Community College, which was forced to close briefly in October due to a Covid outbreak, had nine vacancies – a 42.45% staffing shortfall. The president of the NSW Teachers Federation, Angelo Gavrielatos, said existing shortages would likely lead to the “clash of two crises” once schools resumed during the outbreak. “The crisis of absenteeism that will be the direct result of Covid but also the teacher shortage crisis that the government has known about for years but not acted on,” he said. “There will be disruption due to absenteeism, and that may indeed render schools of non operational.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Gavrielatos said there was a “very strong likelihood” schools would be disrupted for weeks leading some to close due to staff shortages. “Regrettably, there will be disruption … as a result of the absenteeism that’s being anticipated,” he said. “We expect that there will be many instances where schools will be deemed non operational, either in whole or in part.” The NSW government has devised its return to school plans alongside Victoria, and will present them to national cabinet this week. The plan is likely to include the use of rapid antigen testing as a surveillance measure, with students to be asked to do two per week. The regime, which has been used in the UK school system, would require the use of about 24m tests during a 10-week term. On Tuesday, Perrottet said that while no final decisions had been made, surveillance testing was “absolutely” under consideration. Asked about the threat of Covid-enforced staffing shortages, Perrottet conceded there were “challenges” associated with the isolation requirements but said they remained “important in slowing the spread of the virus”. “Last year we faced difficulties and challenges as well. We had schools closed last year [so] there will be challenges as we go through the reopening of schools,” he said. “There’s no doubt about that. But we are determined to make it as smooth as possible. That will mean at times teachers who are positive will have to isolate. It will mean at times that kids who are positive will need to isolate. But that is a better issue to be dealing with than having our schools closed. We need kids back in the classrooms.” Opposition leader Chris Minns said the government had known about the staffing issue before the pandemic hit. “The lack of teachers in our public education system predates Covid by years,” he said. “We’ve seen a general deterioration, the number of teachers. Our great fear is that that will be exacerbated when teachers are off work because they’ve got Covid or they’re a close contact.” The Labor leader has called on the government to release modelling showing how many teachers are expected to contract the virus once classes resume. Opposition education spokesperson Prue Car criticised the government for considering calling on retired teachers to plug staffing holes. “We should be having a proper plan for how to deal with a surge workforce for teachers, not just a heartbeat plan to bring back retired teachers,” she said. Perrottet on Tuesday also confirmed the government was considering asking students in their final year of university to provide a “buffer” to staff shortages, a plan that has come in for criticism from teachers groups. Michael Wright, the acting secretary of the NSW Independent Education Union, was worried university students studying teaching could burn out before they graduate if they were pulled into classrooms to make up shortfalls. “We think it’s really unfair on those students to be thrown into a crisis situation and burn them out before they even start,” he said, adding that retired teachers also presented issues. “We don’t want to see teachers who have retired, coming back in and being infected and having serious consequences because of those Covid infections.” In a statement, the education department did not respond directly to questions about whether it had conducted modelling on the number of teaching staff expected to be forced to isolate due to Covid, or whether any steps had been taken to address the possibility of schools with existing staff shortages being affected. A spokesperson said the NSW education department had “published guidelines for the backfilling of staff, which include the use of the casual teaching workforce”. “This is to ensure that schools can continue teaching and learning, while affording a duty of care to students.”Consumer groups have warned the UK government against following Australia’s lead in allowing the booming buy now, pay later (BNPL) industry to regulate itself, arguing that approach has been “woefully inadequate in curbing consumer harm”. In a joint submission to a consultation process on BNPL regulation run by the UK Treasury, Australia’s Consumer Action Law Centre (Calc) and Financial Counselling Australia (FCA) said there were substantial holes in a voluntary industry code. They urged the UK government to “design regulation that legislates consumer protections as the best way to reduce the negative impact BNPL products can have on a substantial portion of people”. Treasury is holding the consultation process following a review that in October recommended tighter regulation in the UK despite the government’s view that there was “relatively limited evidence” of widespread consumer harm. The industry has exploded in both Australia and the UK, although it has had difficulty turning a profit – shares in Australian-listed operators plunged up to 96% in November after a loss of $653m was declared in August by one of the big players, Zip. On Monday, minnow Beforepay, which is chaired by former Westpac chief executive Brian Hartzer, made a horror debut on the ASX, with shares tumbling 44% from the offer price. In their submission, Calc and FCA said they expected the lack of evidence of consumer harm in the UK was “only because the evidence has not been collected, rather than that the detriment is not occurring”. “The empirical evidence of consumer detriment from BNPL in Australia is clear. Given the similar regulatory environments between our two countries and the similar growth in BNPL, it is likely that the experience of UK consumers will be much the same as that of Australian consumers.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The joint submission pointed to research by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission in 2020 that found 21% of BNPL users missed a payment in the previous 12 months and 20% had cut back on or gone without essentials such as food to make their repayments on time. FCA’s own research last year showed that “BNPL debt is growing rapidly in the case work of financial counsellors, often as an additional debt on top of other forms of credit such as credit cards and personal loans,” the organisations said. “While it may escape legal definitions, BNPL is credit,” the FCA chief executive, Fiona Guthrie, said. “The relationship between BNPL and growing financial hardship is clear.” The organisations said half of the BNPL operators in Australia had signed on to the industry’s inadequate code. They said under the code providers did not have to assess whether repayments were affordable, meaning they were less likely to detect whether potential customers were vulnerable or likely to miss repayments and rack up substantial late fees. It also lacked meaningful enforcement powers, the submission said. “We urge the United Kingdom government to learn lessons from Australia’s experience and take steps to ensure these products have better safeguards, in a manner that puts consumers, particularly people experiencing vulnerability, first,” Tom Abourizk, a Calc policy officer, said.The Spanish footballer Paco Gento, who has died aged 88, played in all five of Real Madrid’s successive victories in the European Cup between 1956 and 1960, and captained the Real team that won that cup for a sixth time in 1966, giving him more wins in Europe’s biggest competition than any other player. One of the greatest Spanish footballers, he never missed a European Cup match between 1955 and 1970, making 80 appearances altogether. In all he took part in eight European Cup finals, won 12 Spanish championship winner’s medals, and was capped 43 times for Spain between 1955 and 1969, appearing in the 1962 and 1966 World Cup finals. Alfredo Di Stéfano, the grand panjandrum of Real Madrid, could find Gento blindfold: with an orthodox pass to the left-wing, or even a backheel. Then away would go the short, sturdy figure of Gento, an outside-left with remarkable pace, to finish with a shot or a centre. Di Stefano was his foil, but it was Real’s Argentinian inside-left of the early 1950s, Héctor Rial, who taught Gento how to use his frightening speed, which had earned him the nickname La Galerna del Cantábrico – the Gale of the Cantabrian Sea. Born in the village of Guarnizo in the Cantabria region of north-west Spain, Gento was playing for the nearest major club, Real Santander, at the age of 19, but had time to appear in only 10 league games before Real Madrid snapped him up in 1953. By 1955 he had gained his first Spain cap in a 1-1 draw against England in Madrid, and in the following year he was appearing in his debut European Cup final, against Reims in Paris. He set up the winning goal for Rial, 11 minutes from the end of a pulsating, fluctuating game that Madrid won 4-3. In the 1957 European Cup final at Real Madrid’s home ground, the Bernabéu, he scored Real’s second goal in a 2-0 success against Fiorentina, and another vital Gento goal was to come in the final of 1958, against Milan in Brussels, when in extra time he got the winner after 107 minutes, shooting through a group of players and past the unsighted goalkeeper, Narciso Soldan, to make it 3-2 to Madrid. Further European Cup winner’s medals, although no goals, followed in the finals of 1959 and 1960, against Reims and Eintracht Frankfurt. As Real’s tight hold on the cup was loosened, there were then losing appearances in finals in 1962 and 1964 before Gento skippered his side to a 2-1 win in 1966 against Partizan Belgrade in Brussels, providing him with his record haul of six victories in the competition. His team failed to appear in a European Cup final for the rest of his career, which lasted until 1971, but he did feature in the 1971 European Cup Winners’ Cup final, for victors of domestic competitions, which Madrid lost 2-1 in a replay to Chelsea. Gento’s trophy cabinet also contained a dozen La Liga medals, one for almost every season of his sojourn at the Bernabéu, during which Madrid utterly dominated the domestic competition. In all he scored 182 goals in 600 appearances for the club. Gento’s international career was rather less stellar, not through any fault of his own but due to the fact that Spain were not a significant footballing force during his era. He played in all three of Spain’s matches in the 1962 World Cup finals in Chile, captaining them against Mexico, but they were eliminated in the group stages, as they were again in 1966 in England, where he played in two of Spain’s three matches, both as captain. Despite his successes and his status as one of Europe’s finest players, like many a winger Gento yearned for a supposedly more influential position. “I am a dissatisfied player,” he once confessed. “Not with my club, my contract, nor my way of life. But with myself and these raw, bubbling elements of my ability which I try so hard and constantly to improve, and to make more efficient. I am also dissatisfied with my position as a left winger; accepting it gladly only because I know it to be the one in which I am of most value to Real Madrid.” He would have preferred to be an inside-forward. After he retired from a playing role at Madrid, Gento coached lower Spanish league teams in the 70s and early 80s, including at Castellón, Palencia and Granada, before taking on a long-term ambassadorial role for Real Madrid, where he was an honorary president until his death. He is survived by his wife, Mari Luz, his sons, Francisco and Julio, and granddaughters Aitana and Candela. • Paco (Francisco) Gento López, footballer, born 21 October 1933; died 18 January 2022A cult-like evangelical Christian society at a leading private school allowed a powerful and charismatic barrister to groom and sadistically abuse boys with impunity, an investigation has found. Members of the Christian Forum at Winchester college “showed signs of what would today be described as radicalisation”, said a 197-page review commissioned by the elite school into abuse carried out by John Smyth QC. The school’s then headteacher, John Thorn, was informed of the abuse in 1982 but did not report it to police. Smyth moved to Zimbabwe, where he abused “as many as 90 boys, possibly resulting in the death of one”, the report said. Winchester college apologised “unreservedly” for its part in the “terrible experiences” of Smyth’s victims. In a statement, it said: “The review … demonstrates in particular that John Smyth was able to infiltrate the college’s Christian community and gain access to the college’s pupils, providing him with the opportunity to groom and then abuse them.” The review, published on Tuesday, said that Smyth had “unfettered access” to the college. “Multiple staff members, including the headmaster, were aware that Smyth was in close contact with boys in the Christian Forum and that he had a powerful influence over them”. However, “levels of supervision … were not sufficient to prevent or detect the physical or sexual abuse which Smyth perpetrated against pupils.” Pupils felt unable to disclose the abuse to staff, and staff members who had suspicions about Smyth’s activities did not share them with each other or report them upwards. Thorn, who is in his 90s, was unable to answer questions for the review. Smyth died in 2018. Up to 100 pupils attended the college’s weekly Christian Forum, which was dominated by Smyth. “The inner circle of the Christian Forum which formed around Smyth in the 1970s and early 1980s shares many features of a cult. Its members showed signs of what would today be described as radicalisation,” the review concluded. Boys were invited to Smyth’s home for Sunday lunch with his wife and three children, and some were subjected to brutal beatings in Smyth’s garden shed. One survivor said he received more than 1,000 strokes on one occasion. Two survivors later attempted suicide. In 2017, Andrew Watson, a former Winchester college pupil who is now the bishop of Guildford, said he had been subjected to a “violent, excruciating and shocking” beating by Smyth in his garden shed. One survivor told the reviewers that Smyth “made me feel special, part of an inner circle”. The QC imposed a “code of loyalty and secrecy”, the report said. Smyth also invited some Winchester boys to attend Christian summer camps, run by the Iwerne Trust, that were aimed at moulding the next generation of Christian leaders in public life. Smyth groomed boys at the camps for abuse in his shed. Some parents of Smyth’s victims raised concerns about his apparent hold over their children with Winchester college staff. Euan MacAlpine, a former housemaster, told an internal investigation in 2017: “We all suspected but never got together to discuss it.” In 1979, he told one parent: “The whole thing really is most awkward since none of us housemasters can tackle Smyth directly.” Thorn became aware of the abuse in September 1982, the report said. He wrote to one father: “It’s literally unbelievable. Because it was unbelievable, it was something none of us guessed at.” In October 1982, Thorn and two parents visited Smyth to get him to sign an undertaking to cut all ties with the school and seek psychiatric help. Thorn wrote: “We have I feel rendered him pretty well harmless.” At no stage were the police or any other statutory body informed of Smyth’s abuse. The report said: “As a result of [Thorn’s] inability to participate in the review, the reviewers have not been able to determine the reasons why no report was made.” The reviewers said they were aware of 13 former Winchester college pupils who were abused by Smyth, but it was “likely there were other victims”. The Church of England has also commissioned a review of its handling of allegations made against Smyth, which is due to report this year. Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, who worked at the Iwerne Trust camps in the 1970s, apologised to survivors last year. In a statement, two survivors welcomed the report, saying the college had taken a “brave step … to establish the truth of what happened 40 years ago”. They commended the college’s “honesty and integrity”. • In the UK, the National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. The NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000The philosopher David Chalmers asks us to embrace virtual worlds as a new reality (Report, 17 January), as “this is where humanity is heading”. Not for this human it isn’t. Thanks, but no thanks. I’ll stick to reality. Pete Lavender Nottingham • While preparing for my interview for a headship, I came across the old adage that schools, like fish, rot from the head down. For some reason, that reminds me of the government. Bob Forster Shipton-under-Wychwood, Oxfordshire • In his autobiography, Farewell to Cricket, Don Bradman recounts how he received a letter from Amsterdam that had no name or address, only a photo of the upper half of his face and the words “Somewhere playing in England” (Letters, 16 January). Claude Scott Richmond, London • I have never understood why BBC Radio does not solicit funding from its worldwide audience to supplement, not replace, its licence fee funding? If Radio 4 got a tenner from even 50% of its worldwide listenership, that would surely add millions to its budget? I, for one, would be happy to bung it a few bob every year. John White Dublin • The BBC only has to suggest that it will have to pull the plug on the Archers and the government will back off. Dave Crook Selly Oak, Birmingham • Six letters hold this country together: BBC and NHS. Jim Secord Cambridge • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I set up Volunteer Riders UK to prevent as many families as possible going through the pain of loss that I felt losing my brother. Volunteer Riders has managed to deliver more than 10m pieces of PPE and equipment to medical staff on the frontline. The equipment has also been distributed among communities, and in private homes, schools and workplaces. We did that with people sewing, printing and manufacturing the products. We provided all this for not a penny. We put people before any money, reward or business. We not only provided supplies to those working on the Covid frontlines, we also listened to them and counselled them. We sought no titles or contracts, just the knowledge that we were doing what was moral and humane. We held no parties, no business meetings and no celebrations. We, like so many others, did what was right in a global crisis, unlike the Tory government and its donors. This is why I am beyond angry and why I want the prime minister and his cabinet held to account, along with every person who profiteered and partied with them. Simon Jones Founder, Volunteer Riders UK • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Restrictions brought in before Christmas to stem the Omicron surge across Scotland are to be lifted from next Monday, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has said. Nightclubs will reopen, there will be an end to social distancing and to a three-household limit indoors, Sturgeon said, adding that the country had “turned the corner on the Omicron wave”. But Sturgeon urged the public to remain “cautious” about socialising in larger groups, while government guidance remains to work from home wherever possible and use face coverings, with vaccine passports still in place for large-scale events. Sturgeon said in her regular statement at Holyrood that the data suggested Omicron peaked in Scotland in the first week of January and that “we are now on the downward slope of this wave of cases” as hospital and intensive care admissions were falling. Cases were down from 36,526 new cases on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday of last week to 20,268 cases reported this Sunday, Monday and Tuesday. She said that, after discussion with her cabinet, the remaining statutory measures introduced in response to Omicron – limits on indoor public events; the requirement for one-metre physical distancing between different groups in indoor public places; the requirement for table service in hospitality premises serving alcohol on the premises; and the closure of nightclubs – would be lifted from next Monday, 24 January. From that day, the guidance asking people to stick to a three-household limit on indoor gatherings will also be lifted. Before the statement, opposition parties and business groups called on Sturgeon to ease restrictions quickly. The Scottish Hospitality Group pointed to Scottish government research which suggested that the number of people visiting bars and restaurants has fallen while the number mixing in each other’s homes has risen. The Scottish Conservative MSP Dr Sandesh Gulhane, the shadow cabinet secretary for health, said the statement marked “a sea change in the government’s policy, starting to shift from a rules-based approach more towards trusting the Scottish public”, but argued that the controversial vaccine passport scheme should also be scrapped. Sturgeon said the cabinet’s decision on vaccine passports was “finely balanced”, but that if case numbers were to rise again then extending the scheme to all hospitality venues “may well be a more proportionate alternative to other, more restrictive measures”. The Scottish Labour leader, Anas Sarwar, said that, despite the optimism contained in the statement, “too many businesses are still teetering on the brink” and called for a clearer framework of support: “We need a system that sets clear trigger points on what people can expect when cases rise – which lays out what support people will be entitled to and when.”Jonathan Freedland (It’s a scandal that Boris Johnson ever got to No 10 – and shaming that he’s still there, 14 January) is right, but in common with most other commentators, he omits the unpalatable truth that this country is likely to become (if it hasn’t already) a laughing stock in foreign capitals. To think that we have put in place a leader who is so utterly shameless and so devoid of any idea of what constitutes the truth will not be missed by leaders in Paris, Washington, Brussels or indeed Moscow and Beijing. How can such a person be trusted to negotiate sensibly or in a trustworthy manner on matters of international importance, when his main interest is his own political survival? And how can a nation that longs to be taken seriously on the international stage put up for a moment longer with this Pythonesque circus? We cannot afford to think that the UK’s shambolic government and leadership go unnoticed, or that they have no international consequences. Dr John Evers Truro, Cornwall • Jonathan Freedland is right to ask what it will mean for the country if Boris Johnson gets away with this. What indeed. I am a proud Scot; I am also proud to be British. In 2014, I voted against Scottish independence as I saw the benefits of Scotland remaining in the United Kingdom (and the EU for that matter). However, if Boris Johnson does get away with this, I will definitely be voting to leave the UK in any future Scottish independence vote. I do not want to live in a country led by an arrogant, corrupt shower of incompetents. I have had enough – and I am not the only one. June Cairns Haddington, East Lothian • Boris Johnson should never have been prime minister, but the only reason he was voted in was the lack of a credible alternative. I don’t believe Keir Starmer is what we need – a real reforming leader who is going to change the disastrous situation Britain is in after years of Conservative misrule. Starmer daren’t even mention the stupidity of Brexit, and so has nothing to offer except wittering on about whether or not Johnson was party to the partying. Will somebody please take back control – of the Labour party for a start? David Reed London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Goldman Sachs paid its 43,900 bankers more than $17bn (£12.5bn) last year, a 33% increase on 2020 as the investment bank celebrated a more than doubling of pre-tax profits to $27bn thanks to frenzied dealmaking on both sides of the Atlantic. The pay and bonuses increase works out at about $403,000 for each employee on average, up from about $328,000 a year ago. It is the most the bank has paid out in wages and bonuses since 2007 at the height of the banking boom leading up to the financial crisis. Goldman’s bankers will find out exactly how much they will personally collect for 2021 on Wednesday when the firm reveals annual bonuses on so-called “comp day”. About 400 leading bosses – or the top 1% of the firm – are expected to receive a special one-off pandemic bonus in recognition of the bank’s success during the coronavirus crisis. The bonuses for this elite group are expected to range from the low single digit million to tens of millions of dollars, according to Bloomberg sources. Goldman declined to comment. David Solomon, Goldman’s chief executive, is likely to see his pay rocket compared with last year when his compensation was cut by $10m over the bank’s role in the 1MDB scandal. He collected total pay of $17.5m in 2020, compared with $27.5m in 2019. Banks on both sides of the Atlantic have been rapidly raising pay and bonuses in recent months in a tussle for top talent as corporate deal-making continues to boom. Last summer Goldman increased pay for its junior bankers after they complained about “inhumane” working conditions and 100-hour weeks. The pay of first-year analysts, who previously received close to $70,000 in base pay, increased to $110,000 before bonuses. Second-year analysts saw their pay rise to $125,000. Goldman’s shares fell 8% on Wall Street as profits in the bank’s final quarter were lower than expected. It record profits of $3.9bn, or $10.81 a share compared with analysts’ predictions of $11.76. Annual pre-tax operating profits rose to $27bn, from $12.5bn a year earlier. Full year revenues came in at $59.3bn, a 33% increase on 2020.“Please, someone, explain,” pleads Adrian Chiles at the end of his article on how local democracy works (I believe in local democracy – I just don’t understand it, 13 January). On the basis of two years’ experience as a local parish councillor, I can tell him that in the case of parish councils, “it doesn’t”. In those two years, at the end of which I resigned in utter frustration, I learned that our parish council has virtually no powers or decision-making authority with respect to anything of significant importance. Almost all matters of significance are the responsibility, and within the jurisdiction, of someone else: planning and housing (borough council and central government); roads and road safety, including local speed limits (county council and central government); education/schools (education authority and central government); health and social care (health trust, county council and central government); crime, policing and public safety (police and crime commissioner, and the home secretary); bus service (county council, bus service providers and central government); flooding (county council). In its election manifesto in 2019, the Conservative party wrote: “Our new Towns Fund will help communities make sure their towns are safe to walk in and a pleasure to be in … Above all, we want the town’s future to be in the hands of the people who live there.” The reality, however, is that during its first two years in office, the central government has sought to increase its control over decision-making, at the expense of the authority of local government, in almost all of the areas of governance that I have listed above. Philip C Stenning Eccleshall, Staffordshire • Like Adrian Chiles, I too believe in local democracy, but find it baffling – and I have the advantage that for the past nine years I have either been the parish clerk or a parish councillor. The division of responsibility between town and parish councils, the local authority (usually a county council outside large cities) and central government is confusing and illogical, with too many decisions being made in London that would be far better made locally. In general, your local parish or town council usually has a good idea of who does what. So if you have a problem but are baffled by local democracy, I suggest you contact a local councillor, who should be able to point you in the right direction. Alan Jordan Vice-chair, Middridge parish council, County Durham • In the 1980s, and before the national curriculum, things were very different in some secondary schools. As parish, district, county, parliamentary and EU elections heaved into view, my social studies department concentrated on the structures, constituencies and policies according to the printed manifestos of the political parties. Students lapped it up, particularly the opportunity to write their own manifestos for a particular election. Many young people today are bamboozled by the structures or why it should matter to them. This suits the Tories perfectly. Having no political knowledge inclines young people not to vote. David Handley Gargrave, North Yorkshire • In my village here in France, it is the mayor you go to for all problems. So simple. Paulette James Tocane-Saint-Apre, Dordogne, France • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The rightwing Fox News host Laura Ingraham has stoked outrage by announcing that the chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff had tested positive for Covid-19 – and applauding as she did so. One critic called the host a “merchant of death”. Another said he was “not sure when hate became a Christian value”. Gen Mark Milley became a target of rightwing anger after extensive reporting showed how he worked to contain Donald Trump at the end of his time in power, keeping US armed forces out of domestic affairs. Milley has also defended the teaching in military institutions of critical race theory, an academic discipline which conservatives have turned into a profitable election issue. On Monday, Ingraham introduced a section of her show called Positively Boosted, in which she gleefully recounts which vaccinated public figures have tested positive. Clapping and smiling, she said: “Triple-vaxxed joint chiefs chairman Mark Milley, our favorite Mark Milley, tested positive for Covid yesterday. “And who else? Gen David Berger, the Marine Corps commandant, also positively boosted.” Earlier, a spokesman for Milley said the general was “experiencing very minor symptoms and can perform all of his duties from the remote location. He has received the Covid-19 vaccines including the booster”. A spokeswoman for Berger said: “The performance of his duties will remain unaffected.” More than 850,000 people have died of Covid-19 in the US, the vast majority unvaccinated. Federal authorities have repeatedly said that breakthrough infections are possible, particularly from the Omicron virus variant. Nonetheless, like other public health measures, the Biden administration’s armed forces vaccine mandate has become a target of conservative anger. On air on Monday, after a brief discussion of reports of a senior Vatican official also testing positive, Ingraham said: “We certainly hope they’re all healthy and fine. But stop pushing your mandates.” Amid widespread criticism, Kim Masters, an editor-at-large for the Hollywood Reporter, said Ingraham was “absolutely disgusting and so are [Fox Corporation chairman and chief executive] Rupert and Lachlan Murdoch for giving her a platform”. “These monsters are merchants of death,” Masters wrote. James Martin, a Jesuit priest and editor-at-large of America Magazine, said: “Laura Ingraham is often described as someone in favor of ‘Christian values’. “But the last time I checked, we’re supposed to love our enemies, not celebrate when they get sick. Jesus had compassion for the sick; he didn’t laugh at them. Not sure when hate become a Christian value.” Others pointed to Fox News’ own strict vaccination requirements for staff. Ingraham also made news on Tuesday with an interview with Northern Virginia magazine in which she said she was not yet ready to back Trump for president again. Asked about online criticism, she said she did not read it, adding: “I’m in a job where controversy is just part of the daily routine.”A Nazi-era law banning doctors from giving women information about abortions is to be scrapped by Germany’s new government in a decision welcomed by activists who have long argued that it has hampered women’s ability to make informed choices. The justice minister, Marco Buschmann, said that he will ditch Paragraph 219a from the penal code after almost 90 years, meaning that doctors will no longer have to fear prosecution if they provide information about the procedure. The law forbids “advertising for pregnancy termination” and in recent years has led to a concerted campaign by rightwing groups against doctors who post factual details relating to the procedure on their websites. The most high profile case involved Kristina Hänel, a GP who lost an appeal against a €6000 penalty she received in 2017 for offering abortion advice to her patients. On Tuesday she welcomed the announcement saying she was “joyful and grateful” that the law had been scrapped, adding that it “hung like Damocles sword” over doctors who lived in fear of prosecution even by just discussing options with their patients. Buschmann, of the pro-business Free Democratic party (FDP), said it made no sense that information about abortion was available freely on the internet, “but that precisely those people who are qualified in this regard, are not allowed to provide the information”. He sought to appease anti-abortion groups who have argued that the abolition of Paragraph 219a will encourage more terminations. Doctors, he said, would be restricted to giving factual information. “The situation for the affected woman is difficult enough,” Buschmann said. “We don’t want to make it even more difficult.” The law change was included in the coalition contract between the Social Democrats, Greens and the FDP which states: “the option to terminate a pregnancy at no cost is part of a reliable health care system”. Abortions are technically illegal in Germany, but they are allowed under certain circumstances and must be carried out within the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. The woman is also required to receive counselling and the doctor must check that this has been carried out. An abortion is not considered a punishable offence if the pregnant woman’s life is in danger or the pregnancy might lead to severe physical or psychological impairment. Hospitals run or supported by the Catholic church do not offer abortions. Buschmann said that a commission would be set up to consider other aspects of reproductive medicine which could be improved, including better support for couples who were having difficulties getting pregnant. Among the opponents of the law change is the opposition conservative Christian Democratic Union. CDU MP Elisabeth Winkelmeier-Becker disputed the argument that women faced a barrier when it came to receiving proper information about termination procedures and who provides them. “We’re talking about the mother’s right to self-determination, as well as about the life of the unborn child,” she told the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. Paragraph 219a was enacted in May 1933, at the start of the Nazi dictatorship, when it was introduced in order to “protect the German nation”. The regime equated abortion with treason. But the campaign to have it repealed did not start properly until after German reunification in 1990.For centuries the citizens of Wales have proudly marked St David’s Day with parades, concerts, flag-waving and the wearing of daffodils. But this year the feast of their patron saint will be celebrated with particular gusto by many, after Gwynedd council bosses defied ministers in London and voted to give up to 5,000 of its workers an extra day off. While Scotland and Northern Ireland designate a bank holiday to celebrating their patron saints, Wales does not, which has long been a source of discontent. On Tuesday, the council cabinet of Gwynedd, in the north-west of Wales, voted to shut its buildings and wind down its services on 1 March to give as many people as possible the day off. Cabinet members were scathing of the refusal by the UK government’s Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, which has responsibility for bank holidays in Wales as well as England, to back the plans on the grounds a day off would disrupt business. Councillors accused Westminster of treating Welsh people as children, or as the empire’s last colony, and said they were fed up with going “like Oliver Twist” to London to ask for concessions. They complained it was not fair that an extra bank holiday had been granted to mark the Queen’s platinum jubilee but Wales was not allowed to celebrate its patron saint. The leader of the Plaid Cymru-controlled council, Dyfrig Siencyn, said it was “drawing a line in the sand” and hoped other councils would follow its example. “It’s really offensive and insulting; our masters in London are treating us as little children who cannot make decisions themselves,” he said. “I think it’s another example of how this government is treating us here in Wales. What do we expect from such a government that sees us as the last colony the empire has?” Another councillor, Nia Jeffreys, said: “The principle behind it is the importance of St David’s Day for us as a nation, how close it is to our hearts. It’s embarrassing that they can give an extra day off willy nilly for the Queen’s jubilee but we can’t decide for ourselves what day we have off.” Teachers will not get the holiday because their conditions are negotiated centrally. But staff such as social workers, refuse collectors, librarians and cleaners will have a paid holiday, costing the council about £200,000. Dilwyn Morgan, a councillor, said: “Let us decide what we want to do with St David’s Day. The days of going to a foreign government like Oliver Twist with our empty bowl asking: ‘Please can we have more?’ – those days need to come to an end very soon.” For councillor Craig ab Iago, the issue was a metaphor for Wales’s relationship with London. “This matter is important to us as a nation,” he said. “It’s a clear part of our culture, history and identity and we want to celebrate it.” He said London’s attitude was “go back to your cage, boys and shut up”, adding: “We deserve better than this; our history is as important as theirs.” A Welsh government spokesperson said: “We’ve repeatedly asked the UK government for the Senedd to have the powers to make St David’s Day a bank holiday, and it’s disappointing to see these requests continue to be refused.”If you thought future generations would remember Daniel Radcliffe for Harry Potter, then think again. According to “Weird Al” Yankovic, a forthcoming biopic starring Radcliffe as the cult hero behind comical spoof versions of classic songs will alter the course of the actor’s career. Radcliffe was confirmed to star in Weird: The Al Yankovic Story on Tuesday. The film will follow the life and career of the five-time Grammy award-winning musician, whose early hits included Eat It (a parody of Michael Jackson’s Beat It), Amish Paradise (Coolio’s Gangsta’s Paradise) and Like a Surgeon (Madonna’s Like a Virgin). “When my last movie UHF came out in 1989, I made a solemn vow to my fans that I would release a major motion picture every 33 years, like clockwork,” the 62-year-old said. “I’m very happy to say we’re on schedule. “And I am absolutely thrilled that Daniel Radcliffe will be portraying me in the film. I have no doubt whatsoever that this is the role future generations will remember him for.” The biopic will air on the streaming service Roku. It is written by Yankovic and Eric Appel, and produced by Will Ferrell and Adam McKay’s company, Funny Or Die. Production is scheduled to begin in Los Angeles in early February. “When Weird Al first sat me down against my will and told me his life story, I didn’t believe any of it, but I knew that we had to make a movie about it,” Appel said. Yankovic, who has recorded more than 150 parodies and original songs, is the biggest-selling comedy recording artist of all time. His 2014 release Mandatory Fun was the first comedy album in history to debut at No 1 on the US music chart Billboard’s Top 200. “There clearly aren’t enough biopic movies about famous musicians and we were excited to shine a light on the incredibly true, unexaggerated story of Weird Al,” said Colin Davis, Roku’s head of original scripted programming. Radcliffe, 32, recently took part in HBO’s Harry Potter reunion, Return to Hogwarts, to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the film franchise. His other recent projects included TV series Miracle Workers and Australian prison film Escape from Pretoria. He will also star alongside Sandra Bullock, Channing Tatum and Brad Pitt in The Lost City, due to land in cinemas in March.Chocoholics went nuts for nuts this Christmas and avoided novelty chocolates, according to the boss of Hotel Chocolat. Hazelnuts, pistachios, peanut butter and pecan-based chocolates were hugely popular over the festive period. Shoppers also traded up to bigger boxes of chocolates as they were able to get together with family. In contrast, novelty chocolates such as gingerbread men and Santas were less popular. A quarter of Hotel Chocolat’s range now includes nuts. Angus Thirlwell, the firm’s CEO and co-founder, said: “It was a slightly unusual phenomena but nuts had their day in the sun. I think it was a combination of being seen as healthy but also authentic.” He said shoppers were looking for “real ingredients” and trying to buy foods that would have less impact on the planet. The company has responded to demand with recipes such as maple and pecan drinking chocolate, a raspberry- and pecan-filled chocolate and a vegan creamy-tasting chocolate made with hazelnuts. Hazelnut is the bestselling nutty addition to chocolates in the UK, while in Japan it is pistachio. Hotel Chocolat’s sales surged 37% in the three months to 26 December and 63% on pre-pandemic levels. Thirlwell said families had decided to “go for it” in celebrating, leading to an increase in ordering online gifts and treats for large gatherings. The company saw strong growth in the US and Japan as well as the UK. Its Velvetiser hot chocolate machine, alongside linked products, was a “star performer”, encouraging shoppers to take out subscription services for supplies. Thirlwell said Hotel Chocolat had been forced to put up prices on some chocolate products before Christmas but believed it would not have to increase them again this year. He said cost rises on ingredients, shipping and wages could be offset by efficiencies generated by the group’s increase in sales.A replica of the entrance gate to the Dachau Nazi concentration camp is to be recreated over three days in Leeds for an art project asking questions about what memorials are for and who has the right to make them. Dachau was constructed a few miles from Munich in 1933. During the war it became a death camp where more than 41,000 people were murdered before US troops liberated it on 29 April 1945. Its iron gate bearing the words “Arbeit macht frei” (work will set you free) was stolen in 2014, which led to a local blacksmith making an exact replica. The artist Rachel Mars, who has learned to weld, will be making a replica of that replica when she arrives in Leeds in March. Visitors to the project will enter a big empty warehouse space and be given a welding helmet to watch Mars construct the gate as accurately as she can. Mars’ grandparents arrived in Britain in August 1939. She grew up hearing stories from her grandmother. “I’ve been thinking about sites where traumatic historical things happen for a long time … perhaps ever,” she said. As a Jew, she said, there was always the decision on whether to visit Holocaust history sites. “Are you going to do the Auschwitz tour? I’ve decided not to because I sort of feel it’s at my dinner table and breakfast table so I don’t need to go, but it’s an ongoing question.” A number of things set Mars off on the Dachau gate project, including David Cameron’s announcement of a UK Holocaust memorial in 2016, at the same time his government was embroiled in a controversy about allowing child refugees into the country. “I do have questions about a nationally commissioned memorial,” said Mars. “What that means for a country to take on the narrative and shape it themselves? “I think there is a spin that the UK does on its Holocaust past, that it is only the good guy. In some ways they are the good guy – my grandparents ended up here. But the reasons we have the Kindertransport is because they weren’t allowing the adults in. “I have questions about how much this memorial will take responsibility for the UK’s ongoing fuck-up with regards to letting immigrants in.” Mars said the theft of the gate, which turned up in Bergen, Norway two years later, raised questions about the market that exists for Holocaust memorabilia. “How much memory is trapped in these kind of objects?” All of these questions will be addressed in Mars’ performance piece, titled Forge, taking place in a new experimental space in Leeds called Testbed, described as 10,000 sq ft (930 sq metres) of “blank canvas” for artists. Learning to weld had been a pleasurable experience, she said. “Welding is quite meditative. It is really peaceful. The thing it’s most similar to what I’ve done before is archery. It takes a lot of preparation for tiny moments of work. It’s incredibly focused, you can’t think about anything else.” Mars said it was easy to weld badly, which increased the pressure on her. “I want to do it as well as I can but I’m not a professional so I expect it will be slightly wonky and that is interesting to me. It can only be as good as I can do it.” Forge has been commissioned as part of the Leeds international performance festival, Transform. Once the gate is made, Mars plans to grind down the weld and make the component parts into a gate at future performances. “For me that says something about the act of repeating memory.” Further down the line she hopes to melt it down and make the gate into something useful. “That’s the horizon plan,” she said. “Potentially spoons.” • Forge, part of Leeds’s Transform festival, takes place 31 March-2 April.When Dr Prit Buttar, a retired GP, decided to break social distancing rules and offer his embrace to a bereaved woman, it was a gesture of core humanity. “Everybody on the team would have done exactly the same, Covid or no Covid,” he said from his study near Kirkcudbright. He did not envisage, a year on, that his recollection of that moment would inspire a cathartic outpouring of similar memories from people across the UK, or that he would become a reluctant – though passionate – advocate for the fury and dismay of ordinary people at the boozy rule-breaking in the seat of power. “So much for coming up to Scotland for a quiet retirement,” he said. Last Friday, Buttar – “flabbergasted and angered and amazed” by the ongoing revelations of Downing Street parties – decided to share on Twitter his recollection of this particular patient who had lodged in his memory. Buttar, a military historian and former British Army surgeon, spent his working life near Oxford before retiring to Dumfries and Galloway in 2016 with his Scottish wife. He usually tweets about wars gone by or his elderly golden retriever, and had waited for a few days after drafting the tweets. “I was just really stunned by the response,” he said. Buttar offered the hug when he was volunteering at a vaccination centre last spring. In that thread, he describes how a woman in her late 60s had apologised profusely for missing her initial appointment two days earlier. She explained that her husband had died of cancer the previous week. Her only son lived in England and, because his wife had just been diagnosed with Covid, he had been unable to travel. The couple had moved to Scotland from England on the eve of the pandemic, and had had no opportunity to make local friends during lockdown. She had dealt with his death and funeral entirely alone. “So I decided to break the rules about social distancing. I leaned forward in my chair and put my arms around her. She clung to me and wept, and sobbed into my shoulder, ‘This is the first time anyone’s embraced me since he died.’” Buttar’s thread has been read by tens of thousands of people and generated hundreds of similarly heart-wrenching examples of momentary rule-bending out of love or compassion: a nurse who admits suggesting to a family they remove their gloves to hold their dying mother’s hand; the son who raced over to his parents’ home after his father collapsed, only to be chastised by police; the stranger who offered a lift to an injured elderly man. As one respondent observed, none of them referred to after-work drinks because the weather was sunny. “There are so many people with tragic stories of their own and how they had done just the little gestures that make life a bit more bearable,” Butter said. “And then there are the many, many people who had not broken the rules. They had to say goodbye to loved ones through windows or across iPads. And now how angry they were, when they learned of how casually other people had disregarded the rules”. The thread was categorically not a criticism of lockdown, he added. “The intention was absolutely to highlight the difference between experiences of ordinary people and the conduct of those in leadership.” On the prime minister’s conduct, Buttar was definitive: “In my working life, had I shown errors of judgment that were remotely close to this the General Medical Council would have taken away my licence to practise.” The anticipated Gray inquiry was simply “an attempt to kick the can down the road”, he said. “What we already know is sufficiently damning … just from the prime minister’s statement, the level of poor judgment that was shown is already bad enough to require resignation.” Buttar, who served on the GP’s committee of the British Medical Association, also raised the impact of the Downing Street revelations on colleagues still working on the frontline, particularly in intensive care. “Many old friends are either close to the edge, or actually far beyond the edge. For them to see these emails in Whitehall of ‘We’ve had a jolly hard week, so let’s go for a party in the garden’ … can you imagine as to people’s morale?” Comments were still being left under the thread, he said. “There is a huge need for people to tell their stories and to open up about what these brutal days meant to them.”One of the earliest contemporary broadside editions of the Declaration of Independence is to go on sale later this year as part of an auction of the private library of William S Reese, the most prominent antiquarian book dealer of his generation. The collection of “Bill” Reese, including printed works, historic prints, fine art and colour-plate books, will be among the most valuable sales of printed Americana in over 50 years, Christie’s said, giving it a “conservative” pre-sale estimate of $12m-$18m. The edition of the Declaration of Independence is likely the first edition printed in New England, and matches almost exactly the typesetting used for the edition printed in the 16 July 1776 issue of the American Gazette. Only six copies are recorded extant, with four housed in institutions including Georgetown University, Harvard University, the Massachusetts Historical Society and the Peabody Essex Museum. It is estimated to sell for between $1m and $1.5m. Christina Geiger, head of the books and manuscripts department at Christie’s New York, said seeing Reese’s private library for the first time “was one of the most thrilling experiences of my life”. She added: “The books and artwork so clearly embody Bill’s passion for history, evidenced in both written and visual culture. The library was a special place of both sanctuary and adventure, of intellectual rigour and humour, of grandeur and approachability – all these elements held in exquisite balance with exceptional taste.” Born in 1955, Reese was a seminal figure in antiquarian Americana with a keen interest in natural history, government and politics, travel and literature. He founded the William Reese Company of New Haven, Connecticut, in 1979, and over the next 40 years, the company became the leader in the Americana market. The antiquarian books firm was situated adjacent to the Yale University campus and housed more than 18,000 items. Reese also worked closely with Yale’s Beinecke Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library to shape its Americana collections. In 1998, he established the Reese Fellowship in the Print Culture of the Americas, which has offered research grants to more than 150 scholars. Other highlights from the auction include a copy of Paul Revere’s 1770 engraving of the Boston Massacre (estimated at $250,000 to $300,000), a first edition of John Smith’s “General History of Virginia, New England and the Summer Isles” from 1624 ($300,000 to $500,000), and rare editions of John James Audubon and Herman Melville. A series of themed live and online auctions will be held in New York beginning on 25 May, and highlights from the collection will be unveiled to the public at an exhibition that opened on Thursday and runs until 28 January, marking the first time in over 30 years that any portion of the current collection has been publicly exhibited. • The headline of this article was changed on 18 January 2022. The original incorrectly said the item was the earliest edition of the Declaration of Independence. It is not, but it is probably the first edition printed in New England.The fashion designer and businessman Nino Cerruti was first and last a native of the city of Biella in northern Italy, where alpine-pastured sheep, and mountain water and its millwheel powers, had been supplying an industry in fine wool textiles for a millennium. He was bred to the spinning and loom trades – “I was born in a manger,” he said, “only instead of straw, there was wool” – and he returned to those trades, and Biella, for his last years. In between, Cerruti, who has died aged 91, became an international fashion name, whose relaxed suits made star appearances in more than 100 Hollywood movies, by applying his profound knowledge of the properties of good wool and other natural fibres to a modern masculine tailoring that did not depend for shape on an invisible interior armature of canvas, padding and lining. At 20, he had suddenly inherited the family mill in Biella, founded in 1881 by his grandfather Antonio (the Cerrutis had been in wool since the 18th century), and set about improving its machinery while respecting the woolly product, and used that as raw material for what developed into “deconstructed” garments, which are in fact very constructed, being subtly girdered by the cut and seaming of their parts. To see his soft tailoring in hard action, look at the Cerruti-jacketed shoulders and torsos of Don Johnson and Philip Michael Thomas in the 1980s television series Miami Vice, how the interplay of their muscles directly animates the fabric. The journalist Suzy Menkes wrote that in fashion BC means Before Cerruti, an antique era of suits like plate armour. Cerruti was the first of the Italian industrial family firm heads to put together in the 50s ancient craft techniques and new, quality, factory production – the beginning of “Made in Italy” ready-to-wear, now a fashion standard. He originally went into the Lanificio Fratelli Cerruti mill in Biella for a month during a long school holiday when he was 10, ordered there by his father, Silvio, and in their teens he and his two younger brothers watched as Silvio was put in charge locally of fairly distributing the limited postwar fibre supplies, and reviving production. Nino wanted to be a writer, but Silvio died in 1951, and, as eldest, he dropped out of his philosophy degree and took over, continuing his father’s innovations, particularly in lightweight fabrics. Cerruti realised his firm could be its own best customer if it made clothes from its cloth. At first he collaborated with tailors to show the cloth’s potential; to project a stylish image across Italy, he commissioned four short plays from famous writers, put on in Milan, Turin, Rome and far south in Naples, and designed the costumes himself. In 1957, he entered the ready-to-wear market that was supplementing, and would supplant, tailor-made menswear, with the launch of his first label, Hitman, in Milan, adding the “designer” Flying Cross brand in 1962. Cerruti recruited talented disciples who could work within his ever-more-easy manner, notably Giorgio Armani from 1964 to 1970, whom the world then credited with Cerruti’s advances in deconstruction and male textiles for female fashion. Cerruti opened a boutique on the Place de la Madeleine in Paris in 1967, afterwards showing men’s, then also women’s, collections during Paris fashion week, rather than in Milan; he later moved company headquarters to Paris, though textile and garment production stayed in Italy. Movie people had discovered Hitman and Flying Cross in the early 60s when Hollywood filmed in Rome’s Cinecittà Studios, or employed Italian crews to shoot epics in Spain. Male stars liked his casual clothes, which softened further in the 70s when he added jersey fabrics and knitwear. (A Cerruti knit endures: he wore a signature yellow sweater to his shows for more than 30 years, getting through just three, with slight style revisions.) What stars wore off-screen they requested for their on-screen wardrobes, including Richard Gere in Pretty Woman (1990), Harrison Ford in Clear and Present Danger (1994), Bruce Willis in Hudson Hawk (1991), Clint Eastwood in In the Line of Fire (1993), and Cerruti’s “muse” Kathleen Turner as private eye VI Warshawski (1991). A Cerruti suit’s drape could conceal any calibre of handgun with a few per cent of stretch Lycra added to the fibre mix. Because Cerruti commanded his Italian manufacturing base all the way to its primary imports of Australian wool and Mongolian cashmere, he was less dependent than most designers on couture catwalk publicity to promote perfume sales and other revenue-generators. The business diversified – jeans, some accessories, reshapings for markets in Asia – but unlike many French houses it was never absorbed into a luxury conglomerate company in exchange for promised infusions of capital. Not until 2000 did Cerruti decide that the company cashflow provided insufficient capital for growth, and then he took six months to audition a partner firm, selling 51% to the Italian industrial company Fin.part. It ended in tears within a year, after Fin.part, which had taken over full control, forced Cerruti, then aged 71, out for “irreconcilable differences”: Cerruti said there was “perpetual conflict”. Fin.part went bankrupt in 2005, the Cerruti name was sold on to successive owners, none faring well. Cerruti immediately returned to Biella to work at, and for, his mill and the city, to keep business and traditions viable despite extreme globalisation in textile production. He sold part of the mill shares in 2016 to the Brandamour company in the hope that their young entrepreneurs would assure its future. Cerruti had two children, Julian, who worked with him as an assistant in the fashion business, and Silvia, from a marriage that ended in divorce. He had been in a partnership with Sibylla Jahr since the 90s. • Nino Cerruti, fashion designer and textile industrialist, born 25 September 1930; died 15 January 2022For anyone who has been closely following ministerial media rounds this week, the same slightly anomalous-sounding word has cropped up time and again in discussions of Boris Johnson’s alleged lockdown-flouting social activities: “implicitly”. The same word has also been used by Johnson’s official spokesperson and, most crucially, the prime minister himself when apologising in the Commons for attending a drinks event in the No 10 garden on 20 May 2020: “I believed implicitly that this was a work event.” What’s going on? The understanding is that Downing Street – most likely with legal advice – has imposed strict messaging on how ministers discuss the subject, in the hope Johnson can face the findings of a report into the various parties without it being proved that he lied. Key to this is the somewhat thin and slippery political plank Johnson is attempting to walk along in accepting he went to the 20 May event but that he also did not realise it was a party – he popped into what is also his own private back garden, chatted to colleagues and returned inside. The use of “implicitly” ties into this narrative of a hard-working prime minister used to seeing colleagues regularly meet outside for work in the May sunshine and automatically assuming this post-6pm gathering, even with bring-your-own-booze drinks, must be the same thing. Legal observers like barrister and Covid rules expert Adam Wagner have noted that other elements of Johnson’s apology and other No 10 language have been similarly cautious, such as the idea it “technically” fell within then-guidance, and that he only realised “with retrospect” that the event was a bad idea. Amid speculation that dozens of Tory MPs have lost faith in Johnson, all this linguistic manoeuvring might be too late to keep him in Downing Street, but it could protect him in the event of something else – a future police investigation.Time to wrap up... here are today’s main stories: Goodnight. GW Shares in Goldman Sachs have tumbled by 7% this morning, after net profits were hit by a jump in pay and bonus payments to its bankers. Wealth correspondent Rupert Neate explains: Goldman Sachs paid its 43,900 bankers more than $17bn (£12.5bn) last year, a 33% increase on 2020 as the investment bank celebrated a more than doubling of pre-tax profits to $27bn thanks to frenzied dealmaking on both sides of the Atlantic. The pay and bonuses hike works out at about $403,000 for each employee on average, up from about $328,000 a year ago. It is the most the bank has paid out in wages and bonuses since 2007 at the height of the banking boom leading up to the financial crisis. Goldman’s bankers will find out exactly how much they will personally collect for 2021 on Wednesday when the firm reveals annual bonuses on so-called “comp day”. About 400 leading bosses – or the top 1% of the firm – are expected to receive a special one-off pandemic bonus in recognition of the bank’s success during the coronavirus crisis. The bonuses for this elite group are expected to range from the low single digit million to tens of millions of dollars, according to Bloomberg sources. Goldman declined to comment. Stocks have closed lower in London, as anxiety over looming US interest rate rises dampen the mood. The FTSE 100 index closed 48 points lower at 7563.5 points, 0.6% down on Monday’s two-year high. Industrial equipment hire firm Ashtead was the top faller, down 5%, followed online home sale portal Rightmove (-4.6%). Unilever fell another 4%, with ratings agency Fitch warning that its ambitions to buy GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer health assets would put its ‘A’ credit rating at risk because of the huge debt it would have to swallow. European markets had a weak day too, with Germany’s DAX dropping 1%. Five payment companies including Mastercard have been fined a total of more than £33m for operating illegal cartels when providing prepaid cards for local authorities to distribute to vulnerable people. The companies were found by the Payment Systems Regulator to have broken competition law by agreeing not to compete with each other for the authorities’ custom. The regulator said that by acting in this way, the providers may have denied the councils access to cheaper products, and vulnerable people may have missed out on better quality services. The cards in question were used to distribute welfare payments to vulnerable members of society, such as the homeless, victims of domestic violence and asylum seekers. Back in the UK, yet another energy firm has collapsed. The owner of Bristol Energy has gone bust weeks after the struggling council-owned supplier assured its customers that the business was stable despite record-high gas market prices. The energy regulator, Ofgem, will appoint a new supplier to take on the 176,000 households affected by the collapse of its parent company, Together Energy, which is part-owned by Warrington borough council. The energy company was forced to deny press reports earlier this year that it was on the brink of calling in administrators and told customers that the company was “stable” and operating on a “business as usual” basis. Bristol Energy said it was “saddened” to announce its exit from the UK’s energy market but it was “untenable for us to continue”. It also denied press reports that suggested it had not bought enough gas and electricity to meet its customers’ needs. Together’s collapse makes it the 27th energy supplier to go bust since gas market prices began a steep ascent to record highs in August last year, leaving more than 2m households in need of a new supplier. Microsoft is acquiring Activision Blizzard in an attempt to dominate the metaverse, says Rupantar Guha, Principal Analyst at GlobalData’s Thematic Team: “Taking part in what is the biggest tech merger &amp; acquisition (M&amp;A) ever reflects Microsoft’s desire to dominate the metaverse. The company is focused on acquiring both Activision’s communities and content—two essential parameters for success in the metaverse. Activision’s popular games franchises Call of Duty and Overwatch, and the communities it commands, will position Microsoft as a leader in the metaverse. “Microsoft is formidable competition for Meta, Epic Games, Tencent, and Roblox, all of which are scrambling for dominance in this emerging theme. While the metaverse is still largely conceptual, Microsoft’s strength in underlying themes such as artificial intelligence (AI), augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and cloud computing give it a leadership position in this theme. Activision’s games will help Microsoft create metaverse experiences and provide an established global consumer base to test and market them. Factories in the New York region have reported that business conditions worsened sharply this month, as the omicron virus and ongoing supply-chain bottlenecks hit the sector. The Empire State survey of business conditions tumbled to -0. 7 in January, a fall of 32.6 points to a reading of -0.7 this month. This was the first negative reading since June 2020 - anything below zero shows New York’s manufacturing sector contracted. This is an early signal of the damage that Omicron has caused to the US economy. The deal kicks off the metaverse ‘arms race’, says David Wagner, equity analyst and Portfolio Manager at Aptus Capital Advisors (via Reuters): “This is a significant deal for the consumer side of the business and more importantly, Microsoft acquiring Activision really starts the metaverse arms race,” “We believe the deal will get done,” Wagner said, but cautioned: “This will get a lot of looks from a regulatory standpoint.” Microsoft is to pay almost $70bn to buy Activision Blizzard, the publisher of mega franchises including Call of Duty, World of Warcraft and Candy Crush, in the biggest ever takeover in the tech and gaming sectors. Microsoft said that the $68.7bn (£50.6bn) all-cash deal – which dwarfs its previous biggest, the $26bn takeover of LinkedIn in 2016 – will “provide the building blocks for the metaverse”. It is the biggest deal in tech history, eclipsing the $67bn paid by Dell to buy the digital storage giant EMC in 2015. The deal will see the Xbox maker become the world’s third-biggest gaming company by revenue behind China’s Tencent and Japan’s Sony, maker of PlayStation games consoles. “Gaming is the most dynamic and exciting category in entertainment across all platforms today and will play a key role in the development of metaverse platforms,” said Satya Nadella, the chairman and chief executive of Microsoft. “We’re investing deeply in world-class content, community and the cloud to usher in a new era of gaming that puts players and creators first and make gaming safe, inclusive and accessible to all.” The deal comes after a tumultuous time for Activision Blizzard, which has 10,000 staff globally a market value of about $50bn and three $1bn gaming franchises, which has been affected by a string of allegations of sexual misconduct and discrimination involving senior executives. More here: Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, agrees that the deal will face antitrust scrutiny: Shares in Activision Blizzard have jumped nearly 30% after Microsoft announced plans to acquire the Call of Duty maker for almost $70bn in an all-cash deal. This is the largest M&amp;A deal in tech history and Microsoft’s biggest deal, sending a strong signal about Microsoft’s ambitions in gaming and the metaverse. The announcement is an exciting development for Activision Blizzard investors who have faced a 40% slump in its share price between February’s peak and Friday’s close on the back of a series of controversies surrounding the company’s CEO and management team. While shares in Activision have staged an impressive rally today, the stock has not yet rallied to the offer price. There are undoubtedly set to be antitrust concerns, which could scupper the deal given the sheer size of the transaction and worries that Microsoft is already too big to fail. Plus rising yields are pressurising the wider tech sector in today’s session with Tesla, Meta and Amazon all nursing sharp losses and with the Nasdaq deep in the red.” Sophie Lund-Yates, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says Microsoft has ‘come out swinging’ with a rather generous $68.7bn all-cash deal to buy Activision Blizzard: “Activision Blizzard holds some of the most valuable IP in the world thanks to the likes of Call of Duty and a host of other games with dogmatically loyal customers. However, today’s news isn’t just about people liking gaming, we’ve known that for a long time. It says a lot more about how gaming is viewed as an integral part of our future social and digital lives. The mushrooming popularity of this hobby is why Microsoft has delved into its very well-lined pockets and splashed out on the gaming production giant. From an outside perspective, the logic is fairly flawless. Microsoft is already the go-to provider of must-have software, so tacking on a gaming arm is a stroke of genius from a cross-selling potential standpoint. The likes of Netflix have already said they’d like to foray into gaming themselves, but Microsoft has come out swinging with today’s rather generous offer, which would make Microsoft the third largest gaming company in the world. Execution risk is still a factor though. This still marks some new territories for Microsoft and is hardly a small-fry deal, so the time to pop champagne will be when the deal has first been fully approved, and second, showed that Microsoft’s model can stomach this new gaming hoard.” Global gaming stocks are rallying after Microsoft announced its near $69bn takeover deal for Activision Blizzard. Electronics Arts have jumped 6%, with Roblox 3% higher and France’s Ubisoft surging 10%. The recent selloff in their shares and rising interest in gaming and the metaverse from megacaps such as Meta Platforms Inc. has raised expectations for more deals in the space, says Bloomberg: Shares in Activision Blizzard have jumped 30% at the start of trading in New York. They’ve risen to over $85, up from $65, but below the $95/share which Microsoft plans to pay: There is already talk that antitrust regulators could take a close look at the deal, as it could lead to Microsoft restricting some Activision Blizzard games from running on other platforms. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets, says: With annual revenues of just over $8bn the deal gives Microsoft, which has annual revenues of $175bn, the ability to oversee and drive the content across its platforms, not only PC games but gaming consoles as well, as it looks to diversify its revenue stream. There is a worry that the deal could raise antitrust concerns if Microsoft decides to restrict new content to its own platform, and not allow games on its nearest competition, which is Sony’s PlayStation, and the PS5? While some have argued that this would be against its own interests and curtail its revenue stream, this wouldn’t be unusual given how Microsoft has got itself into trouble by bundling hardware and software previously. The way gaming has been going, more and more content is going online, and consoles are becoming more and more expensive. With Microsoft’s deeper pockets that will inevitably mean more investment in faster and more realistic graphics, as well as VR, which in turn will deliver richer content. Freetrade’s equity analyst Paul Allison says Microsoft’s planned $68bn acquisition of Activision Blizzard could help it expand into augmented reality and virtual reality. While Activision’s $2bn in profit is less than 5% of Microsoft’s, the strategic implications carry more weight. Microsoft has viewed gaming as being at the forefront of its AR and VR ambitions for a while, and this deal would reinforce that view. The move could be well timed given Activision is struggling to recover from well publicised cultural problems. But investors have become comfortable with Microsoft’s impressive growth being driven by enterprise spending on its cloud and SaaS solutions. Phil Spencer, CEO of Microsoft Gaming, says in a blog post: Upon close, we will offer as many Activision Blizzard games as we can within Xbox Game Pass and PC Game Pass, both new titles and games from Activision Blizzard’s incredible catalog. We also announced today that Game Pass now has more than 25 million subscribers. As always, we look forward to continuing to add more value and more great games to Game Pass. Spencer adds that Microsoft will extend its “culture of proactive inclusion” to Activision Blizzard, in a clear reference to the allegations of sexual misconduct and workplace discrimination at the games developer. We also believe that creative success and autonomy go hand-in-hand with treating every person with dignity and respect. We hold all teams, and all leaders, to this commitment. We’re looking forward to extending our culture of proactive inclusion to the great teams across Activision Blizzard. Just in: Microsoft is buying computer games developer Activision Blizzard in a $68.7bn blockbuster deal. Microsoft has announced it will pay $95 per share in cash for Activision Blizzard, the firm behind “Call of Duty”, a 45% premium, in the software giant’s biggest ever acquisition. Microsoft says the deal will make it the world’s third-largest gaming company by revenue, behind Tencent and Sony. It will accelerate the growth of its gaming business across mobile, PC, console and the cloud -- and provide “building blocks for the metaverse”, it says. The planned acquisition will give Microsoft popular gaming franchises including “Warcraft,” “Diablo,” “Overwatch,” “Call of Duty” and “Candy Crush,” and global eSports activities through Major League Gaming. Satya Nadella, chairman and CEO of Microsoft, explains: “Gaming is the most dynamic and exciting category in entertainment across all platforms today and will play a key role in the development of metaverse platforms. “We’re investing deeply in world-class content, community and the cloud to usher in a new era of gaming that puts players and creators first and makes gaming safe, inclusive and accessible to all.” Activision Blizzard has faced mounting pressure over its response to sexual misconduct allegations at the firm, including sexual harassment, sexual assault and gender discrimination. Last November, employees staged a walkout to protest about the company’s handling of these allegations, which are being investigated by US regulators, and shareholders called on CEO Bobby Kotick to resign. Yesterday, Activision Blizzard said it has fired or pushed out more than three dozen employees and disciplined another 40 since July to address allegations of sexual harassment and other misconduct at the videogame company. Microsoft says today that Kotick will continue to serve as CEO of Activision Blizzard, and he and his team will “maintain their focus on driving efforts to further strengthen the company’s culture and accelerate business growth”. Once the deal closes, the Activision Blizzard business will report to Phil Spencer, CEO, Microsoft Gaming. The European Union is proposing to extend permission for banks in the bloc to continue using clearing houses in London for a further three years from June, its financial services chief says. Mairead McGuinness had already said last year that such permission, known as equivalence, would be extended from June 2022, when it is due to expire. A spokesperson for McGuinness said in a statement. “We are now consulting member states on this draft equivalence decision, which will take the form of an implementing act. We envisage to propose an extension of the equivalence decision of 3 years - until end June 2025,” [thanks to Reuters] Clearing houses are a vital part of the financial sector’s ‘plumbing’. They also allow users to “net their positions” by concentrating them in one place. And by sitting between deals, clearing houses can stop one default creating dangerous shockwaves through the market. The post-Brexit “carry-over deal” currently allows banks from the bloc to access clearing houses in the City as before, meaning the €80trn euro clearing market continues to operate. The Commission has been pushing for this business to shift back to the EU, where it would fall within its regulatory oversight. But as the City of London currently offers such deep liquidity pools, clearing operations has been slow to move. Another clampdown: The UK’s regulator is tightening up European firms who have been using a temporary license to operate in the UK since Brexit. The Financial Conduct Authority says it has already cancelled the temporary permissions of four firms, who, it says, failed to respond to mandatory information requests to show they had applied for a permanent licence to do business in the UK. The FCA provides a temporary permissions regime to allow European firms operating in the UK via a passport when the Brexit transition period ended, so they could keep operating temporarily while they seek full authorisation in the UK. But it warns today that firms who have no intention in applying for full authorisation, or if their authorisation application is refused, would be removed from the TPR. Sushil Kuner, financial services lawyer at law firm Gowling WLG, says European firms should heed the FCA’s warning: “The Temporary Permissions Regime was always intended to enable only those businesses wanting to formally establish in the UK to continue to operate here, pending preparation and submission of their authorisation applications. It’s therefore important for businesses to heed the reality that if they miss deadlines for submission of information to the FCA, removal from the regime and the subsequent inability in the UK is highly likely. “This is part of a wider programme of greater enforcement that the FCA is currently exerting so it will be interesting to see just how many firms are removed from the TPR.” The UK government’s plan to strengthen rules on cryptocurrency promotions has been welcomed, although experts warn that it will not protect consumers from the full risks of crypto. Bradley Rice, partner at law firm Ashurst, says the move could be “game changing.” “These changes to the UK financial promotion regime will bring about monumental changes to how firms offer, promote and market cryptoassets in the UK or to persons in the UK. This could be game changing. “There were only 25 respondents to the consultations. That’s pretty shocking given the number of firms operating in this space and the impact of this regime. “This regime will mean regulated firms are at an advantage over unregulated firms because they will be able to issue their own promotions. Unregulated firms will need to find an authorised firm willing to approve their promotions and there is a lot of focus on this sector from all angles. “I’m not sure how many firms will be offering this service, or if the FCA will let them through the new “s. 21 gateway”. If providers do offer the service, it won’t be cheap.” But Laura Suter, head of personal finance at AJ Bell says new rules will bring crypto adverts in line with other financial promotions - but warns that many people learn about cryptocurrencies from other sources: “You only have to glance through a few cryptocurrency adverts to see that many overstate the potential returns on offer and fail to clearly lay out how much risk individuals will be taking. The Advertising Standards Agency has already been banning individual crypto adverts that it deems misleading or understating the risk involved in the market, but this new move by the Government will lead to a wholesale tightening of the rules governing adverts. “However, the FCA’s own research shows that a crackdown on advertising will have a limited impact, as most people find out about cryptocurrency elsewhere and very few are encouraged to actually buy it from an advert. The regulator’s data showed that only 2% of the people it questioned were led to buy crypto from an advert when they previously hadn’t planned to, and just 5% who were thinking about buying made the leap because of an advert. Myron Jobson, personal finance campaigner at interactive investor, says the rules around crypto assets desperately needs modernising, to prevent people struggling to meet the cost of living being lured into high-risk products. “From a consumer perspective, we’ve been crying out for greater measures to prevent the scourge of misleading and downright harmful advertising of cryptocurrency. “Many cryptocurrency adverts I’ve seen tap into the FOMO (fear of missing out) culture and effectively gaslights would-be investors into thinking cryptos are a sure bet, without flagging the high-risk and highly volatile nature of the asset. “The infamous poster plastered over London’s public transport claiming ‘If you’re seeing Bitcoin on the underground, it’s time to buy’ is a case in point. Cryptocurrency is highly complex, volatile and, combined with the inherent difficulties of valuing cryptoassets reliably, places consumers at a high risk of losses. “Our research found that 45% of young adults aged between 18 and 29 are getting their first taste of investing through high-risk cryptocurrency – and an alarming number are funding this through a cocktail of credit cards, student loans, and other loans. The influence of cryptocurrency advertising cannot be understated here. They have become increasingly difficult to miss, often cropping up on social media platforms and even on public transport. “The concern is first-time investors who experienced a baptism of fire by losing money on crypto bets could be put off investing for life – which could scupper their financial goals. Israeli Prime Minister Naftali Bennett said funding for Iran could lead to “terror on steroids”, in an apparent warning against world powers easing sanctions against Tehran as they seek a new nuclear deal. “The last thing you want to do ... is pour tens of billions of dollars into this apparatus. Because what will you get? Terror on steroids,” Bennett said in a video address to the World Economic Forum’s Davos Agenda. Bennett also explained that as he runs Israel’s national Covid taskforce, he has an hour from 9am each day with all the agencies and ministries involved. That helps make decisions about Covid-19 quickly Leaders can make much quicker decisions, and in a pandemic being slow is losing. You’re better off making decisions early on and quick, and executing on them very quickly. Also, pandemics are not only about medicine or biology, they’re also about society, the economy, education, logistics. It’s a ‘cross-discipline challenge, so you can’t “silo it” and leave running the nation only to doctors, Bennett adds. The UK government has outlined plans to protect consumers from misleading claims by tightening rules over cryptocurrency adverts Following a consultation into crypto assets, the Treasury has announced it plans to introduce legislation to address “misleading cryptoasset promotions”, amid worries that they could be missold. The rules will bring crypto adverts into line with other financial advertising, ensuring they are fair and clear, it says, with new rules increasing consumer protection while “encouraging innovation”. Around 2.3 million people in the UK are now thought to own a cryptoasset, but research suggests that understanding of what crypto actually is has fallen, suggesting that some users may not fully understand what they are buying, the Treasury says. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak said: Cryptoassets can provide exciting new opportunities, offering people new ways to transact and invest – but it’s important that consumers are not being sold products with misleading claims. We are ensuring consumers are protected, while also supporting innovation of the cryptoasset market. Advertising cryptoassets will be brought within the scope of existing financial promotions legislation, by amending the UK’s Financial Promotion Order. That means crypto will face the same standards as stocks, shares, and insurance products. The advertising watchdog has alreayd clamped down on some irresponsible crypto adverts, including one which claimed “it’s time to buy” bitcoin. My colleague Rob Davies reported last week that cryptocurrency firms bombarded Londoners with a record number of adverts on public transport during 2021.... .. and that the unregulated trading and promotion of crypto assets risks creating a new generation of addicts. The number of company insolvencies in England and Wales jumped by a third compared to pre-pandemic levels last month. The latest insolvency statistics show here were 1,486 registered company insolvencies in England and Wales in December 2021. That’s 20% higher than a year ago, and 33% above the 1,120 in December 2019, before the pandemic. But it was lower than in November, when insolvencies hit 1,674, over their pre-pandemic levels for the first time. The increase was driven by a large rise in Creditors’ Voluntary Liquidations (73% higher than in December 2019), in which a company chooses to close down because it can’t satisfy its debts. Christina Fitzgerald, vice president of insolvency and restructuring trade body R3, explains: “The monthly fall in corporate insolvencies has been driven by a reduction in all forms of corporate insolvency process. However, the annual and two-yearly increase in corporate insolvencies has been driven by a rise in Creditors Voluntary Liquidations, which suggests that the economic situation is pushing many company directors to voluntarily close their businesses before that decision is made for them. “Despite the month-on-month fall in corporate insolvencies, December marked a tough end to a torrid year for many businesses. Increasing Covid cases, rising costs and falling consumer confidence hit footfall and sales, and company directors and management teams also had to work in the midst of new Covid restrictions, which will have affected day-to-day operation, customer behaviour and revenue levels. “This is especially true in sectors like retail and hospitality, who normally have their busiest periods in December, but faced an unhappy Christmas this year. Some better news. German investor sentiment has jumped this month, on hopes that the economy will pick up over the coming months as Covid-19 cases fall. The ZEW economic research institute’s economic sentiment index has risen to 51.7 from 29.9 points in December, ahead of expectations. ZEW president Achim Wambach says: “The economic outlook has improved considerably with the start of the new year. The majority of financial market experts assume that economic growth will pick up in the coming six months.” Oliver Rakau of Oxford Economics tweets: Today’s UK jobs figures are disappointing overall, says Institute for Employment Studies director Tony Wilson. They show the recovery was stalling in the run-up to the outbreak of the Omicron variant: Despite record levels of vacancies and unprecedented demand, employment is unchanged on the figures reported last month while economic inactivity, the measure of those who have left the labour market entirely, appears to be rising. This weak performance is being driven in particular by fewer older people in the labour market, especially fewer older women, and more people out of work due to long-term ill health. With nearly as many vacancies as there are unemployed people, employers are facing the tightest labour market in at least fifty years, with labour shortages now holding back our recovery. As each month passes these issues appear to be getting worse, with the recovery clearly stalling on the eve of the Omicron outbreak. So as we start the new year we need a new ‘Plan for Jobs’ that will raise participation and tackle the recruitment crisis.” He’s also written a detailed thread on these points: Pay for workers in Britain has fallen in real terms for the first time in more than a year, despite signs that employers shrugged off concerns over the Omicron coronavirus variant to continue hiring in December. Average wages, after taking account of inflation, dropped in November for the first time since July 2020 amid growing concerns over the hit to living standards this year from high inflation and surging energy bills. The Office for National Statistics said although average total earnings grew at an annual rate of 4.2% in November, the impact from soaring rates of inflation meant workers suffered a 0.9% real-terms cut in their pay packets. The official rate of inflation reached a 10-year high of 5.1% in November. The number of employees on UK company payrolls rose by 184,000 on the month to 29.5 million, an increase of 409,000 on pre-pandemic levels as the jobs market continues to recover from Covid-19. Reflecting staff shortages across the economy, the number of job vacancies rose for most industries over the three months to December to a record 1.2 million despite a slowdown in the rate of growth in recent months. Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, said: “While it’s good to see employment continuing to rise, on pay it’s the same story of a squeeze on workers. “Working people deserve a decent standard of living and a wage they can raise a family on. But instead, following the worse pay squeeze for two centuries, real pay is falling, and they now face a cost-of-living crisis.” Here’s the full story: Back in the markets, oil has hit its highest level in seven years as tensions rise in the Middle East. Brent crude, the international benchmark, rose to $88 per barrel for the first time since October 2014, which could push up fuel costs in coming weeks. US crude also hit fresh seven-year highs, amid fears of supply disruptions after Yemen’s Houthi group claimed responsibility for an apparent drone attack in Abu Dhabi that killed three people. The attack is likely to raise regional tensions as a crucial phase nears in nuclear discussions with Iran, as Martin Chulov, our Middle East correspondent, explains: The strikes, which also injured six people, left flames billowing from an oil storage site near the airport of the United Arab Emirates’ capital A separate explosion, which is also thought to have been caused by a drone, caused minor damage. Two Indian nationals and one Pakistani were killed amid the fireballs. All the wounded were reported to be lightly hurt. The Saudi-led coalition fighting Yemen’s Houthi insurgents said yesterday it had launched air strikes targeting the rebel-held capital Sanaa, following the attack against Abu Dhabi. AJ Bell investment director Russ Mould says: A rise in oil prices to a seven-year high and a continuing, though below inflation, rise in UK earnings has put the spotlight once again on inflationary pressures and a cost of living crisis. “Traders are eyeing the $100 per barrel mark for crude oil for the first time since 2014, with the perceived diminishing threat posed by Omicron to the global economy and supply constraints and disruption driving the black stuff higher. “The question now is whether OPEC will take action to address the surge in the market, or risk demand destruction if it doesn’t. Goldman Sachs expects oil prices hitting $100 per barrel in the second half of this year, citing a lower than expected hit to demand from the Omicron coronavirus variant coupled with increased supply disruptions and OPEC+ shortfalls. “This has kept the global oil market in a larger deficit than even our above consensus forecast,” Goldman said in a note dated Monday, Reuters reports. TUC General Secretary Frances O’Grady says: “While it’s good to see employment continuing to rise, on pay it’s the same story of a squeeze on workers. “Working people deserve a decent standard of living and a wage they can raise a family on. But instead, following the worse pay squeeze for two centuries, real pay is falling, and they now face a cost-of-living crisis. “We urgently need to get pay packets rising across the economy – or too many families will have to choose between paying soaring bills or putting food on the table. “Ministers must give unions more power to go into workplaces and negotiate better pay and conditions, give our public sector workers a decent pay rise, and get the minimum wage up to £10 an hour immediately.” Today’s jobs data suggest that labour demand has remained fairly strong, that supply is struggling to keep up and that the squeeze on household real wages is only just beginning, says Paul Dales of Capital Economics. The labour market appears to have tightened after the end of the furlough scheme and at the start of the Omicron wave. So even though real wages are now falling and will decline further, we still expect the Bank of England to raise interest rates from 0.25% to 0.50% on 3rd February and to 1.25% by December. The legacy of the pandemic is a rise in economic inactivity, warns the Institute of Directors. Kitty Ussher, chief economist at the Institute of Directors, flags that some people have left the jobs market because they’re not well enough to work: “The good news is that the unemployment rate is now back to within a whisker of its pre-pandemic level but the same cannot be said for the number of people actually employed. The reason for this difference is an increase in the number of people who say they are not available for work – in fact, the legacy of the pandemic appears to be this rise in economic inactivity. Today’s data shows inactivity is particularly pronounced in people over the age of 50 with, sadly, a rise in long-term sickness in this group the driving factor. “It is also now becoming clear that the Office of Budget Responsibility’s forecast that the unemployment rate would be 4.8% by the end of 2022 is way off the mark. We expect it to be running at under 4% in the not-too-distant future.” Labour MP Alison McGovern warns the struggle to fill jobs is holding back the economy: The UK economy faces a double whammy of falling real wages and labour shortages. Naomi Clayton, acting director of Policy and Research at Learning and Work Institute, has tweeted the key charts: Reuters’ David Milliken points out that the jobless rate had fallen back, close to its pre-pandemic levels - but rising inflation is eating into wages. Labour MP Barry Sheerman is also concerned that real wages fell in November: Meanwhile in the City, stocks have opened lower as investors worry that America’s central bank will hike interest rates several times this year to fight inflation. The FTSE 100 index has dropped by 59 points, or 0.8%, to 7552, away from the two-year high hit yesterday. Online estate agent portal Rightmove (-3%), UK/US plumbing and heating firm Ferguson (-2.7%) and tech-focused investment trust Scottish Mortgage (-2.6%) are the top fallers. European markets have dropped over 1%, while Wall Street is expected to open lower. Sovereign bond yields (the interest rate on government debt) is also rising, as Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, explains: “European markets have opened lower with technology underperforming amid concerns about faster tightening from the Fed and rising yields as Britain’s 10-year gilt yield hits a three-month high and Germany’s 10-year government bond yield rises to the highest since May 2019. US markets get set to reopen after Monday’s holiday with futures pointing to a softer open. The FTSE 100 is trading lower amid some profit taking after a strong start to the week, closing Monday’s session at the highest level since January 2020. BP and Shell are trading near the top of the index as surging oil prices provide a tailwind for the sector.” Today’s jobs report increases the changes that the Bank of England lifts interest rates next month, City economists say. Thomas Pugh, economist at RSM UK, explains: ‘Admittedly, Omicron pay have taken some heat out of the labour market in December. But the 184,000 rise in payrolls and 43,300 drop in the claimant count last month suggests that job creation remained robust at the end of the year. Indeed, with pay growth at 4.2%, above its pre-pandemic level of about 3%, the MPC is likely to conclude that the labour market is strong enough to absorb higher interest rates. The BoE lifted interest rates to 0.25% in December, away from the record lows set in the pandemic. James Smith, developed market economist at ING, also predicts a rate rise in February. On all the main metrics, the UK jobs market looks remarkably similar to its pre-pandemic state. The latest fall in the unemployment rate to 4.1% takes it to within a whisker of its pre-Covid level. The ending of the furlough scheme last September has been a smooth success, with no discernible increase in redundancies – a stark contrast to what happened ahead of the scheme’s original end-date in October 2020. Alongside rising headline inflation rates and growing evidence that Omicron’s impact has been modest, a February rate rise from the Bank of England looks increasingly likely. But, with a severe wage-price spiral looking unlikely, Smith predicts interest rates won’t rise as fast during 2022 as the markets expect (they are currently priced at above 1% by the end of this year). Martin Beck, chief economic advisor to the EY ITEM Club, warns that wages will probably fall further behind inflation in coming months, despite the pick-up in employment. “The latest healthy set of labour market numbers reinforced hopes that job losses arising from the end of the furlough scheme in September were offset by strong demand for workers elsewhere in the economy. Employment over the September-November period rose 60,000. Combined with a pickup in inactivity, this was enough to lower the LFS jobless rate to 4.1%, a fall of 0.4 percentage points from the previous three-month period. “Moreover, there were no signs that the economic effects from the spread of the Omicron variant held back job creation in December. PAYE data showed the number of employees rising 184,000, an improvement on November’s (downwardly revised) 162,000 increase. An adverse effect may yet appear, but with infection numbers now falling, the EY ITEM Club expects disruption from Omicron to prove short-lived. And that job vacancies in October to December reached a new record high suggests that unemployment should stay low, supporting consumer spending in the face of rising inflation and taxes. “Meanwhile, regular pay growth in the three months to November fell to 3.8% year-on-year (y/y) from 4.3% y/y in the previous month, reflecting, in part, a near unwinding of distortions from the furlough scheme and base effects. This means average pay fell in real terms, an unwelcome development which is likely to worsen over the next few months.” The UK’s cost of living crunch has just begun, and is going to get worse, warns Stephen Evans, chief executive of Learning and Work Institute: “The year ahead will be dominated by the cost of living crunch and labour shortages. Today’s data shows prices rose faster than wages in November. With higher inflation and tax rises still to come, the Government needs to help households: the cost of living crunch has only just begun. Evans also points out that the total number of people in work is still below pre-pandemic levels (even though company payrolls are higher). At the same time, rising numbers of people with long-term sickness mean there are one million people fewer in the labour market than on pre-pandemic trends. We need to support more people to look for work for employers to fill record vacancy levels. We must do so in a jobs market showing some signs of slowing even before any effects of Omicron. Employment is still recovering, but on the best measure remains 600,000 down on pre-pandemic levels. The Plan for Jobs has made a real difference, but the Government should not overclaim on the basis of payroll employment figures that don’t cover everyone in work. This is still mission progressing, not mission accomplished.” Chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak, has welcomed the rise in payrolls and fall in redundancies: “Today’s figures are proof that the jobs market is thriving, with employee numbers rising to record levels, and redundancy notifications at their lowest levels since 2006 in December. “From traineeships for young people to Sector Based Work Academies for those switching careers, our Plan for Jobs is continuing to create opportunity for all.” Minister for Employment Mims Davies MP says: “Our Plan for Jobs is levelling up opportunity across the nation to progress, with payroll employment above pre-pandemic levels in every region. “As we begin the new year, our Jobcentres are open for business, to give people the skills and confidence they need to seize new and better paid jobs in 2022. And increases in the National Living Wage and changes to Universal Credit means everyone has the support they need to move forward and be ready to grab the record number of vacancies out there.” Here’s a chart showing how real wages fell in November, as the sharp rise in inflation this autumn overtook average weekly earnings growth. The ONS says: This was previously seen in early 2020 because of the initial impact of the coronavirus pandemic and previous to this in 2017, when inflation increased, and then before that following the financial crisis in 2008, when pay growth decreased and inflation increased. UK workers are facing a pay squeeze as wages fail to keep up with inflation. Today’s labour market report shows that average total pay, including bonuses, grew by 4.2% in the September-November quarter, while basic pay (ex-bonuses) was 3.8%. Consumer price inflation (CPI) jumped to 5.1% in November, and is expected to hit 6% by this spring when energy bills rise very sharply. The ONS reports that wages fell behind rising prices in November, meaning real wages shrank for the first time since July 2020: In real terms (adjusted for inflation), total and regular pay have shown minimal growth in September to November 2021, at 0.4% for total pay and 0.0% for regular pay; single-month growth in real average weekly earnings for November 2021 fell on the year for the first time since July 2020, at negative 0.9% for total pay and negative 1.0% for regular pay. Public sector workers were particularly hit by the pay squeeze, the ONS shows: Average total pay growth for the private sector was 4.5% in September to November 2021, while for the public sector, it was 2.6%; all sectors saw growth, with the finance and business services sector seeing the largest growth rate at 6.8%. Here’s some snap reaction: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The UK’s unemployment rate has dropped again, as employers continue to add workers to their payroll... but wages are now lagging inflation again. The jobless rate dropped to 4.1% in the September-November quarter, the Office for National Statistics reports. That’s down from 4.2% a month ago. Payrolls continue to swell too -- the ONS estimates that employers added 184,000 more staff in December, lifting payrolls to 409,000, or 1.4%, above their pre-pandemic levels. All regions are now above pre-coronavirus levels, with Scotland having the largest percentage increase on the month. Vacancies hit a record high, again - with 1,247,000 vacancies in October-December, as employers continue to struggle to fill positions. That’s 462,000 more than before the pandemic, with most industries displaying record numbers of vacancies, and the ratio of vacancies to every 100 employee jobs at a record high 4.1. However, the rate of growth in vacancies did slow, the ONS warns. The redundancy rate has decreased to a record low following the end of the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme, suggesting that the end of the furlough scheme has not had a significant impact on the jobs market. But, the economic inactivity rate has increased by 0.2 percentage points to 21.3%, showing that more people have dropped out of the labour market - either because they are studying, retiring early, or ill. Sam Avanzo Windett, deputy director at Learning and Work Institute, says this increase is worrying: And on pay, real average weekly earnings fell in November 2021 for the first time since July 2020 (more on that in a moment). Also coming up today The Bank of Japan has upgraded its growth and inflation forecasts overnight, and flagged heightening chances the recent commodity-driven price hikes will broaden. Japan’s prime minister Kishida Fumio, addresses the World Economic Forum’s virtual Davos Agenda today, as does Israel’s PM, Naftali Bennett. On the economic front, we get the lates German economic morale data, and a healthcheck on factories in the New York state area. European stock markets could open lower, with bond yields rising as investors anticipate several US interest rate rises this year. The agenda 8am GMT: EU finance ministers hold EcoFin meeting 10am GMT: ZEW survey of German economic sentiment 10am GMT: Special Address by Naftali Bennett, Prime Minister of Israel, at Davos Agenda 11am GMT: Special Address by Kishida Fumio, Prime Minister of Japan, at Davos Agenda 1.30pm GMT: Empire State Manufacturing index for New York“She should still be here.” A small homemade sign, doused in candlelight during one of the many vigils for Ashling Murphy, said what was on the minds of thousands who have stood in solidarity across the island of Ireland and beyond in the past few days. The killing of the 23-year-old schoolteacher, out for a run after class in the bright afternoon light, has been described as “random”. As her life was honoured and she was laid to rest near her home town of Tullamore today, one of her cousins offered a hope that the many vigils taking place in Ashling’s memory would “mark the beginning of an end to violence against women”. An outpouring of grief but also of testimony in the wake of her death is forcing a collective reckoning with violence that is anything but random. Two weeks ago, a young woman in Dublin was assaulted and left with facial injuries. Two men have been charged. This Thursday marks one year since the fatal attack of Urantsetseg Tserendorj, a mother of two and teacher from Mongolia stabbed while walking home from work in Dublin. A teenage boy was charged with her murder. The stretch of canal where Ashling was running that day is named Fiona’s Way, in honour of a young pregnant woman who went missing in 1996. Between 1996 and 2020, at least 236 women died violently in the Republic of Ireland. Their names have been written out and remembered individually in recent days. A majority of these women were killed in their own homes, by a man they knew, by men they loved, men they had children with. How do we protect against that? When schools in Ireland were asked to observe a minute’s silence today, I thought of how a majority are still under Church ownership and how many are segregated by gender. During lockdown I spoke at a number of feminist society events at Irish universities. I listened to young women speak about never receiving education around consent or sex, how some who had been victims of sexual abuse and assault had been shamed by their own teachers. These women are demanding change. The last of Ireland’s Magdalene Laundries only closed in 1996. Last week marked the first anniversary of a government-backed report that claims these religious-run institutions that incarcerated “fallen” women and girls were in fact “refuges”, contradicting survivor testimonies. Some of the same religious orders now run anti-prostitution initiatives, supporting laws that put female sex workers at greater risk of violence. Women shouldn’t have to die for their experiences to be heard. In the 1980s, the schoolgirl Ann Lovett died alone in a grotto while giving birth and the national airwaves were flooded with testimonies of hidden pregnancies and the violence of shame imposed through doctrine and legislation. When Savita Halappanavar died after being denied an abortion in 2012, the breaking of silences that followed eventually forced constitutional change. But how do we tackle the crisis of male violence and misogyny that is so deeply normalised? The Irish government is promising a new “zero-tolerance” strategy to tackle domestic, sexual and gender-based violence. But the justice system that enforces laws is rife with violent misogyny. In the past few years, barring orders have been issued under the Domestic Violence Act 2018 against 21 serving police officers. Ireland’s Garda commissioner has apologised not only for hundreds of ignored domestic violence 999 calls but also for an Irish police officer recording video of a woman being arrested while naked, a woman who died by suicide after that footage was posted online. A sergeant was recorded joking about raping and deporting two women who were under arrest. Decisions made by those in power over the past few decades to cut single mothers’ welfare and close rape crisis centres have put vulnerable women even more at risk. Even as thousands stood against gender-based violence over the past week, a Men’s Rosary group tried to drown out female voices at one vigil, a female journalist received a threat warning her against soliciting “negative comments about men”, a man is reported to have masturbated at an online vigil, and male “patriots” with links to the far right stoked xenophobia over the potential nationality of the killer. Last summer, after speaking at an event on Irish feminism, of all things, I was having a few drinks outside with some women, when two of us needed to pee. We were walking alone along a darkened road, trying to find a secluded spot to squat for lack of public toilets when a white van passed us, a man just beginning to leer out of the window. In the last week, Irish women have shared experiences of near abductions, of assaults on streets, of constant hypervigilance. That time, we suddenly heard another male voice in the van: “Shut up man, you can’t be saying that.” It was that simple. A man calling another man out. “Shut up man”. And he did. In Duck Duck Goose, a play by the Irish writer Caitríona Daly, a young woman describes how passengers on a bus turned a blind eye when an eccentric and sad-looking man who she smiled at began to grope and assault her. “It’s [a] feeling like assault but nobody else is responding to it in that way so it can’t be, can it?” she asks herself. “People don’t like assault, they stop assault, that couldn’t have been assault.” She escapes, walks to work, and appears calm. “So I want to know how you just know?” she asks a young man who is defending a male friend accused of rape on the basis that the woman looked normal afterwards. “How do you feel so confident having seen her after the ‘alleged’? When people don’t even seem to know what assault is when it’s happening there in front of them?” The scene was based on the testimony of a young Irish woman I know. It is just one example of the everyday violence that is normalised by misogyny and ignored – until a woman is killed. Caelainn Hogan is an Irish journalist and author of Republic of Shame In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 and the domestic violence helpline is on 0808 2000 247. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14 and the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the suicide prevention lifeline is 1-800-273-8255 and the domestic Violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgTogether Energy has become the latest supplier to go bust weeks after the struggling council-owned company assured its customers that the business was stable despite record-high gas market prices. The energy regulator, Ofgem, will appoint a new supplier to take on the 176,000 households affected by the collapse of Together Energy, and its subsidiary Bristol Energy, which are part-owned by Warrington borough council. The energy company was forced to deny press reports earlier this year that it was on the brink of calling in administrators and told customers that the company was “stable” and operating on a “business as usual” basis. Bristol Energy said it was “saddened” to announce its exit from the UK’s energy market but it was “untenable for us to continue”. It also denied press reports that suggested it had not bought enough gas and electricity to meet its customers’ needs. Warrington borough council is thought to be on the hook for about £52m in equity, loans and guarantees to the company, which is based 200 miles north in Clydebank. The council’s investment was made in 2019 with the aim of earning a return to plug holes in its budget left by central government cuts to local authority budgets. The council also hoped to use its stake to advance tackling issues such as fuel poverty and global heating. However, critics warned the energy supplier was a bad investment from the start, due to the company’s poor customer ratings and risks from wrapping up taxpayers’ money in a complex industry exposed to changeable wholesale markets. Councillor Ken Critchley, who speaks for the opposition Conservatives on finance, said Together Energy was loss-making before Warrington bought its stake, “It’s the taxpayers and residents of Warrington who are going to bear the consequences of this ill judged investment by the Labour led Council,” he said. A spokesperson for the council said it was “disappointed” that Together Energy was ceasing to trade due to the current energy crisis. Together’s collapse makes it the 27th energy supplier to go bust since gas market prices began a steep ascent to record highs in August last year, leaving more than 2m households in need of a new supplier. The fate of a further 1.7m Bulb Energy accounts is yet to be decided by a special administrator, which was appointed to handle the large-scale collapse. Gillian Cooper, the head of energy for Citizens Advice, said: “As well as causing considerable disruption and confusion for customers, today’s announcement will add to the £2.6bn bill consumers are already facing due to these failures.” “The government must spread the cost of supplier failures so people aren’t left to foot a sky-high bill for chaos in the energy market, just as prices rise,” Cooper added. The latest collapse will pile pressure on government officials to agree a package of measures to tackle the impact of rising energy costs on households, small businesses, manufacturers and the wider economy. Senior government officials from the business department, the Treasury and No 10 are locked in talks with energy companies to devise a set of measures which could help avert a national cost of living crisis. The proposals include a radical set of plans to stabilise gas market costs by paying money to energy companies when market prices are above a set level and claiming paybacks when market prices fall below this benchmark. The Guardian understands that the proposal, first reported in the Financial Times, has divided opinion between Treasury officials who are in favour of a plan ambitious enough to prevent an economy-wide inflation crisis, and the business department which has consistently warned against any measure which could be seen as a handout for major energy companies. “There is nothing that has universal support,” a senior energy executive said. “The costs will ultimately need to be borne by bill payers or taxpayers but there has been some discussion around different mechanisms which could smooth these costs out over a few years rather than all at once.” Martin Young, a senior analyst at Investec, warned that setting a reference price for the gas market could have unintended consequences including “a kick in the teeth” for plans to discourage gas heating. “I see it as hugely important that in attempting to solve one problem, that you don’t create another, so without any detail on how a mechanism actually works, it’s difficult to conclude that it’s good for the long-term and doesn’t impede investment, innovation and the pathway to net zero,” Young said. Ofgem said it was “working closely with government and industry to make sure customers continue to be protected this winter”.The Florida governor, Ron DeSantis, has proposed the formation of a large and unprecedented state agency to investigate election crimes – in a state where there is little evidence of voter fraud in the 2020 election or otherwise. In response, one prominent state prosecutor sought to tie DeSantis to rightwing conspiracy theorists, calling his proposal “a solution in search of a problem … a $6m door prize for a QAnon pep rally”. Nonetheless, DeSantis, who has also proposed his own militia, wants state lawmakers to allocate nearly $6m to fund an Office of Election Crime and Security, which would have 52 staffers, including 45 investigators. There would be a central office in Tallahassee, the state capital, and investigators based throughout Florida. Staffers in an office with a budget of more than $660,000 to acquire motor vehicles would refer election crimes to either the state attorney general or local prosecutors. The proposed office would have more investigators than law enforcement agencies in some of Florida’s biggest cities have to investigate murders, the Tampa Bay Times reported. In his state of the state address last week, DeSantis said: “To ensure that elections are conducted in accordance with the rule of law, I have proposed an election integrity unit whose sole focus will be the enforcement of Florida’s election laws. “This will facilitate the faithful enforcement of election laws and will provide Floridians with the confidence that their vote will count.” The office would be the first of its kind. Election crime investigations, like other crimes, are typically handled by local law enforcement and prosecutors. Federal prosecutors also have jurisdiction over some issues. The Texas attorney general, Ken Paxton, a Republican and staunch Trump ally, has a unit dedicated to investigating election crimes and with a $2.2m budget. It has failed to turn up many cases. Still, DeSantis has complained that officials in Florida are not doing enough to look into election crimes. “That’s not their expertise,” he said in November. “They’ve got all these other crimes that they have to deal with. So, by the time it happens, the election is already over. So, it’s not necessary. And some just don’t want to deal with it at all.” Elections experts widely consider Florida to have some of the best-run elections in the US. The state has a considerable early voting period and has long used no-excuse mail-in voting – which Donald Trump used to cast his vote in 2020. Trump lost that presidential election to Joe Biden, but maintains without evidence his defeat was the result of widespread voter fraud. He also maintains a strong grip on the Republican party. At a press conference the day after the 2020 election, DeSantis said: “The way Florida did it, I think, inspires confidence. I think that’s how elections should be run.” But as Republicans have embraced Trump’s lies, DeSantis, widely considered a frontrunner for the 2024 presidential nomination, has come under pressure to review the 2020 results. He has resisted conducting a review but has nonetheless made it harder to vote. Last year, he signed a law that makes it harder to request a mail-in ballot, limits the availability of ballot drop boxes and makes it harder for third parties to register voters. Andrew Warren, the top prosecutor in Hillsborough county, which includes Tampa, told the Guardian the Office of Election Crime and Security proposal was not serious and that there was no widespread election fraud in Florida. His office, he said, had received four referrals for election crimes over the two decades. “This is a solution in search of a problem,” Warren said. “It’s a really expensive one at that. This is a $6m door prize for a QAnon pep rally. “The implication is that there’s so much election fraud that law enforcement needs help investigating it and that state attorneys need help prosecuting it. I’m willing to bet a pretty penny that there’s not one sheriff or police chief or state attorney in the entire state of Florida who’s having that problem.” OECS staffers, the Democrat added, would “sit around and wait for the phone to ring. That’s a lot of time watching Netflix and playing Candy Crush on the taxpayer dollar.” Warren said he was concerned that such an agency could have a chilling effect on people trying to exercise their right to vote. Last week, Democrats in Florida’s congressional delegation wrote to the US attorney general, Merrick Garland, requesting that he investigate efforts to restrict voting access. “Harmful proposals to create new partisan bodies to oversee our voting process are exactly the kind of action that demand oversight as we work to ensure that our voting process is unquestionably trustworthy,” they wrote.Tonga is facing an “unprecedented disaster” from a massive volcanic eruption that covered the nation in ash and 15-metre tsunami waves that destroyed almost all the homes on two small islands, the government has said. Hampered by a communications breakdown caused by the severing of a major undersea cable, authorities had not released an official update since the blast on Saturday, when the Pacific island nation was shaken by what may have been the largest volcanic event in three decades. Since then, information on the scale of the devastation had mostly come from reconnaissance aircraft. On Tuesday, the office of Tonga’s prime minister released a statement saying it had confirmed the deaths of three people, although the toll could rise. The government has still not managed to make contact with several inhabited islands. Prime minister Siaosi Sovaleni’s office said every home on Mango island, where about 50 people live, had been destroyed, and only two houses remained on Fonoifua. A statement described the eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha‘apai undersea volcano, 40 miles (65km) north of Tonga’s capital, as an “unprecedented disaster”. A “volcanic mushroom plume” had reached the stratosphere and extended to cover the entirety of Tonga’s roughly 170 islands, where more than 100,000 people live. Sovaleni’s office announced the deaths of a 65-year-old woman on Mango island and a 49-year-old man on Nomuka, in addition to Angela Glover, a British woman living in Tonga whose body was found on Monday. The government said the Tongan navy had deployed with health teams and water, food and tents to outlying islands. Earlier, aerial photos taken by a New Zealand defence force showed Nomuka island blanketed in black and grey ash. Meanwhile, satellite imagery analysed by the UN showed similar scenes in Kolomotu’a, Tongatapu, and Fafaa village, Kolofo’ou. While some buildings remain standing, others appear to have collapsed, and the entire landscape is coated with ash. At Fua’amotu international airport, the runway appears to have been inundated and is partly covered by either ash or dirt. Other satellite images show that flooding came in several blocks from the coastline. Tongans around the world may be forced to wait weeks for regular contact to resume after testing confirmed that the cable connecting the islands to the outside world was cut in at least one place. The New Zealand foreign minister, Nanaia Mahuta, said on Tuesday the ash could cause problems for getting aid into the country via plane. “Images show ashfall on the Nuku’alofa airport runway that must be cleared before a C-130 Hercules flight with humanitarian assistance can land,” she said. The Australian defence force also sent a surveillance plane on Monday, to assess damage to critical infrastructure such as roads, ports and power lines.The sale of a 16th-century villa in Rome containing the only ceiling mural ever painted by the Italian master Caravaggio has been rescheduled and the asking price reduced by 20% after an auction on Tuesday failed to attract any bids. Villa Aurora was put on the market for €471m (£393m) amid a bitter inheritance dispute between the three sons of the villa’s last owner, the late Prince Nicolò Boncompagni Ludovisi, and his American-born wife, Princess Rita Boncompagni Ludovisi. Bidders had to register their offers before midnight on Monday ahead of an online auction on Tuesday afternoon. Beniamino Milioto, a lawyer for the princess, confirmed there were no offers and that the auction had been rescheduled for 7 April with a 20% reduction in price. Villa Aurora, surrounded by high walls close to the Via Veneto in central Rome, is all that remains of a retreat established by Cardinal Francesco Maria Del Monte in the 16th century. Caravaggio’s Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto mural was commissioned by Del Monte in 1597 to adorn the ceiling of his small alchemy laboratory. The Ludovisis, a noble family with close ties to the papacy, bought the property from Del Monte in 1621. The lion’s share of the asking price is attributed to the Caravaggio, although the villa also contains ceilings frescoed by the baroque painter Guercino. Any buyer would also have to stump up a further €11m in restoration costs. In the past, Bill Gates is said to have been interested in acquiring the villa. Alessandro Zuccari, a history professor at Sapienza University in Rome who oversaw the valuation of the mural, said: “I’m not surprised there were no bids, in fact I would have been amazed if a buyer had come forward. The price is too high. Let’s see what happens in April, but I doubt anyone will come forward then – what would someone like Bill Gates do with Villa Aurora, especially with all the extra costs?” Since the site is protected by the ministry of culture, once a bid has been agreed at auction the state will have the chance to buy the property at the same price. A petition launched last week urging the government to intervene and stump up the cash was signed by more than 35,000 people.The Sweden goalkeeper Robin Olsen has become Aston Villa’s third signing of the transfer window after joining on loan from Roma. The 32-year-old has spent the first part of the 2021-22 season on loan at Sheffield United but has not featured since the international break in November. Olsen has struggled to get playing time at Roma since joining the Serie A club after an impressive World Cup in 2018. He had previously been loaned out three times – to Cagliari, Everton and Sheffield United – and is unlikely to have a future in the Italian capital. He made 11 appearances for Everton last season and has played the same number of games for Sheffield United this campaign. The current Villa No 1 goalkeeper, Emi Martínez, has been at Villa since 2020 and won the Copa América with Argentina last year but has made a few high-profile errors this season, including one against Manchester United at the weekend. Meanwhile, Sead Kolasinac has left Arsenal to join Marseille. The former Schalke defender had his contract terminated at the Emirates to allow him to join the Ligue 1 club on a deal that will run until the summer 2023.Irish police investigating the death of Ashling Murphy have arrested a man in his 30s on suspicion of murder. Murphy, a primary school teacher, was strangled on a canal path near the town of Tullamore while out jogging last Wednesday afternoon. Her funeral was held on Tuesday. He was arrested at a Dublin hospital where he presented last Thursday with unexplained injuries, some of them self-inflicted. He was reportedly taken into custody on Tuesday morning after authorities judged that he had recovered sufficiently to face questions at Tullamore garda station, where the investigation into the fatal assault is taking place. Police said they had arrested a man on suspicion of murder. “Gardaí investigating the fatal assault on Ashling Murphy that occurred at approximately 4pm on Wednesday, 12 January, 2022, along the canal bank at Cappincur, Tullamore, County Offaly have arrested a male in his 30s on suspicion of murder,” a statement said. “The male is now detained in Tullamore garda station under section 4 of the Criminal Justice Act 1984. An Garda Síochána has no further comment at this time.” The man can be questioned for 24 hours after which he must be charged or released. According to reports in Ireland the man arrested has links with Offaly and south Dublin but has also lived abroad. Gardaí refused to comment on reports by Irish national broadcaster RTÉ that the man in custody was a father of young children. On Monday, the garda said “significant progress” was being made in the murder investigation, as they renewed their appeal for information. They asked that anyone who saw a man dressed in a black tracksuit top with no hood, black tracksuit bottoms with a large white stripe or white writing on the side and black trainers to come forward. DNA gathered at the scene will be critical to the investigation. Two houses have been sealed off for forensic examination. Other forensic evidence has been gathered from a Falcon Storm mountain bike abandoned at the crime scene. On Monday gardaí removed a bottle bank from a recycling location less than a mile from the scene of the crime and on Tuesday police were seen dismantling a clothes bank at a separate location near Tullamore. Murphy’s death has shocked the nation and led to vigils attended by tens of thousands of people in Dublin, Cork, Belfast, London and New York over the weekend. Like the murder of Sarah Everard in the UK last year, it has reignited the debate about safety of women as they go about their everyday business. At her funeral on Tuesday, the Bishop of Meath, Thomas Deenihan, told mourners “a depraved act of violence” that deprived Murphy of her life had united the country in grief and support and said her killing had asked questions of “ourselves and of society”, as well as questioning attitudes towards women. “Whether those questions will be addressed or passed over remains to be seen but we cannot allow such violence and disregard for both human life and bodily integrity to take root in our time and culture,” he said. Bishop Deenihan said one light in last week’s darkness was the outpouring of support and sympathy. In a statement on Tuesday, Murphy’s boyfriend Ryan Casey described her as an “incredible, loving and beautiful person” He said: “Ashling was so much more to me than a girlfriend, she was my soulmate, she is my soulmate, she will always be my soulmate. She is the greatest love of my life. I will cherish the last five years we spent together my entire life.”Senegal will play a third-placed team in Bafoussam next Tuesday. Guinea, also in Bafoussam, will play Gambia, Mali or Tunisia. Malawi will ... let’s see. Morocco play Gabon tonight and Ghana face Comoros as Group C winds up. But that’ll do from me for now. Thanks for reading, as ever, and take care! Zimbabwe have beaten Guinea 2-1. It means little for them, but for a sluggish Senegal it means winning the group even if their only goal was a sketchy 97th minute penalty in the first game. Malawi, who are more proof that Africa’s supposed minnows can match the best, come third. It is a fairly good bet that the Flames will make it to the last 16, but they must wait a couple of days. Senegal get away with one, really, as it was a really tight-looking call to overturn Malawi’s penalty award with VAR. But get away with it they do, and once the other game is over in a minute all two I’ll tell you what it all means. 90+1 min: We will see three added minutes. 90 min: A deep cross from the left goes beyond Mane, who has been peripheral at best overall. 89 min: Now Mbulu goes off on a stretcher too, and again I’m fairly sure he will walk back on. Given it is still 2-1 to Zimbabwe in Yaounde everyone should soon be fairly happy ... but that overturned penalty will be a big talking point. 86 min: Chance for Diedhiou! The ex-Bristol City man chests a long pass down expertly before volleying straight at Thom. Good technique from the big striker but no finish. 85 min: Concern for Malawi as Chester, who only recently came on, is stretchered off. Seems to be on his feet now though and I think we’ll see him again. Meanwhile Ballo-Toure comes on for Ciss. 83 min: A corner to Senegal. Malawi do not deserve to concede here, at the least they merit a spot in that third-place shakedown. Sarr swings it across ... and beyond everyone. 81 min: A Sarr cross is straight to Thom. It’s still quite open here, it’s not been awful as nil-nils go. 80 min: Idana goes off and Ngalande on for Malawi, while a Senegal player receives treatment. 77 min: Play restarts with a drop ball, which suggests the ref thought Chirwa had dived. I think Malawi have been very hard done here. VAR sucks the joy out of so much, it’s for people who don’t like football very much. Ah, hold your horses, did Sarr’s challenge start outside the box? The ref has gone to his screen to check, which is never the best sign ... and the decision is overturned! Was that really clear and obvious! Malawi are furious! I think it was really borderline. My, my, my! Mhango makes ground and finds the overlapping left-back Chirwa ... who goes down under Sarr’s challenge after initially hesitating! This could win Malawi the group! 73 min: Chance for Pape Gueye immediately! He makes a late, untracked run onto Sarr’s cross but heads well wide. It was a decent chance. At the other end Mbulu lashes well over from range. At least both sides are having a go, still, even though the score suits them. 72 min: Mhango wants a penalty after being barged by Abdou Diallo, but I don’t think that will come to much. Senegal seek a spark witk two more changes – Diedhiou and Pape Gueye replace Dia and Mendy. 69 min: Now Malawi do wreak some minor havoc, Koulibaly making a vital interception from a right-sided cross and Mendy flinging himself at the ball to punch away as it loops up. 68 min: It helps that Senegal’s possession has largely been guileless; certainly doesn’t feel as if they’ve dominated it to that extent despite their second-half improvement. Here are two Malawi subs, Mbulu and Chester replacing Mhone and Muyaba. 66 min: According to the stats, Malawi have had just 22% of the possession but the teams have had seven attempts each, which tells you their gameplan has worked pretty well. 64 min: Malawi aren’t offering a lot going forward at the moment. It’ll be a long way back if they concede now and they’ll know the point puts them in a good position to qualify, so caution may be the name of the game from here. 62 min: At this point you’d back Senegal to score, but we’ve already seen they can have long periods where they just drift and they need to avoid another. 60 min: The corner is dealt with, and then Dieng comes on for Habib Diallo in Senegal’s first change. 59 min: Chaziya is booked after sending Mane tumbling near the left byline. Senegal have their latest chance to load the box, and it’s a great position. After a long wait and a squeeze of the 10-yard aerosol from the ref, it’s driven in by Gueye ... and tipped over by Thom! 56 min: It’s a pleasantly open start to this half, both sides having counters snuffed out. Malawi are certainly being asked a lot more questions now. 54 min: Up the other end, it’s another free-kick for Senegal ... and a free header for Abdou Diallo, who plants it over! They’ve had two great chances in this half now. 53 min: Malawi come forward now and earn a free-kick but Chirwa (I think) makes an awful hash of it. 51 min: Game on in Yaounde, where Naby Keita has scored a belting solo goal for Guinea! They are 2-1 down now ... so another goal for them and they’d win the group on goals scored. 51 min: Senegal have come out as if handed a rocket by Aliou Cisse. They have another corner and the big guns are up, but Koulibaly can’t control it when it reaches him beyond the far post. 49 min: Gueye is alright and Senegal have a free-kick on the left, in a decent area. It’s sent in at the second time of asking from Ciss ... and that’s a good save from Thom! Koulibaly flicks it on, Habib Diallo redirects it and the keeper readjusts his feet to tip over magnificently. Malawi survive the resulting corner and that is as close as Senegal have come. 46 min: As in the first half, Senegal come forward immediately but Malawi smuggle the ball away when it comes in. Gueye will need some treatment after a challenge from Sanudi. We’ll know soon, because here we go ... The players are back out for the second half. Will Senegal step things up a notch? Will Malawi’s good work come to count for even more? A Fiver for your half-time delectation: Mane had an early opportunity but since then Malawi have been the better, sharper, more threatening side. This outcome looks fine for both teams at the moment but Senegal have been disappointing. 45+1 min: Malawi get another corner but, not for the first time, can’t threaten. 45 min: Not that this is really going to matter by the looks of it – Zimbabwe, who have nothing to play for, are two up against Guinea! It’s a well-struck drive from Mahachi, but the keeper should have done better. Senegal, as if spurred by that, then have a shot blocked in the box. Unless Malawi score they are winning this group. 44 min: When they do try and get going, Diallo switches accurately towards Sarr ... who miscontrols. 43 min: Still next to nothing coming from Senegal. They have a creative problem in the middle, it’s clear, and it feels like we’ve said that for a while now. 41 min: Less accurate from Sanudi there, who crosses beyond everyone, but the buildup was again smart. 39 min: Malawi come yet again through the rampaging left-back Chirwa, whose cross has to be tipped over by Mendy. They look really sharp, fair play to them. Mendy fumbles the corner at first but then, after a kind rebound, gathers the ball. 38 min: Chance for Mhango! He gets beyond Koulibaly, who has had an uncharacteristically bad half and clearly isn’t sharp after his Covid absence, and tries to round Mendy but is crowded out at the last! 36 min: Ciss miscues a cross horribly out of play and that rather sums Senegal up for far. 35 min: Wouldn’t be a gross exaggeration to say Malawi have played the better football since the opening minutes. Senegal just haven’t got going after that chance for Mane. Malawi win another corner now but can’t make much of it. 33 min: Close! Mhango’s free-kick is deflected *just* wide while Malawi scream that it came off an arm. Nothing doing, but they get a corner ... which is totally wasted after they try to play it short. 32 min: Malawi, who are playing well, win a free-kick in shooting range ... 30 min: Now then! Zimbabwe have taken the lead against Guinea in Yaounde, which is quite a surprise. It was a bullet header by Musona from a corner, and means Senegal now occupy top spot. 28 min: Sarr, Senegal’s attacking right-back, has been Senegal’s biggest threat so far and wins a dangerous free-kick on the right. Gueye puts it in but Mane’s far-post header is easy for Thom. 26 min: Long way to go but, if both games finished like this, Senegal and Guinea would have identical records and I am fairly sure the group winners would be determined by the drawing of lots. Someone correct me if I’m wrong! 24 min: Sanudi tries another long throw but doesn’t get much on it and, in any case, Senegal are awarded a free-kick in their own box. 23 min: A wild 45-yard Malawi free-kick is hit several goals high. 21 min: Senegal have totally faded after their bright start but do find another glimmer down that right side, only for the cross – I didn’t see who by – to be wastefully hit straight to Thom. 20 min: He’s in the wars again after being caught by an arm from Kouyate ... who is booked and, in a blow for Senegal, will now miss their round of 16 tie. 18 min: Mhango needed treatment after that, which will be a concern, but the physio gives Malawi’s bench a thumbs-up. He scored twice against Zimbabwe and has looked sharp here so far – they need him. 17 min: Malawi dangerman Mhango cracks a tremendous shot just over from 22 yards after sloppy play from Koulibaly, who moments earlier the same player had almost beaten to a long through ball. That was close, and Malawi look enterprising here. 15 min: Goalless in the Guinea-Zimbabwe game so far, by the way, and little has happened there as far as I can tell. 13 min: It’s a decent start here but, as with Cameroon v Cape Verde yesterday, I wonder if there’ll come a point where everyone is OK with a draw if things remain tied for long. 11 min: A long throw for Malawi, launched in by Sanudi, is headed away and so is his subsequent cross. The Flames are firing the ball around quite nicely when they get the chance, and when they come forward again Mendy gives towards and completely misses a diagonal cross. No harm results, luckily for him. Shortly afterwards Koulibaly makes a big block deep inside his own box. This is 129th in the world against 20th but there’s no real sign of that yet. 8 min: Mane dinks over Thom, the goalkeeper, but also over the top after a smart move down the right opens Malawi up. Thomu takes a knock for his trouble, having some out bravely to block, and is having treatment. He’ll be OK. Good football from Senegal there and a nice tempo so far. 5 min: Diallo heads well wide after being located by a Sarr cross from the right. He was a good 18 yards out so it would have been some achievement to threaten with that. 4 min: Malawi look as if they’ll try to press from the front. They were pretty ambitious in their opening two games too. 3 min: Peter Oh likes Malawi’s nickname, the Flames, as do I. “Interesting nickname that Malawi have got there. It’s a good thing for Senegal that they will likely go through to the knockout rounds no matter what. If they needed a result to qualify, their campaign could potentially have gone down in Flames today.” 1 min: It comes to nothing but that was the kind of intent Senegal need to emerge with. Senegal, all in white, kick off against the red-clad Malawi and begin at pace, winning a corner ... Over in Yaounde ... Capacities for non-Cameroon games are capped at 60% for now, while you have to be vaccinated against Covid and that’s a big problem in most of Africa, but attendances do seem to be picking up after a very sluggish start and it’s a decent atmosphere as the teams come out and sing the anthems. Guinea v Zimbabwe will happen simultaneously to this game; I’ll have half an eye on it for you. Guinea are, like Senegal, pretty much guaranteed to go through but will have a great chance of winning the group – a bit of a surprise if it happens – if they beat their already-eliminated opponents. Sadio Mane watch: not overly involved so far this AFCON, but did score the last-gasp penalty that saw off Zimbabwe. No need for him to explode into life til the latter stages, you’d think, but if Senegal do go all the way he’ll have to be a major reason. Familiarise yourself with Mario Marinica, the man in Malawi’s hot seat, via this brilliant interview by Dave Hytner. It’s some story: Familiar names in here. Edouard Mendy, named the world’s best keeper last night, is back! The group stage finales roll onwards and we’ve a tasty one for you this afternoon. Senegal are tipped by many to finally win their first AFCON title this year but they’ve got a job to do in Bafoussam first. If they don’t beat Malawi they probably won’t win Group B, and even then they need to improve on Guinea’s score against Zimbabwe. They should get an easier last-16 tie if they come top of the pile so there’ll be no snoozing today – it’s not been a sparkling showing from Sadio Mane and company so far, but it feels as if we’re due one. Malawi are no slouches though. They lost narrowly to Guinea and turned around a deficit to beat Zimbabwe, who are now eliminated. Some of their attacking football have been pretty fun. They’re guaranteed at least third place but I doubt they’ll make it through as one of the four best teams in that position unless they finish with four points. It mean a draw, at least, today is vital for them. Stay with us for the buildup and then, of course, for the match itself! Emails and tweets can flood in to the addresses above – love to hear about your experience of AFCON so far.Ministers have been issued with a stark warning over mandatory Covid vaccines for NHS workers in England, with a leaked document saying growing evidence on the Omicron variant casts doubts over the new law’s “rationality” and “proportionality”. Two jabs will become compulsory for frontline NHS staff from 1 April after MPs voted on the legislation last month. But the document, drawn up by Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) officials and seen by the Guardian, said the evidence base on which MPs voted “has changed”, creating a higher chance of objections and judicial review. The effectiveness of only two vaccine doses against Omicron, and the lower likelihood of hospitalisations from the milder variant, are cited. More than 70,000 NHS staff – 4.9% – could remain unvaccinated by 1 April, the document says. NHS trusts in England are preparing to start sending dismissal letters from 3 February to any member of staff who has not had their first dose by then. Amid significant pressures on the NHS, last week groups including the Royal College of Nursing urged Sajid Javid, the health secretary, to delay the legislation, known as “vaccination as a condition of deployment” (VCOD2). An earlier VCOD1 rule applied to care workers and came into force on 11 November. On Tuesday the Royal College of Nursing said the leaked memo should prompt ministers to call a halt to the imposition of compulsory jabs, which it called “reckless”. “The government should now instigate a major rethink”, said Patricia Marquis, the RCN’s England director. “Mandation is not the answer and sacking valued nursing staff during a workforce crisis is reckless.” NHS trusts should be left to continue their efforts to persuade vaccine-hesitant staff to get jabbed and not have to dismiss much-needed staff, she added. “Vaccines against Covid-19 are safe and effective and the vast majority of staff have been fully vaccinated. Encouraging people to get vaccinated is the best way to boost take-up and nursing staff have a key role to play in addressing any concerns people may have.” Some exemptions are allowed but the mandate has infuriated dozens of Tory MPs, with 61 voting against extending the mandate to NHS staff in December. The document prepared by DHSC officials noted that two vaccine doses provide up to 32% effectiveness against Omicron infection, which wanes to in effective zero 20 weeks later. At the time the policy was developed, two-dose effectiveness against infection with the Delta variant was substantially higher – 65% with Oxford/AstraZeneca and 80% with Pfizer/BioNTech, the DHSC memo said. Booster jabs have since been shown to be highly effective but are not part of the law for NHS workers. The document says: “While Omicron is more transmissible there appears to be a substantially lower risk of hospitalisation and mortality for those vaccinated vs Delta. “The low VE [vaccine effectiveness] against infection (and consequently effect on transmission) plus the lower risk posed by Omicron brings into question both the rationality of the VCOD2 policy and its proportionality and makes the case for vaccination requirement weaker than when [ministers] decided on the policy. “The evidence base on which MPs voted on VCOD2 has now changed and we may see more objections from MPs, increased media interest and higher likelihood of judicial review.” Work is under way with the UK Health Security Agency “to pull together evidence” for Javid to advise on “appropriate next steps” on the policy and “the inclusion of boosters”, the document adds. Some Tory MPs are likely to use the advice to ministers to push for the policy to be dropped. Mark Harper, the chair of the Covid Recovery Group, said: “Forcing NHS and social care staff to get vaccinated or get the sack wasn’t a sensible policy in December, when I and many of my backbench colleagues voted against it. “Now we’ve learned more about both vaccine efficacy against Omicron transmission and its severity, it looks increasingly foolish. “Ministers would be wise to rethink the policy and avoid putting even more pressure on our NHS by sacking tens of thousands of health and social care workers in the next few weeks. When you know something won’t work, it’s right to change course.” Hospital bosses have voiced rising concerns that they may have to close entire units and send patients elsewhere for treatment because the enforced dismissal of unvaccinated staff means they cannot run safely. There is particular concern about maternity units as hospitals are already 2,500 midwives short. Matthew Trainer, the chief executive of Barking, Havering and Redbridge NHS trust in London, said last week that the loss of unvaccinated midwives, coupled with the fact that it already had a 10% vacancy rate among those specialists, “would put us in quite a serious position”. But the DHSC has dismissed any prospect of a delay. A DHSC spokesperson said: “Health and social care workers look after the most vulnerable people in society, who could face serious health consequences if exposed to the virus. Ensuring staff are vaccinated is the right thing to do to protect patients and those in care. The vast majority of NHS staff have had the vaccine which is our best defence against Covid-19.” A senior NHS official said: “Some staff seem to think the government will back down. But when they realise that they won’t then they’ll have to get jabbed or lose their jobs. Some can be redeployed but many won’t be able to.” With the deadline for first doses just over two weeks away, “it’s a case of who blinks first” between Javid and unvaccinated staff, the source added.Boris Johnson has claimed “nobody warned me it was against the rules” for a drinks party to be hosted in Downing Street during the first lockdown, but also refused to deny the possibility he could resign should he be censured by the inquiry into rule-breaking. Responding to Johnson’s interview, Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, has said it shows he knows he’s at “the end of the road”. (See 1.53pm.) Sue Gray, the civil servant investigating the partygate scandal, has said she will interview Dominic Cummings, the former No 10 aide who says he is willing to give evidence on oath that Johnson has lied about the Downing Streeet drinks party on 20 May 2020. (See 5.42pm.) Christian Wakeford has become the seventh Tory MP to publicly call for a no confidence vote in Johnson. (See 5.40pm.) MPs have been meeting to discuss their next steps, and there is increasing speculation that 54 letters demanding a confidence vote will soon be with the 1922 Committee chairman, Sir Graham Brady, meaning the threshold for a ballot would have been met. Dominic Raab has admitted that lying to parliament is “normally” a resigning matter, amid claims that the prime minister deliberately misled MPs over his knowledge of a Downing Street party. Restrictions brought in before Christmas to stem the Omicron surge across Scotland are to be lifted from next Monday, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has said. Controversial measures including police powers to stop noisy protests could be brought back to the Commons by the government after a series of late-night defeats in the Lords, the justice secretary has said. The court of appeal has overturned a ruling that found that a government contract given to a polling company with links to Dominic Cummings was unlawful. Labour has called on the government to immediately withdraw a proposed law that would allow the Democratic Unionist party leader to “double job” at Westminster and Stormont. That’s all from me for today. But our Covid coverage continues on our global live blog. And this is from the Times’ Steven Swinford, reporting the response of a Boris Johnson supporter in cabinet to news that “red wall” Tories are plotting against him. Sue Gray, the civil servant investigating partygate, will interview Dominic Cummings as part of her inquiry, the Mirror’s Pippa Crerar reports. The Conservative MP Christian Wakeford says he has submitted a letter calling for a no confidence vote in Boris Johnson, Yahoo News’s Nadine Batchelor-Hunt reports. He is the seventh Tory MP to publicly say a contest is needed. Tory MPs have warned the Royal Navy will be operating a “taxi service” for people crossing the Channel in small boats under “Operation Dog’s Dinner”, PA Media reports. In a Commons urgent question earlier ministers came under fire from some on their backbenches for not seeking to push back small boats trying to reach England from France. PA says: The Ministry of Defence (MoD) is expected to take over command of the operation from Border Force by the end of the month in a move signed off by Boris Johnson. Defence minister James Heappey said military involvement is part of a wider plan from the government, which will be announced in the coming weeks. The current details are believed to have been announced as part of a government bid to offer “red meat” to Tory MPs in a bid to drive attention away from Downing Street party allegations. But Conservative former minister Sir Edward Leigh warned: “In the absence of ministers having the political will to use pushback, what is the point in appointing a Royal Naval admiral to help Border Force to be a more efficient taxi service so that the migrants will know that now ‘we have got the Royal Navy going to pick us up and we will be taken safety to the UK, and we will be put in a hotel and we will never ever be sent home’? This is just an embarrassment.” “Will the minister now coordinate with his colleagues to do what we have been suggesting for months now and that we get rid of the pull factors, namely we reform any piece of legislation that is necessary, including the Human Rights Act, and people who do this illegal crossing are arrested, put in a prison, and then deported?” Heappey replied: “His exhortations and those of colleagues have been heard.” Conservative MP Philip Hollobone added: “This isn’t Operation Red Meat, it’s Operation Dog’s Dinner. This is going to incentivise people traffickers, they’ll see the Royal Navy ship on the horizon and they’ll say ‘point your dinghy in that direction, you only need to get halfway’ and the Royal Navy will pick them up. The only way this will work if the Royal Navy intercepts asylum seekers and returns them back to France. Without the second bit, this simply won’t work.” Heappey replied: “The last bit would be impossible without French permission and French permission has not been given. But I don’t accept his characterisation of what is being spoken about today. The MoD’s mission is to make sure nobody arrives in the UK on their own terms.” Tobias Ellwood, Conservative chairman of the defence committee, warned: “There is a real danger of mission creep here, with further naval assets being sucked into this challenge.” Gavin Barwell, chief of staff in Downing Street under Theresa May, and a regular critic of Boris Johnson’s, says his latest excuse for attending the party in the Downing Street garden is “absolutely hopeless”. My colleague Jessica Elgot also reports that among Conservative MPs patience with Boris Johnson is running out. And Sky News’s Mollie Malone says Tory MPs may be closer than people think to getting the 54 letters needed to trigger a confidence vote in the prime minister. At the weekend there were reports that around 35 letter might already have been submitted to the 1922 Committee chairman, Sir Graham Brady, but the real figure is a closely-guarded secret, and so most estimates involve an element of guesswork. Tory MPs from the 2019 intake have been meeting to discuss getting rid of Boris Johnson, my colleague Aubrey Allegretti reports. Here is my colleague Jessica Elgot’s analysis of Dominic Cummings’ claims about Boris Johnson. Ten more universities have voted to join industrial action on UK campuses, taking the total to 68 institutions expected to go on strike later this year. The University and College Union (UCU) said that after reballoting, universities including Newcastle, Queen Mary London, Strathclyde and Swansea all passed the 50% thresholds required to support strikes. In early December 58 universities saw UCU members strike for three days over a variety of causes, after two ballots. One ballot was on pay and employment conditions, while the other was against proposals for the Universities Superannuation Scheme that UCU says would result in substantial pension cuts. Jo Grady, UCU’s general secretary, said: We truly hope that further disruption can be avoided - that is what staff and students alike all want. But this is entirely in the gift of employers who simply need to revoke their devastating pension cuts and take long-overdue action over deteriorating pay and working conditions. Raj Jethwa, chief executive of the Universities and Colleges Employers Association, said there would be “widespread dismay” at the prospect of further strikes six months after agreement on a 1.5% pay increase. And here is Dominic Cummings replying to the interview in which Boris Johnson responded to claims from Cummings that he lied to MPs about the Downing Street party. Like many of Cummings’ tweets, it need translating. OODA is OODA loop, a US miliary concept highlighting the importance of the “observe, orient, decide, act” cycle. Fkd probably needs no explanation. For your OODA loop to be fkd is not good, at least, in Cummings’ book. Jeremy Hunt, the Conservative chair of the Commons health committee who was runner-up in the 2019 Tory leadership contest, has told the House magazine that it would “take a lot” to persuade him to stand again. He said: I wasn’t expecting to leave the government in 2019, but I’ve enjoyed being on the backbenches much more than I thought. I won’t say my ambition has completely vanished, but it would take a lot to persuade me to put my hat into the ring. And this is how Dominic Cummings thinks Hunt’s words will be interpreted. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, told MPs in the Commons earlier that he was “cautiously optimistic” that the government could “substantially reduce” Covid restrictions in England next week. Declaring that hospital cases seem to have reached their peak, he said: The action that this government has taken in response to Omicron and the collective efforts of the British people have seen us become the most boosted country in Europe, the most tested country in Europe, and [have] the most antivirals per head in Europe. That is why we are the most open country in Europe. I have always said that these restrictions should not stay in place a day longer than absolutely necessary. Due to these pharmaceutical defences and the likelihood that we have already reached the peak of the case numbers of hospitalisations, I am cautiously optimistic that we will be able to substantially reduce restrictions next week. The Guardian and Observer charity appeal in support of communities affected by climate-induced extreme weather is closing in on £1m donations from readers. The theme this year is climate justice, inspired by stories of people and communities uprooted by climate volatility, whether flooding, wildfire, melting ice or drought, from Madagascar to the Arctic Circle. The appeal , which started in early December, had reached £940,000 by midnight on Sunday, when the appeal was originally scheduled to close, and then extended in a bid to try to hit the £1m mark. My mid-afternoon on Tuesday donations had inched closer – reaching £980,000 as hundreds more readers gave generously, bringing the total number of donors to 9,300. Donations will be shared between four charities: Practical Action, Global Greengrants Fund UK, Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, and Environmental Justice Foundation. Welcoming the news, Hélène Ralimanana, Head of the Kew Madagascar Conservation Centre, said: We couldn’t be more grateful to everyone who is supporting this year’s appeal. The work we are doing here in Madagascar is critical to the ensuring sustainable livelihoods for the local communities as we face multiple threats to our island’s ecosystems. There is still time to give online to the appeal. YouGov says its latest polling suggests almost two-thirds of people think Boris Johnson should resign. Here is the Boris Johnson inteview in full. There’s some hope on the horizon for England’s 4 million households who live in social housing, many of whom struggle to get help with essential problems from squalid conditions to fire safety. Michael Gove’s Department for Levelling up, Housing and Communities has announced plans to professionalise housing staff and is consulting on how they should be trained so they are “better equipped to support tenants, deal effectively with complaints, and make sure homes are good quality”. Waiting in long call centre queues and not getting adequate help has long been a headache for social housing tenants. Six out of 10 complainants are not happy with the response, according to the latest English Housing Survey, and there has been a 139% increase in complaints to the housing ombudsman. This was a big issue at Grenfell Tower where complaining tenants were labelled “rebel residents” and the public inquiry has heard few of the senior housing officers had any training in housing. “If you look after 500 properties and you don’t know what you’re doing you can inflict an awful lot of misery on a lot of people,” said Ed Daffarn, a committee member of Grenfell United, which has been campaigning for a better deal on social housing. He escaped the 16th floor at Grenfell after his complaints were ignored. Eddie Hughes, minister for rough sleeping and housing, said: Too many social housing residents have told me they feel like they are not listened to or treated with respect – raising complaints time and time again only for the problems not to be fixed. This needs to stop. This review announced today will drive up the standard of services received by residents, making sure their concerns are taken seriously and they have somewhere safe to live. Boris Johnson has never sounded as contrite, humbled and close to beaten during his premiership as he did in the pooled TV interview with Sky’s Beth Rigby broadcast at lunchtime. His script has not changed much since last Wednesday, when he told MPs at PMQs that he thought the lockdown-busting party he attended at No 10 on 20 May 2020 was a work event. But he was pressed relentlessly, and a lot has changed in his situation over the last six days. Here are six takeaways from the inteview. Johnson is now resting his claim not to have lied about the party on the narrow assertion that no one told him in advance it was “against the rules”. There is compelling evidence now that he was told in advance the event should not go ahead, but it is perhaps conceivable that these objections were framed in general terms, and without detailed reference to the Covid restrictions in force at the time. (Even people who lie easily and casually, like Johnson, tend to prefer being truthful if that is an option.) In response to Rigby’s opening question about whether he had lied, Johnson said: Nobody told me that what we were doing was against the rules, that the event in question was something that was not a work event, and as I said in the House of Commons, when I went out into that garden I thought that I was attending a work event. And later he said: I am absolutely categorical [about this]; nobody said to me this is an event that is against the rules. He made the same point, about being categorical on this, a second time. This is not a convincing excuse, because it is clear that the people who warned him not to go ahead with the party did so precisely because it would be against the rules. But they may not have phrased it like that. When asked by Rigby about claims that he told these people they were “overreacting”, Johnson did not deny that aspect of the case against him. Johnson is also claiming that he was entitled to assume the event was legitimate - because otherwise it would not have been organised in the first place. He told Rigby: I can tell you categorically that nobody told me, nobody said that this was something that was against the rules ... or that we were doing something that wasn’t a work event because, frankly, I can’t imagine why on earth it would have gone ahead, or why it would have been allowed to go ahead. And at another point, when asked if he was calling Dominic Cummings a liar, he said: I can’t believe that we would have gone ahead with an event that people were saying was against the rules. This is a circular argument (‘it must have been allowed because it was allowed’) that implies Johnson is still not taking responsibility for what happened. He implies others are to blame. Johnson declined several invitations to say that he thinks Cummings has been lying about him. That might be because he wants to avoid provoking Cummings even further. But more probably it is because he realises Cummings has witnesses and email evidence to back up his account of what happened. Johnson does not sound confident that the Sue Gray inquiry will clear him. He confirmed he has given evidence to Gray. Asked if he had been lying, he said at one point: My memory of this event, as I said, is going out into the garden for about 25 minutes for what I implicitly thought was a work event and talking to staff, thanking staff. I can’t remember exactly how many but for about 25 minutes I was there. I then went back to my my office and continued my work .... That is the very, very best of my recollection about this event. That’s what I’ve said to the inquiry. We’ll have to see what they what they say. The political historian Steven Fielding thinks this is reminscent of Ronald Reagan - another boosterish politician with a factual reliability problem. Johnson does not seem to be discounting the possibility that the Gray report will force him to resign. He did not confirm that he definitely would resign in those circumstances. And it would have been odd for him to rule it out, because that would prejudge the inquiry. But when pressed by Rigby on this, he sounded genuinely unsure of his future. Johnson is now accepting more readily that he was personally at fault. In the Commons last week he said “there were things we simply did not get right”, implying others were at fault, and in private he told Tory MPs later he did not think he had done anything wrong. That is not his position today. He started by admitting he had personally got things wrong. He said: I want to begin by repeating my apologies to everybody for the misjudgments that I’ve made, that we may have made in No 10 and beyond, whether in Downing Street or throughout the pandemic. He also repeatedly said he was “deeply” or “heartily, heartily” sorry for the party. His apology sounded more genuine than last week’s (although that is not particularly hard). Restrictions brought in to combat the Omicron variant before Christmas will be lifted across Scotland from next Monday, with nightclubs reopening, social distancing rules in bars and restaurants shelved and large indoor events resuming. But the public are being urged to remain “cautious” about socialising in larger groups, to continue to work from home and use face coverings, while vaccine passports remain in use for large-scale events. In a statement to the Scottish parliament, Nicola Sturgeon said that the latest data “gives us confidence that we have turned the corner on the Omicron wave”. Confirming a significant fall in the number of new positive cases, Sturgeon said that on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday of last week, 36,526 new positive cases were recorded through PCR and lateral flow tests, compared with 20,268 cases reported this Sunday, Monday and today. With hospital admissions and admissions to intensive care falling, Sturgeon said that the data suggested Omicron peaked in the first week of January and that “we are now on the downward slope of this wave of cases”. Yesterday the limit on numbers at outdoor public events was lifted. The remaining statutory measures introduced in response to Omicron – limits on indoor public events; the requirement for one metre physical distancing between different groups in indoor public places; the requirement for table service in hospitality premises serving alcohol on the premises; and the closure of nightclubs – will be lifted from next Monday, 24 January. From Monday, the guidance asking people to stick to a three-household limit on indoor gatherings will also be lifted. Before the statement, opposition parties and business groups called on Sturgeon to ease restrictions more quickly. The Scottish Hospitality Group pointed to Scottish government research which suggested that the number of people visiting bars and restaurants has fallen while the number mixing in each other’s homes has risen. Here is some comment from journalists and commentators on the Boris Johnson interview. From Sky’s Kate McCann From my colleague Peter Walker From the Spectator’s Isabel Hardman From TalkTV’s Piers Morgan From the Sun’s Harry Cole Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, has responded to the Sky interview by saying it is “the end of the road” for Boris Johnson. She points out that, although Johnson may be saying no one told him specifically the party was against the rules (see 1.15pm), they should not have had to - because it should have been obvious. She says: Boris Johnson clearly knows it’s the end of the road. He’s the prime minister, he set the rules, he didn’t need anyone to tell him that the party he attended broke them. If he had any respect for the British public, he would do the decent thing and resign. Rayner has identified a crucial feature of Johnson’s denial; that it was tightly defined, which implies he is not contesting broader aspects of the case against him. For example, Johnson may have been told that holding the party was unwise, without someone saying explicitly it was against Covid regulations. Dominic Cummings and the other official or officials who raised concerns may not have felt the need to spell this out - because they thought it was so obvious. Here is the PA Media story on the Boris Johnson interview. Boris Johnson has denied lying to parliament about a gathering in No 10’s garden during the first lockdown despite Dominic Cummings saying he would swear on oath that he warned the prime minister it would be a rule-breaking drinks party. In a major interview, Johnson said he had told the Whitehall inquiry into the allegations that to the “best of my recollection” ahead of the 20 May 2020 event “nobody told me that what we were doing was against the rules”. The prime minister said that he does “humbly apologise to people for misjudgments that were made” after facing calls to resign over the partygate affair, including from six Tory MPs. He made his first public appearance after reducing his contacts from when No 10 said a family member tested positive for Covid-19 last week, as chancellor Rishi Sunak refused to give the prime minister his unequivocal backing. (See 12.53pm.) Asked if he had lied to parliament over the parties during a visit to a north London hospital, Johnson said: “No. I want to begin by repeating my apologies to everybody for the misjudgments that I’ve made, that we may have made in No 10 and beyond, whether in Downing Street or throughout the pandemic. “Nobody told me that what we were doing was against the rules, that the event in question was something that ... was not a work event, and as I said in the House of Commons when I went out into that garden I thought that I was attending a work event.” Johnson said he “could not imagine why on earth it would have gone ahead, or why it would’ve been allowed to go ahead” if he had been told it was not a “work event”. “I do humbly apologise to people for misjudgments that were made but that is the very, very best of my recollection about this event, that’s what I’ve said to the inquiry,” he said. Here is a clip from Beth Rigby’s pooled interview with Boris Johnson. Q: Will you still be PM at the end of the year? Johnson says he understands why Rigby is asking the question, but he is focusing on delivering for the public. And that’s it. Sky News has finished broadcasting the clip. I will post a proper summary and analysis soon. Q: Has cabinet agreed not to renew the plan B restrictions? Johnson ducks the question, but stresses the importance of booster vaccines. Q: Can you survive this? Your ratings are terrible. Johnson says he understands people’s feelings. He repeats his apologies. But he says there is “another story” that he wants to come on to. That is about how Britain has been able to recover more quickly from Covid than any other comparable country. Q: But you must be worried about your future? Johnson says his job is to remain focused on delivering for the British people. Q: Was having to apologise to the Queen for No 10 staff holding parties the night before Prince Philip’s funeral a moment of shame for you? Johnson says he deeply and bitterly regrets what happened. Q: It is ludicrous to say you went out there, and saw the drinks, and did not realise it was a party. Johnson repeats his apologies for the misjudgments that were made. Q: Do you accept on principle a PM who has misled parliament should have to resign? Johnson says it would be wrong to prejudge what the report will say. Rigby asks again if Johnson will resign if the Gray report finds against him. Johnson again says people should wait to see what is in the report. Q: Will you resign if it is shown that you have misled parliament? Johnson says they should wait to see what the Sue Gray report says. Q: Dominic Lawson says you were warned about the party, and you said they were over-reacting? Johnson says he is sorry for the judgments made. He says, again, no one told him this was against the rules. Beth Rigby, the Sky News political editor, is interviewing Boris Johnson. Q: Have you lied about the No 10 party? Johnson says he wants to start by repeating his apology. No one told him this was against the rules, or not a work event, he says. He says we should wait to see what Sue Gray says. He will return to the Commons as soon as that report is out to say more. Q: So you are saying Dominic Cummings is lying? Johnson says he is sorry mistakes were made. Q: He is saying you are lying? Johnson says he can say categorically nobody told him this was against the rules, or not a work event. His memory of this was going out into the garden for about 25 minutes, for what he thought was a work event. He says he humbly apologises for the misjudgments made. Boris Johnson has restated his claim that he believed the gathering in No 10 garden on 20 May 2020 was a “work event”, PA Media reports. I will post the full quotes shortly. Rishi Sunak, who as chancellor has appeared slightly more reluctant than other cabinet ministers to defend Boris Johnson over the Downing Street party, has recorded a TV interview. He called in the cameras to discuss the latest earnings figures, but briefly answered questions about partygate too. Asked if he believed Johnson’s account, Sunak replied: Of course I do. The prime minister set out his understanding of this matter last week in parliament. I refer you to his words. Sue Gray is conducting an inquiry into this matter and I fully support the prime minister’s requests for patience while that concludes. Asked if Johnson should resign if he had lied to parliament, Sunak said: “I am not going to get into hypotheticals, the ministerial code is clear on these matters.” This is more or less exactly what Downing Street said when asked this question (see 12.34pm) – and Dominic Raab, for that matter (see 9.31am). But TV interviews can often convey more than you might glean from the transcript and, although Sunak was just repeating “the line”, viewers might conclude that he was not doing so with great enthusiasm. He also wrapped up the interview quickly, allowing him to ignore a question about whether he supported the PM unequivocally. At the Downing Street lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesman rejected Dominic Cummings’ latest claim that Boris Johnson has lied to parliament about what he knew about the No 10 party on 20 May 2020. The spokesman said: You have seen us say repeatedly that it is untrue that the prime minister was warned about the event [on May 20, 2020] in advance and you have got the prime minister’s statement to the house. Asked if Johnson had ever lied to the Commons, the spokesman replied: “No.” The spokesman also said Johnson supported the guidance in the ministerial code saying ministers who lie to the Commons should resign. Asked if Johnson would resign himself if he misled parliament, the spokesman said: The guidance is clear, the ministerial code is very clear on this point when it comes to knowingly misleading the house and the prime minister abides by that, and we fully support it. The spokesman also said it was important not to “jump ahead” and conflate what was in the ministerial code with “what the investigation may or may not conclude or set out”. I will post more from the briefing later. In a blogpost for the Spectator, Robert Peston, ITV’s political editor, says Sue Gray, the senior civil servant investigating the partygate scandal, knows the identity of the second senior No 10 official who told Martin Reynolds, the PM’s principal private secretary, that the party on 20 May 2020 should not got ahead, and that she wants to speak to him. In his Substack blog yesterday, Dominic Cummings said he and another “very senior official” told Reynolds on 20 May that holding the party was a mistake, because it was against the rules, and that it should be cancelled. Cummings said these concerns were also raised directly with Boris Johnson. (See 9.31am.) No 10 denies this, and is sticking to its claim that Johnson was not alerted to concerns about the appropriateness of the event before it started. Peston, who like Cummings has not named the second official, says: [Gray] has also told the sender of the dynamite email she would like to speak with him but has not yet. When she does, he will both point her to the email and he will tell her that Reynolds immediately came to his office after receipt of the email and asked him why the party should be cancelled. Reynolds was told by the email sender – ‘in the nicest possible way’ – that the party was a kind sentiment but it should be cancelled because it broke the rules. Reynolds allegedly said he feared it could be more embarrassing to cancel. I have included a new paragraph to the post at 11.29am, listing all 14 government defeats in the Lords on the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill last night, explaining which of those defeats cannot be overturned in the Commons. If the government does want to bring back those measures, it would have to put them in a new bill. To see the update, you may need to refresh the page. The government has won its court of appeal bid to overturn a ruling that a contract given to a company whose founders were friends of former adviser Dominic Cummings was unlawful, PA Media reports. PA says: Last year, the high court ruled that the Cabinet Office’s decision to award a contract to market research firm Public First was unlawful as it gave rise to “apparent bias”. The organisation was given a contract for over £550,000 in June 2020 for focus groups and other research - including testing public health slogans such as “Stay at home, protect the NHS, save lives”. Campaigning organisation the Good Law Project brought a case over the links between the firm’s founders and the prime minister’s former adviser as well as then-Cabinet Office minister Michael Gove. In the original ruling, Mrs Justice O’Farrell found that the “apparent bias” was not due to the existing relationships between Cummings and Public First but because of a failure to consider any other research agency and record the objective criteria used in the selection. However, in a judgment this morning, the court of appeal overturned the previous ruling. The Lord Chief Justice Lord Burnett, sitting with Lord Justice Coulson and Lady Justice Carr, found that the original judgment was an “unprecedented outcome”. Lord Burnett concluded: “The fair-minded and reasonably informed observer would not have concluded that a failure to carry out a comparative exercise of the type identified by the judge created a real possibility that the decision-maker was biased.” Cummings has described this as “total vindication” for the procurement decision he took in a Twitter thread starting here. In his Today programme interview this morning Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy prime minister, was asked if the government would try to reverse the government defeats on the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill last night when it returns to the Lords (or at least those capable of being reversed - some clauses cannot be brought back, because they were only added after the bill arrived in the Lords). Raab said the government would have to think carefully about what it would do next, but he signalled that it would bring back the measures relating to noisy protests. (See 11.29am.) He told the programme: In relation to noise, of course we support the right to peaceful and rambunctious protest, but it cannot be allowed to interfere with the lives of the law-abiding majority. Here is a summary of the votes the government lost last night on the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill in the House of Lords. I have taken the detail from PA Media. 1) Peers voted for an urgent review of spiking offences. 2) Peers voted to impose a duty of candour on members of the police workforce. 3) Peers voted to make misogyny a hate crime. 4 and 5) Peers removed measures in the bill giving the police the power to impose conditions on protest marches judged to be too noisy. There was also a second vote on the same issue. 6) Peers voted to include an amendment in the bill guaranteeing there would be no “unintended ban on protests in Parliament Square”. 7) Peers rejected measures to create a new offence of “locking on”, a tactic used by protesters to make it difficult to remove them, carrying with it a penalty of up to a year in prison. 8) Peers voted to ensure that tougher penalties in the bill for blocking a highway would only apply to people blocking major routes and motorways, not all roads. 9) Peers rejected measures to a create a new offence of obstructing the construction or maintenance of major transport works. 10) Peers rejected measures to create an offence of interfering with the use or operation of key national infrastructure, including airports, the road network, railways and newspaper printers. 11) Peers rejected measures to allow the police to stop and search a person or vehicle if they suspected an offence was planned, such as causing serious disruption or obstructing major transport works. 12) Peers rejected measures to allow police to stop and search anyone at a protest “without suspicion”. 13) Peers reject measures that would allow individuals with a history of causing serious disruption to be banned by the courts from attending certain protests. 14) Peers voted to repeal the 19th century law which criminalises rough sleeping. Of these votes, 7), 9), 10), 11), 12) and 13) relate to clauses that were introduced to the bill when it was in the Lords, which means they cannot be overturned in the Commons. Last night the government suffered 14 defeats in the House of Lords on the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill. My colleague Jedidajah Otte has the story here. Here are some tweets from peers about the votes, which represent a significant setback for the Home Office, particularly because some of the clauses in the bill relating to protest were only introduced when the legislation was in the Lords, and cannot now be reinserted when it returns to the Commons. From Dick Newby, the Lib Dem leader in the Lords From Andrew Adonis, the Labour peer From Jenny Jones, the Green party peer From Paul Strasburger, a Lib Dem peer There will be three urgent questions in the Commons starting at 12.30pm: on the role of the military dealing with Channel crossings; on fraud in coronavirus grant schemes; and on Derby County Football Club. We are likely to hear from Boris Johnson today, the Mail’s Jason Groves reports. Johnson has been avoiding doing media in recent days, partly, we were told last week, because he was limiting contact with others after a family member tested positive. William Hague, the former Conservative leader, told Times Radio this morning that he is “appalled” at Boris Johnson’s failure to tackle the drinking and partying culture in No 10. He said: I am appalled because I can’t imagine allowing I can’t imagine that being allowed in any government that I have served in, which is quite a few governments. You can understand officials working together under great stress ... sometimes having a drink and sometimes relaxing together and you can understand that. However, this the scale and regularity of what we’ve read about - it’s not something I can picture happening under David Cameron or John Major or Margaret Thatcher without them saying, ‘What the hell do you think you’re all doing? Get back to your desks and put away that drink.’ In his column in the Times (paywall) today Hague says, if Johnson is forced to resign, he will be “an outlier in British political history” because other prime ministers made to quit by their own MPs have left over policy issues, not because of their conduct. Hague says Johnson that should try to ensure the Sue Gray report is published this week, so the crisis is resolved quickly, and that Johnson should announce measures to show he is taking standards more seriously, such as allowing Lord Geidt, his standards adviser, to initiate his own investigations and accepting all the recommendations in the recent report from the Committee on Standards in Public Life. The BBC will be forced to axe some of its programming after being left with a £285m gap in funding from the two-year licence fee freeze, Tim Davie, its director general, has warned. My collaegue Jamie Grierson has the story here. Downing Street refuses to concede that the event for staff held in the garden on 20 May 2020 was a “party”, even though attendees were asked to BYOB (bring your own bottle/booze). Boris Johnson claimed last week that “it could be said technically to fall within the guidance”, which seemed to mean ‘We’re still calling it a work event, even though in truth we know that’s not really what it was’. But, as the Mirror reports, in his Sky News interview this morning Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy PM, momentarily went off message and said it was a “party”, before quickly correcting himself. Pay for workers in Britain has fallen in real terms for the first time in more than a year, despite signs that employers shrugged off concerns over the Omicron coronavirus variant to continue hiring in December, my colleague Richard Partington reports. This is awkward for Boris Johnson, who last autum was arguing that “wage growth” would be what proved that his levelling up strategy was working. Good morning. Boris Johnson’s critics believe that, if they can prove he lied to the House of Commons, then finally they will have the evidence to force him out (because the ministerial code says “ministers who knowingly mislead parliament will be expected to offer their resignation to the prime minister”) and Dominic Cummings is trying again to lever the PM out on these grounds. Cummings has tried before, and last year he told MPs in evidence to a committee that he had heard Johnson say he would rather see the “bodies pile high” than order a third lockdown – a claim Johnson had categorically denied from the dispatch box. But last year the parliamentary authorities, and even the committee taking evidence from Cummings, showed no interest in following up Cummings’ evidence on this point, and adjudicating on who was telling the truth, and the allegation was left hanging in mid air. Yesterday Cummings returned with new evidence of Johnson lying which, because partygate has become such a toxic controversy, will be much harder to ignore. In his statement to MPs last week Johnson said that when he attended the party in the No 10 garden on 20 May 2020, when lockdown restrictions were in force, he “believed implicitly that this was a work event”. No 10 has also said that Johnson was not “warned” in advance that it would be a mistake for the party to go ahead. There have also been claims from the government that he did not know it was happening in advance. No 10 says he did not see the email from his principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, inviting staff to the party (although it would not be unusual for a PM not to read an email about a diary matter – his staff are there to read them for him). And on the Today programme this morning Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy PM, was asked to confirm that Johnson has denied knowing “in advance about it [the party]”. That was correct, Raab said. Cummings’ evidence, if true, blows the Johnson account to pieces. In a new post on his Substack blog, he says that he personally told Johnson on the day of the party that holding it was a mistake. Johnson “waved [the concerns] aside”, Cummings says. He also says that he and another “very senior official” told Reynolds on the day that holding the party would be against the rules. Cummings says Reynolds disagreed, but said he would discuss it with the PM. Cummings says he is “sure” Reynolds did check with the PM. Raab has been giving interviews this morning. He told Times Radio that Cummings’ claims were “nonsense”. He said: The suggestion that [Johnson] lied is nonsense. He’s made it very clear to the House of Commons ... that he thought it was a work event. But Raab also refused to discuss the details of Cummings claims, and he said these were matters for the investigation by Sue Gray, the civil servant investigating all the partygate claims. Raab also admitted that, in normal circumstances, lying to parliament would be a resignation matter. After stressing that he did not want to “get into hypotheticals”, he told the Today programme: If it’s lying, deliberate in the way you describe, if it’s not corrected immediately, it would normally, under the ministerial code and the governance around parliament, be a resigning matter. Here is the agenda for the day. Morning: Boris Johnson chairs cabinet. 10am: Richard Meddings, the government’s proposed candidate for chair of NHS England, gives evidence to the Commons health committee. 11.15am: Greg Hands, the energy minister, and Christopher Pincher, the housing minister, give evidence to the Commons business committee about energy policy. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 11.30am: Sajid Javid, the health secretary, takes questions in the Commons. 11.30am: Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, gives evidence to the Commons Scottish affairs committee about Storm Arwen. 12pm: Vaughan Gething, the Welsh government’s economy minister, holds a Covid briefing. 12.15pm: Andy Burnham, the mayor of Greater Manchester, holds a press conference on Covid. 1.30pm: Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, takes questions in the Senedd. 2pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, makes a statement on Covid in the Scottish parliament. There will be some UK Covid coverage here, but for more coronavirus coverage, do read our global live blog. It’s here. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comUnilever has been warned that buying GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer products arm is likely to substantially swell its debt pile and could trigger a “multi-notch downgrade” to its credit rating. Ratings agency Fitch said Unilever would not be able to keep hold of its current A rating with a stable outlook beyond 2024-2025, and would be cut to BBB, if it were to acquire GSK’s consumer products division or another large business. Shares in Unilever, which owns brands including Dove soap, Marmite and Ben and Jerry’s ice-cream, have fallen by more than 10% since news broke of the company’s failed £50bn approach for the pharmaceutical firm’s consumer products arm. Fitch calculated that Unilever’s £50bn offer for the GSK division would have seen the company’s net debt reach levels equivalent to 4.5 or 5 times its pre-tax profit after the deal was finalised in 2022. The agency said it considers cutting a company’s rating from A once it debt rises above the threshold of 3.3 times higher than pre-tax earnings. Unilever will need to raise its offer in order to gain GSK’s approval, according to Fitch, meaning an even higher level of debt. However, Fitch said the extent of the downgrade to Unilever’s credit rating would depend on other action taken by the company, including the dividends offered to investors, whether it acquired other firms, and whether it sells off some of its existing business. Unilever’s chief executive, Alan Jope, has pledged to grow the company’s health, beauty and hygiene business and said this would be funded by selling some of its slower-growing operations, such as food brands, rather than relying on taking on more debt. GSK is planning to demerge its consumer healthcare business – which owns brands including Panadol pain relief and Sensodyne toothpaste – by the middle of this year. The spin-off will be chaired by former Tesco boss Sir Dave Lewis, and analysts have said GSK should hold out for a higher offer. Despite its warning, Fitch said it views “GSK’s operations as complimentary to Unilever’s” and added the acquisition would give a boost to Unilever’s current profit margin. According to Fitch’s analysis, the deal would enable Unilever to strengthen its high-growth range of vitamin products and supplements, while also allowing to start selling over-the-counter medicine through GSK’s range of products for pain-relief and dealing with digestive and respiratory problems. Fitch said any deal between the consumer goods firm and GSK “carries high integration risk”, as the Marmite-owner would have to learn how to distribute over-the-counter medicine.England in Australia: anatomy of a shellacking. The reviews are in. The play-by-play reports have been filed by those closest to this sullen and lifeless Ashes tour. Two things stand out. Firstly, the startling mediocrity of so much of the basic management. There is no question, if only in the spirt of making the deckchairs look nice while the prow of the ship slides into the north Atlantic, that heads must roll, even if just in the name of keeping up appearances. The second thing is the level of blame and misdirection around England’s defeat, a quality that seems in itself deeply instructive. To date, the roster of excuses offered up by players, management and connected parties has included: the umpires, the rain, the heat, the ball, the pitches, inexperience, bad luck, Darren Stevens, injury, tiredness, boozing, skin folds, not enough family time, too much family time, the need to play golf, playing too much golf, the bowling being too fast, the bowling being too accurate, the bowling being too bouncy, each other and, best of all, a Culture Of Excuses. Plus of course Darren Stevens, and Darren Stevens again. It is a quirk of English cricket’s angst-ridden conversation with itself that Stevens’ name was mentioned so often over the first three Tests that he issued a statement asking people to stop bringing him into it. With good reason too. Here’s a funny thing: Australian Test players in county cricket have a WhatsApp group where they talk about the difficulties of playing here. It’s called “Stevosgoingtogetyou”. And he is. Last summer Stevens bowled to Marnus Labuschagne twice and once to Travis Head. He got them out all three times, for 11, 11, and 20. In reality Stevens is one of the good bits of county cricket – supremely skilful, supremely fit, famously encouraging to younger players, with 227 wickets at 18 to his name between ages 40 and 45. To hold him up as an embodiment of a failed culture is nuts. He’s the good bit, a reservoir of skill and knowledge, and the guarantor of a certain standard of localised difficulty. But then the idea that what happens in the county game is all bad, or divorced in any meaningful sense from every other part of English cricket is clearly absurd. This does seem to be the playbook however. Witness the recent comments of the ECB’s eternally slippery chief executive Tom Harrison , who has presided over county cricket for the last seven years, but who seemed startled to discover in the wake of Ashes defeat that there is so much work to be done here, so many problems that only he, Tom Harrison, can possibly solve. More jarring was Joe Root’s comment that “anyone coming into this Test team at the minute is doing it in spite of county cricket, not because of county cricket.” Root’s wider point was more detailed and well-meaning, although there will always be something a little odd in hearing the highest-paid person in English cricket telling every county level coach, player, groundsman administrator, development officer, paying supporter and junior hopeful that the thing they like is trash and it’s basically their fault England have just lost 10 for 56 in Hobart. In Root’s defence it is a well-worn tale. Pitches are poor, rewarding only 40-something bed-blockers. This in turn is not preparation for Test cricket where pitches are good and the bowlers quick (not actually true most of the time). And this is why the England Test team can’t make 300. Is this true? The idea county cricket has consistently been an elite testing ground is definitely overplayed. If young players in the 1980s really were being pounded by a revolving attack of Sylvester Clarke and Clive Rice every week why were England so bad at batting? Similarly the idea the current circuit is peopled solely by aged pie-throwing decadents is exaggerated. In his brief appearances for Yorkshire in the last three years Root has faced Michael Neser, Kyle Abbott, Stuart Broad, James Anderson, Fidel Edwards, Jake Ball, Jade Dernbach, Sam Curran, Peter Siddle, George Garton, Michael Hogan, Nathan Gilchrist and Miguel Cummins, while playing alongside South Africa’s current opening bowler, Duanne Olivier. Does this really sound like the end of days? The other obvious problem with Root’s statement is that batters keep coming out of county cricket, starting well at Test level, then steadily getting worse. Ollie Pope averaged 47 after seven Tests against high-quality bowling, then fell through the floor as a centrally contracted England player. Is that somehow county cricket’s fault? The same goes for Dom Sibley, who averaged 47 in nine games in his first full Test year then fell apart under the eyes of England’s elite coaches. Ditto Rory Burns, who has got worse as an England player, and also Zak Crawley, who made a double hundred straight out of county cricket then fell to bits once England got him into the system. There is an aspect of being worked out here. It is common to have an early spike of form. Opposition bowlers find your weakness. You plateau out, then work and push on. Why has that not been happening? Why are England unable to oversee that development? This is surely the role of the elite pathway director, the elite batting coach, the head coach, the managing director. It definitely isn’t anything to do with Darren Stevens. There are two points worth adding. Root’s complaints about not replicating exactly the conditions of Test cricket in advance are the words of a sports person who has been cosseted through a system from boyhood, who feels it is an oversight not to be spoon-fed the perfect prep. How many successful people in the history of sport are given this? How many times had Shardul Thakur, Mohammed Siraj, Rishabh Pant and KL Rahul played red-ball cricket in England before last year? How hard and how desperately have England’s batters been begging the England fast bowlers to help prepare them for Mitchell Starc and Pat Cummins? That gap is there to be bridged. That is the test. It can be done. This isn’t to say county cricket is a healthy place. But it isn’t a separate, blameable entity, some toxic netherworld presided over by the hobgoblin king Darren Stevens. It is instead of a piece with everything else in English cricket, subject to the same scarce resources, invisibility, narrow demographic and careless management. Rather than blame, what it really needs is a little care.An ex-partner of KPMG sought to portray himself as negligent because it was the “lesser of two evils”, a tribunal heard today, as former employees of the big four accounting firm gave evidence about its audit of collapsed outsourcer Carillion. The tribunal is investigating claims made by the Financial Reporting Council, which regulates accountants, that KPMG and its staff misled FRC inspectors by forging documents in relation to its work on the accounts of Carillion and a software company, Regenersis. On Tuesday, the FRC published a settlement with KPMG and its former employee Stuart Smith over the 2014 Regenersis audit. Smith will pay a fine of £150,000 and is barred from accountancy for three years, while KPMG is liable for a sanction that will be determined after the tribunal. As the tribunal continued on Tuesday, much of the evidence focused on KPMG’s “misleading” disclosures to the FRC over its audit of Carillion. Carillion collapsed with £7bn of debts in January 2018, resulting in 3,000 job losses and causing chaos across hundreds of its projects – including two big hospitals, schools, roads and even Liverpool FC’s stadium, Anfield. KPMG has admitted misleading the FRC during routine checks on the quality of its audit but former staff members accused of misconduct by the FRC disagree over who was to blame. They include Peter Meehan, one of the most senior staff members, known as partners. He was suspended by the company in 2019 and left in 2021. On Tuesday, Meehan repeatedly denied being involved in the alleged falsification of documents. He had earlier told the tribunal that he was “shocked and devastated and angry” to find that members of his team had allegedly duped the regulator. Fionn Pilbrow, acting for one of Meehan’s team, Richard Kitchen, said Meehan knew about the alleged forgery of documents but “sought to paint a picture of yourself as just a negligent auditor” because it was the “lesser of two evils”. “Your evidence now is untrue and like all the evidence you’ve given, trying to distance yourself from your team,” said Pillbrow. Meehan denied this. The FRC alleges that Kitchen, an audit manager of Carillion, edited a key formula in a spreadsheet handed to the FRC, to increase a threshold for scrutiny of contracts from £300,000 to £1.5m. The change ruled out a large number of contracts that would have been flagged, and avoided uncomfortable questions on why more contracts had not been scrutinised, the FRC alleged. Kitchen strongly denies all wrongdoing. Pilbrow has argued that Kitchen was following Meehan’s directions, and that he did not knowingly make false representations to the regulators. Alistair Wright, a KPMG group senior manager working under Meehan, has already admitted “serious misconduct”. But lawyers for Meehan have argued that he was a “patsy” for actions carried out by members of his team. The tribunal continues.My friend Tony Birtill, who has died aged 67 of cancer, was a fluent Irish speaker and teacher based in Liverpool. He was a regular contributor to Irish-language publications including Foinse, Lá, Beo and Tuairisc, and broadcasted frequently on Radio Merseyside, RTÉ News, Raidió na Gaeltachta and Radio Ulster. In 1990 he re-established the now thriving Gaelic League (Conradh na Gaelige) branch in Liverpool. On Tony’s initiative the Frongoch memorial was established in 2002, marking the site in north Wales where participants in the Easter Rising had been interned. In 2018 Tony advised on translating the phrase “You’ll never walk alone” into Irish for use on a Spirit of Shankly banner at Anfield football ground. Tony’s book A Hidden History: The Irish Language in Liverpool (2020) brought to light the considerable numbers of Irish speakers in the city in the 19th century, the contribution Irish speakers from Merseyside made to the language revival movement, and the prevalence of words and expressions of Irish origin still found in the Liverpool dialect. Born in Liverpool, Tony was the son of Julia (nee Daly), a nurse from Garlow Cross, Co Meath, and Joe Birtill, a chemistry teacher. He developed a keen interest in Irish from an early age after having heard it spoken by his mother and among the Christian Brothers at his school, Cardinal Godfrey, in Liverpool. After graduating in economics and economic history at University of East Anglia in 1975, Tony did his teacher training at the Institute of Education, University of London. He taught economics initially at Harlow college, Essex, then at Skelmersdale college, Lancashire. It was in the early 1980s that he took up study of the Irish language in earnest, and it was at these evening classes in Liverpool that I met him. After gaining A-level and teaching qualifications, Tony began teaching Irish at the Liverpool Irish Centre, Liverpool University Continuing Education and other venues. He also wrote regularly for the Irish Post during this time. A qualified mountain leader, Tony guided walks – conducted mainly in Irish – at the Oideas Gael school in Donegal each summer, and they became a significant attraction in the school’s programme. According to one participant, “Tony’s walks in Gleann were legendary because of his deep interest in and knowledge of local flora and fauna, archaeology, the rugged landscape, the remote setting, the language and culture.” Tony was a socialist, republican, trade unionist and environmentalist. He was on the committees for the Great Hunger commemoration, the Liverpool 1916 commemoration and the Liverpool Irish festival. Always good company, he was renowned for his sense of humour and loud laugh. He remained dedicated to his local area, campaigning to maintain rights of way and cycle routes, and continued teaching Irish classes in Liverpool until shortly before he died. Tony is survived by his wife, Grace, a special needs teacher, and his son, Liam, from a former relationship with Liz Hanson.Competitors at the Beijing Winter Olympics will face an “Orwellian surveillance state” in China and could put themselves in danger if they speak out in support of the Uyghur Muslims, human rights and athlete advocacy groups have said. In a blunt message before the Games that begin on 4 February they also warned athletes not to expect the International Olympic Committee to protect them if they stood up for human rights or were critical of the Chinese authorities. Yaqiu Wang, a researcher on China for Human Rights Watch, said the disappearance of the tennis player Peng Shuai was “a good indicator of what could possibly happen” if athletes spoke out. “Chinese laws are very vague on the crimes that can be used to prosecute people’s free speech,” she said. “People can be charged with picking quarrels or provoking trouble. There are all kinds of crimes that can be levelled at peaceful, critical comments. And in China the conviction rate is 99%.” Dr Sophie Richardson, the China director at Human Rights Watch, said: “One of the features of the 2008 Games was the authorities’ use of what was then considered high technology, but that pales in comparison to the Orwellian surveillance state. “The authorities use across the country now where tools like AI and predictive policing, Big Data databases, extensive surveillance of social media platforms, keeps people from engaging in certain kinds of conversations. Anyone who’s travelling to the country for these games – journalists, athletes, coaches – needs to be aware that this kind of surveillance could affect them.” Meanwhile, the US Nordic skier Noah Hoffman, who competed at the 2014 and 2018 Winter Olympics, has said the American team was telling its athletes not to talk about human rights for their own safety. “Athletes have an amazing platform and ability to speak out, to be leaders in society and yet the team is not letting them field questions on certain issues ahead of these Games,” he said. “That makes me upset. “But my advice to athletes is to stay silent because it would threaten their own safety and that’s not a reasonable ask of athletes. They can speak out when they get back.” That message was echoed by Rob Koehler, director general of the most high-profile international sports athlete advocate organisation, Global Athlete, who urged the IOC to announce it would support competitors who spoke in favour of human rights. “It is absolutely ridiculous that we’re telling athletes to be quiet,” he said. “But the IOC has not come out proactively to indicate that it will protect them. “Silence is complicity and that’s why we have concerns. So we’re advising athletes not to speak up. We want them to compete, and use their voice when they get home.”Microsoft’s planned takeover of Activision Blizzard puts the tech company at the centre of two big issues facing the sector: the metaverse and Washington’s determination to rein in big tech. The metaverse is where the physical and digital worlds come together, although it is very much at the concept stage. The idea is that you will put on a virtual reality headset and a digital representation of yourself – an avatar – will interact with others at work and play in a combination of virtual and augmented reality. Microsoft has made clear with its planned $68.7bn (£50.6bn) acquisition of Activision Blizzard that it expects gaming to be a key feature of this new world, with Satya Nadella, Microsoft’s chair and chief executive, saying on Tuesday that gaming “will play a key role in the development of metaverse platforms”. If the metaverse is an immersive world, then gaming – as exemplified by titles such as Roblox and (Microsoft-owned) Minecraft – already offers that experience to its participants. Mark Zuckerberg is so convinced by the potential of the metaverse concept that he changed the corporate name of his empire from Facebook Inc to Meta. If his recent announcement that his company is spending $10bn a year on the metaverse seemed like a gamble, Microsoft has just staked nearly $70bn on it. Of course there are immediate benefits for Microsoft, which will gain access to Activision’s 390 million monthly users and huge gaming franchises such as Call of Duty and Warcraft. Gaming, Metaverse or not, is a $180bn global market already, according to research firm Newzoo. Microsoft owns the Xbox gaming platform and Activision’s games and talent will help the company in its competitive battle with Sony’s PlayStation as well as gaming offerings from Meta’s VR platform, Oculus. Despite big brands like Xbox and the Halo game, Microsoft’s big earners are business-focused: cloud computing (ie providing services like storage space over the internet and sparing you having to invest in hardware) and PC software. As analysts at Wedbush Securities said of the deal on Tuesday, Microsoft’s consumer strategy has “been on a treadmill approach”. Not any more. But the opinion of regulators and lawmakers matters on this deal. Microsoft is one of the big three console makers and owns games-making studios such as Mojang, the creator of Minecraft. If this deal goes ahead it would make Microsoft the world’s third-largest gamesmaker and it will be noted by regulators, says David Wagner, analyst and portfolio manager at Aptus Capital Advisors. “This will get a lot of looks from a regulatory standpoint.” The US competition watchdog, the Federal Trade Commission, is now under the leadership of Lina Khan, who has underlined her interest in tackling the big tech players by successfully lodging a renewed complaint against Meta. Khan is a Joe Biden appointee and big tech has few friends among Democrats and Republicans in Congress. Microsoft is making a big move in a hostile environment.My father, Colin Ward, who has died aged 90, spent much of his working life as a herdsman on farms in the home counties and Norfolk, but also had a period as an unwitting ‘virgin soldier’ during a violent interlude in Singapore in the early 1950s. Colin was born, and grew up in, the village of Kimpton in Hertfordshire. His father, Tom, was a tailor and his mother, Drusilla (nee Kirby), a housewife. Colin left St Mary’s secondary modern school in Welwyn at 14 and worked as a clerk in the accounts department of the plastics division of ICI at Kimpton Hoo, until, aged 18, he was called up to do his national service. After basic training he embarked on a six-week journey to British Malaya, and then found himself based in Singapore in early 1950, from where he fought in the Malayan Emergency. Much later in life Colin told many stories of that time. He was on a bus one day which was attacked, and a woman sitting behind him was shot and killed. On another occasion his train was ambushed, and he recalled watching a line of dum-dum bullets making holes in the carriage above his head as he lay on the floor. The soldier sleeping in the bunk above him was hit and died instantly. The author Leslie Thomas did his national service at the same time and in the same field of conflict as Colin, and Thomas’s novel, The Virgin Soldiers, had many echoes of Colin’s own experiences, although he claimed not to recognise the more salacious aspects of the book. Colin was discharged in 1951, returning to the UK on the Empire Windrush. He briefly considered rejoining the army, for the camaraderie, but instead moved to his sister’s farm at Ashdon, Essex, where he worked as a herdsman. He met Anne Williamson, the daughter of the village shopkeeper, at his 21st birthday party, and they married in 1954. Thereafter Colin worked as a herdsman on various farms around the home counties until 1967, when he moved his young family to Norfolk to look after the cattle at Norfolk College of Agriculture (now Easton College) near Norwich and to give on-the-job training to a new generation of herdsmen and women. Colin left farming in the mid-1970s, needing a higher wage to support his growing family. He worked first as a machine setter, then as a process worker at May &amp; Baker in Norwich, and finally as a landscape gardener until his retirement. Anne died in 2007. He is survived by their four children and five grandchildren.English water companies have got used to pumping raw sewage into the sea and rivers. An investigation launched last year by the regulator, Ofwat, and the Environment Agency, is a chance to put things right. But there are worrying signs that this opportunity to shine a light is in danger of being missed. The refusal by the Environment Agency to reveal which 2,000 sewage treatment works in England are being looked at, and whether this will lead to delays in dealing with new complaints, raises questions about its commitment to openness. That the investigation is happening at all is due to huge efforts by campaigners. Concern over sewage dumps has been rising in response to water companies’ failure to tackle a longstanding problem that increased extreme weather, due to climate change, is expected to make worse. Discharges of untreated waste into the sea or rivers are supposed to happen only in exceptional circumstances, to reduce flood risk. Over recent years, it has become clear that rules are being routinely flouted by an industry that puts profits before environmental stewardship. At the same time, the Environment Agency’s record for punishing breaches has sharply declined following budget cuts. A report from a committee of MPs last week drew attention to the poor condition of rivers and called for a step change. Last summer, Southern Water was fined a record £90m for pouring between 16bn and 21bn litres of raw sewage into protected coastal waters for financial gain. It was the worst environmental crime in the Environment Agency’s 25-year history. Yet the House of Commons last year stopped short of imposing a legal duty on water companies to stop releasing raw sewage, after ministers rejected a Lords amendment. The nine privatised water companies, which are regional monopolies, are instead obliged to make only “progressive reductions” in the amount they pollute. Now the approach of the Environment Agency to requests for information from the campaign group Fish Legal suggests an unwillingness to hold the industry publicly to account. Not every company has the same repulsive track record as Southern Water. But the problem is systemic and cannot be blamed on one weak or unscrupulous board of directors. Over 11 years, £16.9bn has been awarded to water company shareholders in dividends, while debt has rocketed to £48bn. Bosses are rewarded for failure: Liv Garfield, chief executive of Severn Trent, was awarded £1.9m in bonuses in 2020, a year when the company poured untreated waste into waterways on nearly 61,000 occasions. It doesn’t have to be like this. Scottish Water is publicly owned, charges less, and since 2002 has invested nearly 35% more, per household, than privatised English water companies in the infrastructure upgrades that are needed to limit pollution. Welsh Water is also non-profit. The English industry’s dismal track record makes renationalisation the obvious answer. In the short term, the bodies with responsibility for regulating water must toughen up. A five-year plan from Ofwat, expected soon, must put much stronger emphasis on environmental protection. And when the public seek information about which water companies are failing, they must be given it.Diego Carlos appears to have succeeded in forcing a move from Sevilla to Newcastle and could be registered in time to make his debut in Saturday’s Premier League game at Leeds. Shortly after the 28-year-old Brazilian centre-back submitted a formal transfer request, Sevilla – who had rejected two Newcastle bids – appeared to concede defeat in their attempts to retain him and began advanced negotiations over a potential deal in the region of £30m. With Newcastle second-bottom and having won one game all season while conceding 43 Premier League goals, Eddie Howe has identified signing at least one central defender as imperative. When Lille rejected han attempt to buy the 22-year-old Netherlands defender Sven Botman, Newcastle swiftly switched their attention to Carlos, who would need to be registered by midday on Friday to be involved at Leeds. Having begun his career in his homeland, he moved to Portugal, playing for Estoril, and then joined Sevilla from Nantes in 2019, helping the team in second place in La Liga to win the Europa League in 2020. He would be Howe’s third signing, joining the England right-back Kieran Trippier, acquired from Atlético Madrid for £15m, and the centre-forward Chris Wood, a £25m buy from Burnley.“Of all things in the world, people are the most precious,” Mao Zedong said soon after taking power, believing China needed more soldiers and workers. The advent of peace saw the population rocket from 540 million to 969 million over the next three decades. Authorities abruptly switched to curbing births and brutally implementing the “one-child” policy. These days, most Chinese couples are curtailing their families – or going without – by choice. The population now stands at 1.4 billion; a sixth of the global total. But last year’s birthrate was the lowest since 1949, and the rate of population growth the lowest since the Great Famine six decades ago. The pandemic has seen dramatic drops in births in many places. But in China, the shift is part of a pronounced long-term trend. Several experts believe that last year marked the population peak. Numerous Asian countries face a population crisis; South Korea has the world’s lowest fertility rate at 0.9, far below China’s rate of 1.3. (The replacement rate is around 2.1.) But Chinese leaders continued to impose tight restrictions long after demographers urged them to ease off. Relaxing the rules – permitting couples two children, and last year three – came too late. Now Beijing is scrambling to persuade people to have more children (though not in Xinjiang, where there are reports of Uyghur women being forced to have abortions and sterilisations, and the birthrate has almost halved). About one-third of the population is predicted to be aged over 60 by 2050. A 2019 report by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences said the state pension fund was likely to run out of money by 2035. Some analysts suggest this demographic timebomb may prevent China from overtaking the US as the world’s largest economy. The problem is exacerbated by China’s heavily skewed sex ratio at birth, which was worsened by the one-child policy: the country now has 30 million more men than women. Young women also seem to be opting out of marriage: a survey of 18- to 26-year-old urban residents by the Communist Youth League found that 43.9% of women had no intention of getting married or were unsure whether it would happen. The discrimination mothers face at work appears to be a significant disincentive. The government has banned expensive private tutoring and promised increased affordable childcare; such policies may appeal given growing concerns about the cost of living. But a recent report suggested that Beijing would have to spend around 5 of GDP on incentives if it wanted to see the fertility rate reach 1.6. The concern is that the state may give up on persuasion. In a system overwhelmingly run by men, the declining fertility rate and concerns about unwed men have already led to the promotion of conservative “family values”. The state feminist organisation has for years encouraged young women to focus on marriage and motherhood. More recently, the government has introduced a 30-day cooling off period for divorces. Now men are reporting finding it harder to obtain vasectomies, and recent guidelines saying local governments should try to reduce the number of abortions for “non-medical reasons” have sparked fears of reduced access. There are not only more humane but more effective ways of dealing with the falling birthrate. China has no appetite for immigration. But it should redouble its pursuit of increased automation, household registration reforms, better rural education and a higher retirement age, with better conditions for workers. Beijing seems to see its population as a commodity to be managed. But the abuses of the one-child era should not be replaced by pro-natalist infringements of people’s rights. • This article was amended on 18 January 2022. In an earlier version, we used percentages for the fertility rate. These are not percentages. The rates refer to an average number of children born to women in the country and this has been corrected.The body of a four-year-old Belgian boy has been found in the Netherlands after he was abducted by his babysitter, who it emerged has a previous conviction for abuse that led to the death of a two-year-old child. A police search found Dean Verberckmoes, who had been missing for four days, at the back of a car park near a theme park on an artificial island off the Dutch Zeeland coast on Sunday night. The discovery followed the arrest and questioning of Dave De Kock, 34, who had been due to return the boy to his grandmother last Thursday. De Kock had been arrested at 2.15pm on Sunday after reports from residents in Gorinchem, in South Holland province, of an intoxicated man peering into houses. It has been reported that De Kock was initially unable to answer questions but later led detectives to where he is suspected of dumping Dean’s body. De Kock, who was described as a “cuddly uncle” to Dean, had regularly looked after the boy for his mother, Elke Verberckmoes, 39, who is receiving treatment for depression. Verberckmoes told Belgian media outlets that she had trusted De Kock entirely and had no idea that he had been convicted in 2008 and sentenced to 10 years in prison for “inhumane acts resulting in the death” of two-year-old Miguel Van Kriekinge. De Kock’s prison sentence ended in December 2018. On Sunday, Verberckmoes said: “Dave would take care of my son, which he did every Wednesday. They get along very well and Dean considers him something of a cuddly uncle. There was no indication that he had other plans this time.” Dean’s last words to his mother before being taken were: “Goodbye mum, I’m going to miss you.” The boy was last been seen by Verberckmoes on Wednesday when De Kock dropped her off at a hospital in Sint-Niklaas, a city near Antwerp, where she was staying for scheduled treatment. De Kock then drove the boy to his house in Kerkstraat in Sint-Gillis-Waas where he lived with his girlfriend. On Thursday, De Kock told the boy’s grandmother that Dean wanted to stay an extra night with him. Over the next few days, De Kock maintained contact via text messages with Dean’s mother but communication appears to have ended on Saturday, at which point the police were alerted. In response to public anger over the case, Belgium’s justice minister, Vincent Van Quickenborne, said legislation allowing judges to order the surveillance of offenders after prison had been enacted too late to apply to him. De Kock’s previous conviction had seen him befriend his victim’s mother, Sandra Verbeek, 35, whom he had lived with for four weeks before her son’s death. A court heard from psychiatric experts that De Kock would react in a “sadistic way” when he was upset. In explanation of the fatal injuries to Verbeek’s child, De Kock had said he had played “brutal games” with the boy while under the influence of drugs. A judge ruled that the injuries discovered to the boy’s face, torso and arms “could in no way be explained by brutal games”. Dean’s body was found by police on Neeltje Jans, an artificial island popular with cyclists and walkers during the summer but largely unpopulated in the winter. The suspect’s Peugeot was discovered at the grounds of a car breaker.The British man who took hostages at a Texas synagogue had been under investigation by MI5 as a possible Islamist terrorist threat as recently as 2020, Whitehall sources have acknowledged. British intelligence closed the investigation, however, after officers had concluded Malik Faisal Akram from Blackburn posed no threat, and as a result he was able to travel freely to the US and purchase a gun. It is understood the investigation was “mid-level” and took place in the second half of 2020 – but once it had ended Akram was left as a closed subject of interest on MI5’s records, and no information of concern appears to have been passed to the US authorities before the synagogue attack. The Security Service’s investigation lasted “over four weeks”, a source said. But it ended with an assessment that Akram did not pose a jihadist terror risk and there was no reason to prevent him from travelling abroad. The acknowledgment is a particular embarrassment to the agency, which prides itself on a close working relationship with its US counterparts. The FBI has known about MI5’s previous investigation for some time, although British sources declined to say whether they had apologised. Akram, a 44-year-old from Blackburn, was killed after an 11-hour hostage standoff at the Congregation Beth Israel synagogue in the Dallas suburb of Colleyville on Saturday evening. All four hostages survived the siege unharmed. Two teenagers who were being held by British detectives were released without charge on Tuesday evening. They were being questioned to see if they knew anything about Akram’s intentions to travel to the US to stage the attack. Greater Manchester police also said an address in the north of the city had been searched. President Joe Biden on Sunday declared the incident an act of terrorism and the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said the UK government condemned “this act of terrorism and antisemitism”. Akram had a criminal record in the UK but no known terror convictions. Investigators and family members say he had a history of mental health issues. He had been the subject of an exclusion order in 2001 banning him from Blackburn magistrates court after he made remarks about the 9/11 attacks on the US, saying he wished a court usher had been on a plane flown into buildings to commit mass murder. Akram travelled to the US around the time of the new year, and spent time in homeless shelters in Dallas. He was brought to a shelter in downtown Dallas on 2 January by a man who hugged him and had conversations with him, said Wayne Walker, the CEO and pastor of OurCalling, which provides services to homeless people. Asked by reporters on Sunday how Akram could have procured weapons in the US, Biden said: “The assertion was he got the weapons on the street. He purchased them when he landed.” As the siege unfolded, the FBI asked British police to get Akram’s family to try to talk him into surrendering. They spoke to Akram as he held hostages, but could not convince him to give himself up. In a statement to Sky News on Monday, Akram’s brother Gulbar asked how he had been able to acquire a visa to enter the US. “He’s known to police. Got a criminal record. How was he allowed to get a visa and acquire a gun?” he said.The Chelsea Women manager, Emma Hayes, said she fulfilled a childhood dream in winning a Fifa award on Monday – and that her son, Harry, asked whether it was “for being the best mummy”. Hayes won the women’s coach award and was following proceedings from home via a link when the announcement was made in Zurich. “The funniest thing about it all is my son came downstairs and he said: ‘Mummy, you’ve won an award – is that for being the best mummy?’” a beaming Hayes said. “Dream fulfilled, and in my son’s eyes, I won an award for being mummy of the year. “When they called my name out, as everyone knows I was completely shocked,” she added of her open-mouthed reaction that went viral. “The first thing I thought about was that little kid in the orange flats kicking the ball against the wall, commentating on myself in a cup final or leading a team. As a little girl I dreamed of these things. I’ve just had a dream turn into a reality and then I felt instantly embarrassed.” Hayes’s embarrassment comes from the fact that, while appreciative, she does not see too much in individual awards in a team sport. Chelsea won a domestic treble in 2021 and reached the Champions League final. “I feel like everybody deserves it,” she said. Being a role model, too, feels a little alien. “When you are that person, trust me, words like role model or inspiration or pioneer get used a lot and you don’t really understand it,” she said. “It’s not because I’m ignorant but because I’m doing a job I love every day. “It’s all of us that will influence the next level for the game, in terms of making sure people are involved, invested and influenced by it, that the base becomes even bigger. We know when we first started there were only a few of us. “The fact we’re more front and centre across the board, there’s more regular coverage and there’s more back-page stories, it’s just helping the game. I’m one of those parts to that. That movement for me is far more powerful than any other individual award.” Helping to challenge her is the increased competitiveness of the Women’s Super League. West Ham, Chelsea’s opponents in Wednesday’s Continental League Cup quarter-final, are one of many performing better than ever. “It’s great,” Hayes said. “It’s what I’ve always wanted for the league. I always feel when I watch West Ham play that they know how to stay in the game. Olli Harder has done a great job with them. “But what a great job so many teams are doing: Rehanne Skinner at Tottenham, Kelly Chambers to recover Reading, Mark Skinner, Manchester United, he’s doing an amazing job. They’re making the league interesting.” A noticeable difference in the WSL compared with other leagues is the number of female managers, with half the teams managed by women. Tottenham and Chelsea also have female former WSL head coaches as assistants. “I’m proud of the league for that,” said Hayes. “The NWSL has a lot to learn, as does the French league, the German league, the Spanish league, about appointing women. This isn’t about just appointing women into jobs. It’s just demonstrating that healthy diversity is important, at any level, for the players, for the whole sport. “I’m very proud of all of them for what they’re doing because they’re raising the bar for the sport and I become a better coach with competition, so I’m really enjoying the difficult games week in, week out.”The US supreme court on Tuesday considered whether the city of Boston violated the free speech of a Christian group which sought to fly a flag in front of city hall. The justices seemed to have little doubt that Boston was wrong to refuse to fly the banner, which was described as a Christian flag. Three flagpoles stand outside Boston city hall. The US flag and the Massachusetts state flag are permanent fixtures. The third pole is usually reserved for the Boston flag but the city has allowed groups to use it while holding events in front of the building. Flags that have been flown include the LGBTQ+ pride flag and those of different nations. In 2017, Harold Shurtleff, the founder of Camp Constitution, a volunteer group that aims “to enhance the understanding of the country’s Judeo-Christian heritage”, applied to have a white flag with a red cross on a blue square flown during an event featuring “short speeches by some local clergy focusing on Boston’s history”, court documents say. The city denied the application and shortly afterwards published rules saying it would deny flags that support “discrimination, prejudice or religious movements”. Shurtleff sued, saying the city violated his free speech by denying him and Camp Constitution access to the flagpole, which he argues is a public forum. The city argued that the flagpole is government speech and that to fly religious flags from it would constitute an unconstitutional endorsement of religion. In court documents, lawyers for Shurtleff argue that the city long exercised little control over who could use the flagpole, sometimes approving applications without looking at the flags that would be raised. Before Shurtleff’s application, over a decade, the city approved 284 flag-raising events without denying any. Once the supreme court announced it would be taking up Shurtleff’s case, Boston said it would no longer accept applications to fly flags in front of city hall. Two lower courts decided in favor of the city but those decisions could be overturned by a supreme court controlled 6-3 by conservative justices. Furthermore, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and the Biden justice department have filed briefs siding with Camp Constitution, saying the flagpole has been used essentially as a public forum. “[The city] has flown political flags, national flags and the flags of private civic organizations,” wrote David Cole, national legal director of the ACLU, in an op-ed for the Washington Post. “Free speech principles prohibit the government from discriminating against speakers because of their messages, including religious messages.” On Tuesday, arguments at the high court appeared to unite justices on the left and right in favor of Shurtleff. Samuel Alito, a conservative, noted that Chinese and Cuban flags had flown. Douglas Hallward-Driemeier, representing Boston, said those were part of a policy that recognizes the heritage of Boston residents, not an endorsement of those regimes. Elena Kagan, a liberal, was among several justices who suggested the decision to refuse Shurtleff’s request was a simple mistake. “Why is it that people have not been able to correct this mistake?” Kagan asked. The case has a “strange bedfellows” aspect to it, in that Shurtleff, a former organizer with the far-right John Birch Society, uses his Camp Constitution website to question the 6 January 2021 insurrection at the US Capitol, the outcome of the 2020 election that put President Joe Biden in office, the efficacy of Covid-19 vaccines and even who was behind the 9/11 attacks. None of that came up during arguments on Tuesday. A decision is expected by late spring.For all the excitable claims by Matt Moulding, founder, chairman and chief executive of THG, that the e-commerce retailer was a victim last year of a vicious “short attack” from hedge funds, there was a boring explanation for the big tumble in the share price. The stock market, in its collective wisdom, was already in the process last autumn of deciding that the e-commerce and new-tech brigade – think Asos, Boohoo, Darktrace and others – might be a tad overvalued. The reappraisal wasn’t confined to the UK; it was happening in the US too. And THG, or The Hut Group as it was, gave investors extra reasons to be cautious because its communication around its Ingenuity division, the unit that provides “end-to-end technology solutions” for other people’s brands, was cack-handed. Put simply, investors struggled to see what was revolutionary about a marketing, logistics and distribution set-up. Given that Ingenuity, according to the market’s previous bullish thesis, accounted for about half of THG’s value despite being the divisional tiddler, it was hardly surprising that outsiders had a rethink. You don’t need a conspiracy theory to explain the shares’ descent from 600p from 200p-ish. They now stand at 168p, down 10% on the day, after a trading update that said operating profit margins in 2021 would be slightly below City forecasts. Conventional factors, including foreign exchange rates and commodity prices, were to blame, but it all adds to the impression that THG inhabits the same universe as the rest of the corporate world and should probably be valued as such. THG’s Beauty businesses, centred on the Lookfantastic brand and with revenues of £1.1bn in 2021, are clearly a substantial operation. So, too, the shake and protein division called Nutrition (£659m of revenues). But Ingenuity, with revenues of £194m remains a mystery. Yes, it’s growing rapidly, but until THG provides a breakdown of divisional profits, any valuation is vague. Moulding, wisely, didn’t treat us to another airing of his views on short-selling. Best to keep things that way: if there is hidden value within THG, the stock market is perfectly capable of finding it. Debt threat to Unilever’s ambitions On day two of the great GSK adventure, Unilever’s shares fell another 4%. One worry is that the company, led by chief executive Alan Jope, will end up overpaying for GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer products division. Another is that it will walk away and overpay for something else. Jope, after all, was clear on Monday that, whatever happens, Unilever’s strategy is to expand “materially” in the territory of “health, beauty and hygiene”. Investors’ nerves won’t be helped by credit rating agency Fitch’s contribution. A purchase of the GSK business, “or possibly any other large target”, would raise debt levels to the point where the current A rating on Unilever’s debt is threatened, it said. Unilever has a view on the debt point, of course: it would sell some or all of its food business, which is stuffed with excellent brands such as Ben &amp; Jerry’s and Hellmann’s. It has no intention of running with sky-high borrowings for long. But there is an issue of time and sequencing here. If the food business is worth roughly £50bn – the same as the rejected offer for the GSK unit – how quickly could that sum be turned into cash? A single buyer looks unlikely, which would imply a series of sales. As it happens, Unilever sold at decent prices in the recent past when disposing of its spreads business and then the PG Tips tea operation, but neither sale happened quickly. Targeting the GSK unit is entirely reasonable, as argued here on Monday: the fit is good. But the journey to a reinvented Unilever is starting to look extremely complicated. Only radical in the US “Stakeholder capitalism is not about politics. It is not a social or ideological agenda. It is not ‘woke’. It is capitalism, driven by mutually beneficial relationships,” writes Larry Fink, big boss of the $10tn asset manager BlackRock, in his annual “Dear CEO” letter. There’s nothing particularly new or groundbreaking in his view. Fink was late – disgracefully so, many would say – to embrace the idea that long-term returns require a long-term perspective, and that profit-seeking companies should operate with a sense of duty to wider society and the planet. But he’s been arguing along those lines for a few years now. So why does he feel the need to reject the charge of being woke? Only because he’s getting heat from US conservatives. In the UK – and, indeed, in the mainstream fund management in the rest of Europe – Fink’s version of stakeholder capitalism would be seen as unthreatening and middle-of-the-road. Over here, almost nobody is calling him radical or woke.A French skier who killed a five-year-old British girl after slamming into her at a resort in the Alps has been charged with manslaughter. Prosecutors in the nearby town of Bonneville said the accident had been caused by the experienced skier’s excessive speed, and charged a 40-year-old local man with manslaughter late on Monday after an inquiry was launched that morning. The incident took place as the girl was learning to ski late on Saturday morning in Flaine, northwest of Chamonix. The public prosecutor told local newspaper Le Dauphiné: “This is a man totally unknown to judicial authorities, who is clearly also devastated by the accident.” An autopsy also took place on Monday morning establish the exact cause of death. Local TV network France 3 Regions said initial reports suggested “a very violent shock”, and that the results would be passed on to the judge. The skier risks up to three years in imprisonment and a €45,000 fine, France 3 Regions said. The badly wounded girl died onboard a helicopter that was rushing her to hospital despite attempt at resuscitation after she was plunged into immediate cardiopulmonary arrest. She had been taking part in a lesson organised by the French Ski School (ESF) with four other children. The public prosecutor for Bonneville told France Bleu that the child was in single file behind the group and was about to make a right turn when she was “very violently” hit by a skier arriving at high speed who tried unsuccessfully to avoid her. The accident was said to have taken place at the edge of the piste during clear weather. The girl had been on a skiing holiday with her parents who live in Geneva and own a holiday home in nearby Carroz, Le Dauphiné reported. The man, a volunteer firefighter, tried to give first aid to the girl immediately after the accident with the assistance of a local doctor, the paper said. The ski instructor, who was questioned as a witness, was not found to be at fault in any way, Le Dauphiné said. Jean-Paul Constant, the mayor of local municipality Arâches, said: “Everyone was very shocked.” He said staff at the resort and in the ski school would be provided with counselling and he was also looking for a psychologist who speaks English to assist the girl’s family, who have returned to Geneva.Good morning. The Australian Open is in full swing with the focus finally on the court following Novak Djokovic’s deportation. The Omicron outbreak continues to add pressure to struggling sectors as Australians fight to access tests and booster shots. Paramedics across Sydney who are already “drunk on fatigue” are being asked to drive ambulances home and to be on call as demand soars due to the Omicron outbreak. Chris Kastelan, the New South Wales president of the Australian Paramedics Association, suggested it was unprecedented for paramedics to be on call in Sydney and warned that the conditions were becoming unsafe. “I would suggest that the fact that that’s happening shows that the rostering or the staffing levels for both metropolitan Sydney and regional NSW is just not enough for the workload at this point in time,” he said. Last week, NSW Ambulance averaged 4,500 triple zero callouts per day. Prior to the Omicron outbreak, there had never been more than 4,000 calls on a single day. Tuesday was Australia’s deadliest day of the pandemic so far, with 77 deaths across the country. Tonga is facing an “unprecedented disaster” from the massive volcanic eruption that covered the nation in ash and 15-metre tsunami waves that destroyed almost all the homes on two small islands, the government has said. Leaked images from the New Zealand defence force show some areas have had “catastrophic” devastation while others were relatively unscathed. Three people have been confirmed dead, but authorities fear the death toll could rise as the government has still not managed to make contact with several inhabited islands. Nobody was quite sure how Nick Kyrgios would perform at the Australian Open after missing all the warm-up events due to asthma problems and a bout of Covid. But he bested British qualifier Liam Broady 6-4, 6-4, 6-3 in one hour and 54 minutes. The game featured many of the theatrics that Kyrgios is known for, but, after the match, his actual words were of surprise. “The first couple of days [with Covid] I was bedridden, I didn’t know if I’d be able to play,” he said. “I’m just super happy to be here again.” In other games, Andy Murray beat No 21 seed Nikoloz Basilashvili 6-1, 3-6, 6-4, 6-7 (5-7), 6-4 and Emma Raducanu defeated Sloane Stephens 6-0, 2-6, 6-1. Australia Facebook ads were used to push unapproved rapid Covid test kits to Australians and users are attempting to sell large volumes of rapid tests on Facebook marketplace, charging up to $300 for 20-packs, contrary to the site’s rules. A NSW GP who allowed an elderly patient to pay for his child’s school fees, buy him expensive medical equipment and build a granny flat on his property for her care has had his registration cancelled. A disabled man has been told he will have to wait “another month or two” to get Covid booster after an Australian vaccine contractor that provides home services prioritised aged care clients. A “clash of two crises” is looming when students return to NSW schools, as the Omicron wave adds pressure to a system that already faced severe and prolonged staffing shortages. The world A woman who may have seen Prince Andrew with Virginia Giuffre at a London nightclub 20 years ago is “willing” to provide testimony in Giuffre’s civil lawsuit against the royal, the witness’s lawyer said. The Israeli police allegedly conducted warrantless phone intercepts of Israeli citizens using the NSO group’s controversial Pegasus spyware, according to an investigation local media. Norwegian far-right mass murderer Anders Breivik has appeared in court asking to be released on parole after serving 10 years in prison for killing 77 people in 2011. Recommended reads Comedian Nazeem Hussain shares his love of massage guns, and a sad childhood story of loss in this week’s interview about beloved objects. “I’d save my massage gun [from a house fire]. I bought it on a whim in 2020 from an ad on either Facebook or Instagram. There’s usually a huge endorphin rush with purchasing things online and it’s all downhill from there – when it arrives, it’s meant to underwhelm you. But this was the opposite – the massage gun has made every night happier. I know that sounds wrong – I don’t mean it that way! Please don’t make this sound sexual!” Rebecca Sharrock is one of a handful of people worldwide with highly superior autobiographical memory. But remembering minute details of your own life has its downsides. “I need to have distractions such as noise and light around me to get to sleep,” Sharrock says. “If everything’s quiet, memories just flash into my mind and that keeps me awake … It’s awful to be a medical exception because very few people understand what you’re going through and there just aren’t many treatments designed for it.” Listen Covid positive? More than a million people are currently infected with Covid across Australia. The Full Story team speaks to Dr Karen Price about which symptoms to expect and when to seek emergency medical care, while psychiatrist Prof Jayashri Kulkarni talks about some mental health dos and don’ts while in isolation. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Witness K and lawyer Bernard Collaery helped correct what they saw as a gross injustice. For today’s Australia Reads, Luke Henriques-Gomes introduces Christopher Knaus’ story about espionage, oil fields and diplomatic embarrassment for the Australian government. Listen to the best of Guardian Australia’s journalism on Australia Reads podcast on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport The AFL has “immoral form” and is “corrupting and compromising the sport” with deals like the $25m sponsorship deal with cryptocurrency firm Crypto.com, according to a gambling reform campaigner. The Tennis Australia board has broken its silence on the Novak Djokovic saga on Tuesday night to come out in support of its chief executive, Craig Tiley, while acknowledging it “deeply regrets” the distraction the Djokovic deportation caused other Australian Open players. Media roundup Victorian nurses are calling for military support as the state’s health sector enters a “code brown” amid record numbers of hospital admissions, reports the Age. The ABC reports the upcoming Aukmin talks between the UK and Australia will be dominated by the recent Aukus nuclear submarine deal and the growing concerns over China’s power in the Indo-Pacific. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Most places you look in parliament, people are putting on a brave face. Devout-looking ministers and friends of Boris Johnson beam with confidence as they proclaim the prime minister is still safe, and his popularity will quickly rise when Covid restrictions are lifted and the Downing Street party scandal dies down. Those Conservatives who are pushing for his removal say with equal certainty and a knowing grin that it’s “the end” and the number of no confidence letters is climbing speedily, with 54 required to trigger a vote. As one sped off down a corridor this week, they winked and proclaimed: “Karma’s a bitch, isn’t it?” After what was expected to be a difficult weekend for Tory MPs facing the wrath of their associations and constituents, some returned to Westminster reporting the mood music was “absolutely toxic” while others were surprisingly upbeat. The lack of another “killer blow” in the form of fresh party allegations or further evidence Johnson personally broke the law inspired some to hope the temperature was “settling”, a minister reflected. But the mood around parliament remains fraught amid rising tensions between backbenchers and the government. Tory MPs grapple with nervous colleagues asking whether they want to back or sack Johnson. Many are holding off on deciding whether to commit regicide until the parties report by civil servant Sue Gray surfaces. “It’s like waiting for Godot,” one complained. Some backbenchers admitted to having written their no confidence letter – but said they were waiting until Gray’s report is published before dispatching it. “If he misled parliament, it’s sudden death. That’s a red line,” said a former minister said, who backed Johnson in 2019, and in 2017 before his aborted first leadership bid. After Johnson on Tuesday delivered his first TV interview in days, where he stressed that no one warned him a “bring your own booze” event on 20 May 2020 with 30-40 staff was against the rules, MPs’ incredulity grew further. One, Pauline Latham, said: “We all knew what the rules were. And we all wanted to break them. There were people around this country that desperately wanted to break them because they want to see their loved ones. I just feel that we’ve got to get the truth here.” Even the alleged plan hatched by senior government figures dubbed “Operation Red Meat” has fallen flat. Tackling the promise to crack down on small boats arriving from across the Channel by putting the military in charge – to which navy sources responded by saying they would not pursue Priti Patel’s pushback policy – Tory MPs complained ministers were “yet again, giving it all talk and no action”. One said: “We’re just drawing attention to an issue we are patently unable to solve – it’s daft politics and it’s desperate.” An idea that migrants could be processed offshore in Ghana also backfired, after the country issued a statement rebuffing the policy, mistakenly calling it “Operation Dead Meat”. Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said it made ministers “look like total charlatans”, adding: “Be it Operation Big Dog or Red Meat or whatever schoolboy name they have for it now, it’s just ridiculous.” While many MPs still believe Johnson can rescue the situation, the group No 10 will be watching with most nervousness is the 2019 intake of Tories. Many feel they owe their seats directly to Johnson and have previously been loyal to him. So a gathering of two dozen of their number on Tuesday, in a colleague’s office in parliament, to discuss the partygate “shitshow” and no confidence letters will send jitters through the heart of Downing Street. “The wheels are in motion,” smiled one of those trying to engineer Johnson’s removal. In a sign of the distrust between backbenchers and ministers, there was “genuine concern” from one MP present that Tory whips had stationed someone outside the office where the 2019ers’ meeting took place, to count attenders in and out. The MP also feared a covert audio recording had been made of the meeting, which was quickly dubbed the “pork pie pustch” as it was held in the office of Alicia Kearns, whose constituency contains Melton Mowbray. A government source pointed out the meeting was held in a place where MPs often walk through, though denied anyone was specifically posted outside to spy, and strongly denied knowledge of any recording. Given the “toxicity” of the situation – one of the most common words used by Tory MPs – muttered gossip between MPs is increasingly focused not on whether a vote of no confidence will be triggered but whether Johnson would survive it – and the potential leadership hopefuls who would replace him. Some of those who have not yet put in a letter privately said they would vote against Johnson in such a scenario. And even if he won the ballot, MPs supportive of Johnson suggested it would not make him immune from removal for 12 more months. “Just look at what happened to Theresa May,” a senior Tory quipped, referencing when the former prime minister won the 1922 Committee-triggered ballot on her premiership in December 2018 before announcing she would quit No 10 five months later. Tory MPs will have to keep their brave faces on as they prepare to endure another prime minister’s questions on Wednesday where Johnson has to field questions about No 10 parties. “I’ve never been more glad to need to wear a mask in the chamber,” one frontbencher sighed.Things fall apart. It had been intended as the comeback day. The day when Big Dog finally stopped barricading himself in his Downing Street kennel and came out to prove there was life in the confidence trickster yet. That, by sheer force of personality and the odd gag, Boris Johnson could make the Tory party – and possibly even the country – fall back in love with him. And yet right from the start of his TV interview with Sky’s Beth Rigby at Finchley memorial hospital in London, it was clear the prime minister was running on empty. All passion spent. Things fall apart. This was Johnson as we’ve rarely seen him. Not contrite, exactly: he still doesn’t really seem to believe he’s the cause of his own fall from grace. But certainly Hang Dog rather than Big Dog. Someone who can tell the game is up. Someone who has run out of last chances and has no more lies to tell. None that will be believed, anyway. A beaten man no longer in control of his own destiny who is waiting on a miracle to save him. Things fall apart. Rigby went straight to the heart of the matter. Dominic Cummings says you are lying and that you were explicitly warned the party should not go ahead. This account has been confirmed by a second source. So, have you lied? she asked the prime minister. For once Johnson was wearing a mask inside a hospital, but even so there was no sign of the usual telltale smirk. His eyes were the giveaway, as they invariably are. Puffy, almost closed, the pupils bloodshot pinpricks. Eyes that had stared into his soul and been surprised and alarmed to find that he had one. Albeit a primordial work in progress. Things fall apart. “I’m sorry for my misjudgments,” he said, before hastily correcting himself to speak in the passive voice. He was sorry for the misjudgments that had been made. That was better. His safe place, where he was not responsible for his own actions. Nobody had told him he was doing anything against the rules. When he had gone out to join the party – not that it was a party – he had thought he was attending a work event. Things fall apart. This was either gaslighting of the highest order – after all, he had made the rules and told the country to obey them at frequent press conferences, so you would have thought he knew what they were – or we were witnessing the partial implosion of the Johnson psyche. Someone so detached from a painful reality he could no longer take any responsibility for himself and could only relate to himself in the third person. A separate entity. Things fall apart. What followed was a police interrogation as, slowly and forensically, Rigby destroyed every alibi. Was Johnson saying that Dom was a liar? Boris didn’t dare do that. All he could do was repeat his assertion that no one had told him that the social event had been against the rules. Presumably because no one really thought they needed to spell it out that plainly, as they imagined the reasons for not having a party were blindingly obvious. Things fall apart. Was Dominic Lawson a liar? He, too, had said he knew someone who had warned Johnson not to go ahead with the party. “Um, er,” said Big Dog. “All I can do is humbly apologise for what happened.” And repeat that no one told him it was a bad idea. Then again, no one had bothered to tell him to put on his shoes or wipe his bum that morning. Every time he said it, pulling nervously on his toddler haircut, he sounded a bit more feeble. A bit more pathetic. You could almost sense his grip on power growing looser by the minute. Things fall apart. Rigby picked up the pace. Should Sue Gray interview Cummings? Should Cummings give testimony under oath? Would he resign if he was found to have misled parliament? How ashamed was he at having to apologise to the Queen? What did he think of the ministerial code? Presumably not very much, given he hadn’t sacked Priti Patel when she was found to have broken it. Big Dog sighed sadly. How was it that everyone found it ludicrous that he could go into the garden, see trestle tables laden with food and booze and 40 people getting a bit pissed and imagine he was at a work seminar? Who hadn’t done that? Things fall apart. “Will you still be prime minister beyond the end of this year?” asked Rigby. Johnson stared into eternity. He thought of how Dominic Raab had admitted the party had actually been a party to Sky’s Kay Burley earlier that morning. And had then gone out of his way to distance himself from it by saying he definitely hadn’t been invited and wouldn’t have gone anyway. Thanks for nothing, Dom. Things fall apart. Big Dog thought of how junior defence minister James Heappey had been laughed out of the Commons by all parties during an urgent question on bringing in the navy to control migrants in the Channel. The halfwit had been stupid enough to confess he hadn’t a clue what the plan was. Operation Red Meat was dead on arrival. He thought of how that snake Rishi Sunak had yet again refused to offer him any support. Next year? He’d be lucky to make it through to the end of the week at this rate. John Crace will join a Guardian Live online event about the No 10 lockdown parties and Boris Johnson’s future this Wednesday 19 January 2022, from 8pm-9pm GMT. Book here • This article was amended on 14 February 2022. A reference to the “passive tense” was changed to the intended “passive voice”.A 14-year old indigenous activist has been murdered in Colombia, prompting horror and shock at the latest in a spate of killings of environmentalists and social leaders in the South American country. Breiner David Cucuñame was shot dead on Friday while on patrol with the Indigenous Guard, an unarmed group which seeks to protect indigenous lands from incursions by the country’s many armed groups. Cucuñame, a member of the Nasa people, was accompanying his father when he and two other Guard members were killed in an ambush, according to the Association of Indigenous Councils of Northern Cauca (ACIN), a local indigenous organisation. Dissident members of the now-demobilized rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc), were blamed by indigenous authorities for the murder. “The indigenous guard are protectors of the land and the environment, and Breiner represented that,” said Eduin Mauricio Capaz, the human rights coordinator for ACIN. “The murder of Breiner is the result of a phenomenon that was years in the making. In Colombia, armed groups dominate once more.” New figures released this week showed that last year, a social leader –whether a human rights defender, community activist or environmentalist – was killed every 60 hours in Colombia. 2021’s total of 145 victims was down from the previous year’s total of 182, but the country remains one of the most dangerous in the world for activists. “We are deeply saddened by each case, because of the impact they have on the communities,” said Carlos Camargo, human rights ombudsman, on Monday. Many in Colombia had hoped that such violence would have been consigned to the past when the government signed a peace deal in 2016 with the Farc, which at the time was Latin America’s largest guerrilla army. That peace deal, at least on paper, ended a decades-long low-intensity civil war that killed over 260,000 people and forced 7 million to flee their homes. Colombia’s army, state-aligned paramilitary groups, drug traffickers, and other leftist guerrillas all contributed to the bloodletting. But since then conflict continues to plague communities across the country, with Farc dissidents and other armed factions stepping into the void. Bearing the brunt of the bloodshed are social leaders, who in many cases are viewed as the grassroots implementers of the peace deal. “Why are social leaders a target?” asked Elizabeth Dickinson, senior analyst for Colombia at the International Crisis Group. “Because they are often the few voices within a terrified and traumatised community who are willing to speak up against the affectations of violence, whether against their communities or the environment. “The threats against activists are not a secret to anyone; the government has been warned repeatedly - by the community, by the military, by the state ombudsman – about the risks,” Dickinson said. “Far too often, the response is reactive, when it is already too late, rather than doing the hard work of prevention to change the context in which these individuals work.” Age is no shield in Colombia, where last year Francisco Vera, a 12-year-old activist, received a slew of death threats for his public speeches against environmental destruction. Throughout the country’s decades of conflict, children have often borne the brunt, said Dickinson. “In the area where Cucuñame was assassinated, nearly 100 minors were reportedly forcibly recruited into armed groups in 2021, often with false promises or threats,” the analyst said. “Children have lost parents to the violence, been forced to displace, and as in this case, suffered violence directly.”The US phone carriers AT&amp;T and Verizon agreed on Tuesday to temporarily defer turning on some wireless towers near key airport runways to mitigate a looming aviation crisis caused by new 5G technology. Both AT&amp;T and Verizon will launch new C-Band 5G wireless service on Wednesday but agreed to delay some deployment near airports that had threatened to result in numerous flight cancellations. The concession came after major airline executives wrote the Biden administration on Monday asking it to intervene in AT&amp;T and Verizon’s planned rollout of their 5G technology on Wednesday, warning of potential “catastrophic” effects if it were to go ahead. “Unless our major hubs are cleared to fly, the vast majority of the traveling and shipping public will essentially be grounded. This means that on a day like yesterday, more than 1,100 flights and 100,000 passengers would be subjected to cancellations, diversions or delays,” the CEOs said. The airline industry has warned that the new network, which would allow consumers much faster internet access, could interfere with sensitive airplane instruments such as altimeters and significantly hamper low-visibility operations. Airlines asked on Sunday “that 5G be implemented everywhere in the country except within the approximate 2 miles (3.2km) of airport runways” at some key airports. AT&amp;T and Verizon say their equipment will not interfere with aircraft electronics and that the technology is being safely used in many other countries. Both companies confirmed to the Guardian they were voluntarily limiting deployment near certain airports. “We are frustrated by the FAA’s inability to do what nearly 40 countries have done, which is to safely deploy 5G technology without disrupting aviation services, and we urge it do so in a timely manner,” an AT&amp;T spokesperson told the Guardian. “We are launching our advanced 5G services everywhere else as planned with the temporary exception of this limited number of towers.” Here’s what you need to know about the controversy: What is 5G? 5G is the newest generation of cellular network, following 4G, which was introduced in late 2009 and is used on most US cellphones today. Nearly every 10 years since 1980, a new-generation network has arrived, offering faster speeds and expanded capabilities. At the simplest level, 1G allowed for phone calls, 2G brought messaging, and 3G provided internet access. Today, on 4G, users can download apps, stream video and more, with relative ease and speed. The fifth generation is expected to offer new levels of speed – making it possible, for example, to download a movie to one’s phone in seconds – and allow more devices to be connected to a network at once. The latter is increasingly important in our crowded cellular landscape. (Ever been at a concert or stadium and unable to send messages?) “Those types of data rates could enable virtual reality applications or autonomous driving cars,” Harish Krishnaswamy, an associate professor of electrical engineering at Columbia University, told Live Science. Why is the US airline industry concerned about 5G? To execute the upgrade, cellular networks plan to move operations on to a new band of radio frequencies called the C-Band. Last year, Verizon and AT&amp;T spent a combined $67bn acquiring the C-Band spectrum licenses needed to upgrade their networks to 5G, according to Forbes. But some aircraft regulators worry that planes’ radio altimeters, which measure how far above ground a plane is to help pilots land their crafts in low-visibility situations and also operate on C-Band frequencies, could be disturbed by 5G. Can 5G and the aviation industry coexist? The Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and telecom carriers all agree that 5G and airline travel can exist together. In fact, they already do in nearly 40 countries. The telecom companies have pointed out that there have not been any accidents in other countries where 5G is operational and American airlines regularly fly to those countries. The FAA, too, has said that “5G and aviation have safely coexisted in other countries”. That’s because in those regions, “power levels have been reduced around airports and the industries have worked together prior to deployment”, the agency said in a 3 January statement. So what’s the problem in the US? The discussions over how the transition should take place in the US have been brewing for years and intensified in recent months. Verizon and AT&amp;T had initially planned to launch 5G in December but delayed the rollout until the beginning of January amid concerns from the aviation industry. On 3 January, the companies agreed to postpone the rollout another two weeks, until 19 January, to allow for further coordination. Both telecom companies proposed several measures to mitigate the possible impact of the switch to 5G, including reducing the strength of their 5G around airports and helipads, and operating 5G service at lower power levels nationwide for the first six months. But by 17 January, the companies and the aviation industry still didn’t appear to be on the same page. The CEOs of 10 passenger and cargo airlines including American, Delta, United and Southwest warned that 5G would be more disruptive than they originally thought because dozens of large airports that were to have buffer zones to prevent interference with aircraft would still be subject to flight restrictions announced last week by the FAA. The airline CEOs asked that 5G be barred within two miles of runways. Why wasn’t this conflict resolved before? The airline industry and the FAA say that they have tried to raise alarm about potential interference from 5G C-Band but the FCC has ignored them. The telecoms, the FCC and their supporters argue that the aviation industry has known about C-Band technology for several years but did nothing to prepare – airlines chose not to upgrade altimeters that might be subject to interference, and the FAA failed to begin surveying equipment on planes until the last few weeks. Reuters contributed to this report