The number of households suffering from “fuel stress” – those spending at least 10% of their family budgets on energy bills – is set to treble to 6.3m overnight when the new energy price cap comes in on 1 April, according to a leading research group. Fuel stress will no longer be confined to the poorest households, according to a study by the Resolution Foundation. Low- and middle-income families will also find it hard to cope as they spend a far greater share of their family budget on these essentials than higher earners. The forecast will add to calls for the government to take action to avert a cost-of-living catastrophe after global energy market prices surged to record levels. The research shows 9% of English households are currently experiencing fuel stress, an indicator of finding energy bills unaffordable and also the definition of fuel poverty in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. That figure is expected to leap to 27% when the energy price cap rises to about £2,000 a year in April, an increase of more than 50%. The energy regulator, Ofgem, will announce the new price cap level on 7 February. Levels of fuel stress are expected to be highest in the north-east and the West Midlands (33% and 32% respectively), among pensioner households (38%), among those living in local authority housing (35%) and those in poorly insulated homes (69% of families in homes with an energy performance certificate F-rating). Jonny Marshall, senior economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “Fuel stress levels are particularly high among pensioner households and those in poorly insulated homes – a stark reminder of the need to modernise Britain’s leaky housing stock and curb national dependency on gas for power and heating.” The foundation called on the government to intervene and said the most effective way to support lower-income families was through the benefits system, with a faster-than-planned uprating of benefits in April, when support is due to rise by 3.1%. An alternative would be an additional payment based on the warm homes discount. The thinktank recommended raising the £140 payment by at least £300; widening eligibility to all families in receipt of pension credit or working age benefits (8.5m families in total) and making payments automatic; making them timelier – the extra support should be delivered via an additional bill discount this spring, following the normal winter round; and making them taxpayer funded, rather than through further increases in everyone else’s energy bills. The foundation has calculated that the measure would cost the taxpayer £2.5bn. A vastly improved warm homes discount would cut the number of households living in fuel stress by about five percentage points, equivalent to more than a million families. The thinktank called for government action to cut everyone else’s energy bills too, by temporarily transferring social and environmental levies from bills to general taxation. This would cut average bills by around £245 and would reduce the number of families in fuel stress by more than seven percentage points – or 1.7m families – at a cost of £4.8bn to the taxpayer. In total, energy bills would be reduced by up to £545 a year, at a cost of £7.3bn, and 2.7m fewer families would be living in fuel stress. “While not cheap at £7.3bn, this plan is affordable, and by cutting bills by up to £545 would help prevent the upcoming rise in energy bills turning into a cost of living catastrophe for millions of families,” Marshall said.The 10 richest men in the world have seen their global wealth double to $1.5tn (£1.01tn) since the start of the global pandemic following a surge in share and property prices that has widened the gap between rich and poor, according to a report from Oxfam. Urging governments to impose a one-off 99% wealth tax on Covid-19 windfall gains, the charity said World Bank figures showed 163 million more people had been driven below the poverty line while the super-rich were benefiting from the stimulus provided by governments around the world to mitigate the impact of the virus. Oxfam projects that by 2030, 3.3 billion people will be living on less than $5.50 per day. The charity said the incomes of 99% of the world’s population had reduced from March 2020 to October 2021, when Elon Musk, the founder of the electric car company Tesla, and the other nine richest billionaires had been collectively growing wealthier by $1.3bn a day. Musk, according to figures taken from Forbes magazine’s billionaires list, saw his wealth increase 10-fold to $294bn in the first 20 months of the pandemic, catapulting him above Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, to be the world’s richest person. During a period when technology stocks were soaring on Wall Street, Bezos’s net wealth rose 67% to $203bn, Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg’s wealth doubled to $118bn, while the wealth of the founder of Microsoft, Bill Gates, increased by 31% to $137bn. The charity urged governments to levy taxes on capital and wealth in a report – Inequality Kills – intended to coincide with the now-postponed gathering of the global elite at the World Economic Forum in Davos. Oxfam said a one-off 99% windfall tax on the Covid wealth gains of the 10 richest men could pay for enough jabs to vaccinate the entire world and provide the resources to tackle climate change, provide universal healthcare and social protection, and address gender-based violence in 80 countries. Even after a 99% levy, the top 10 billionaires would be $8bn better off between them than they were before the pandemic, the charity said. Danny Sriskandarajah, the Oxfam GB chief executive said: “The explosion in billionaires’ fortunes at a time when poverty is increasing lays bare the fundamental flaws in our economies. Even during a global crisis our unfair economic systems manage to deliver eye-watering windfalls for the wealthiest but fail to protect the poorest. It is an avoidable tragedy that every day people die because they lack essentials such as food and healthcare. “Today’s generation of leaders can start to right these wrongs by implementing progressive taxes on capital and wealth and deploying that revenue to save lives and invest in our future. They should make sure that Covid-19’s long-term legacy is quality universal healthcare and social protection for all. Governments have an historic opportunity to back bold economic plans based on greater equality that change the deadly course we are on.” Share prices fell sharply in the early weeks of the pandemic but were then boosted by the stimulus provided by central banks and finance ministries around the world. Cuts in interest rates to record low levels and massive increases in the supply of money through the bond-buying process known as quantitative easing sent stock markets soaring, with technology companies such as Amazon, Google, Apple and Facebook boosted by an increase in working from home and online shopping during the pandemic. While people on more modest incomes have also seen their assets rise in value during the pandemic, Oxfam said the 10 richest men own six times as much wealth as the bottom 40% (3.1 billion people). It would take the 10 billionaires 414 years to spend their combined wealth at a rate of a million dollars each per day, the charity added. The threat posed by inequality was highlighted last week by David Malpass, the president of the World Bank, when he announced his organisation’s latest forecasts for the global economy. “Developing countries are facing severe long-term problems related to lower vaccination rates, global macro policies and the debt burden,” he said. “There’s a growing canyon between their growth rates and those in advanced economies. This inequality is even more dramatic in per capita and median income terms, with people in the developing world left behind and poverty rates rising. We’re seeing troubling reversals in poverty, nutrition and health”Oops she did it again. Britney mania has got another millennial teenager obsessed. Still, Jean is a superfan with a difference. With 172 similarities to the popstar, and the ability to understand the coded messages hidden within her songs before anyone else, Jean is convinced she is the only person who can save Britney. Inspired by the New York Times documentary and the #FreeBritney movement, Saving Britney details the life of the celebrity from her early days in the Mickey Mouse Club to the present day by Shereen Roushbaiani who speaks as an American narrator into a plastic yellow toy microphone. Intersected with long monologue sections from Jean (also played by Roushbaiani), listing reasons why her life has been devoted to the singer, it gives an intricate insight into the mind of an engrossed enthusiast. But while the subject matter feels topical, the solo drama fails to keep us engaged. Roushbaiani plays the ADHD-diagnosed Jean with youthful confidence. Her 90s childhood bedroom has been transformed into a shrine to Britney. Decorated with a homemade collage dedicated to her on the back wall, it is clear that the star has been present for many of her defining life moments. During her sexual awakening with a female classmate, Britney’s famed kiss with Madonna at the MTV Video Music Awards played on the TV. It was Britney who was there for Jean after her mum died. They even share a birthday – despite it being eight years apart. But though Roushbaiani is full of energy, after 70 minutes watching her alone on stage, her performance becomes grating. Written by David Shopland, many of the lines are cringeworthy rather than naturalistic, and while she tries hard to get the audience laughing, most of her self-deprecating jokes fall flat. The crescendo is Jean’s realisation that, even with such an intense love for Britney, she also might be part of the problem that caused her collapse. But with her whole life fixation falling apart so quickly, this conclusion feels hurried. Britney is an idol to so many, but in this case Jean’s worshipping doesn’t quite land. Saving Britney is on tour until 26 March.The former Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson has said she almost did not run for the position because she feared her history of mental health problems would be exposed. The life peer was diagnosed with clinical depression in her first year at university and said she was concerned that standing for the role of leader in 2011 would result in her medical history coming out. She told the Desperately Seeking Wisdom podcast, hosted by Craig Oliver, that she wanted to be able to talk about her mental health on her own terms so she could “own the way in which it was presented”. Davidson said: “I considered not throwing my hat in the ring for leader in case my medical history … came out. “I’m trying to remember dates, but I became leader in 2011, so it would be after the press got hold of Gordon Brown’s children’s medical records, which felt like a really egregious breach. “But the idea that the papers had the power to find out and open up people’s medical records – why wouldn’t somebody want to find that out about the new leader of the Tories in Scotland?” Davidson said that when she was diagnosed about 20 years ago, people did not talk about mental health issues as much, saying: “It was very shameful. I didn’t want anyone to know.” During her time in politics, she has worked with the Scottish Association for Mental Health and Davidson said she was pleased that she had had the opportunity to open up about mental health issues. She expressed hope it could help other people to realise it is not career-ending, as she had feared at the time of her diagnosis. “At that time, I was just starting at uni. I had big dreams, everyone does, but the idea that you could go on and have a big job, that you could be in the public eye, you could be in politics at all, and have this big shameful secret ... It didn’t occur to me,” she said. “I thought that that was my ambition over.” Davidson also spoke about her annoyance at being described as a lesbian kickboxer during the 2011 leadership contest while all the other candidates were referred to by their respective jobs. “I’ll tell you why it annoyed me,” she told the podcast. “One, because I’d stopped kickboxing years before, so it wasn’t even true. And two because it was so reductive, and it was reductive to try and make a point.”That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today’s Covid blog. Please join me on our latest live feed here where I’ll be focusing a little more on the coronavirus crisis across Asia, Australia and the Pacific. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. A small-scale US study has found a significant proportion of people remain infectious beyond the five-day self-isolation period recommended by the US Centers for Disease Control. Forbes reports more than half of the cases examined in the Harvard University study, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, were still contagious on the fifth day and 25% on the sixth day. Only 13% were still infectious on day seven. A three-week-old baby has died from Covid-19 in Qatar, the health ministry said on Sunday, reporting a rare child fatality from the illness in the Gulf country. The emirate’s public health ministry said in a statement: A three-week-old baby has sadly died as a result of severe infection from Covid-19. The baby had no other known medical or hereditary conditions. The death is the second child to have died in the country since the pandemic began, it added. Child deaths from Covid-19 are infrequent but health authorities in several countries have registered a rise in childhood infections since the spread of the Omicron variant. The Qatari ministry said youngsters have generally been less at risk of severe Covid infection than older people, but that “a greater number of children are being infected in this current wave and needing medical care than in previous waves”. Boris Johnson has held talks with Sue Gray, the civil servant investigating lockdown busting parties in Number 10. The Telegraph reports Johnson has shared what he knows with Gray ahead of the publication of her report, which could come as early as this week. Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as my colleague Tom Wall calls it a night in London. I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news from Sydney. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The country’s most populous state of NSW recorded 29,504 cases and 17 deaths, with 2,776 people in hospital. Victoria reported 22,429 new Covid cases, six deaths and 1,229 people in hospital. After 11 tumultuous days, world tennis No 1 Novak Djokovic has been deported after the full bench of the federal court upheld the Morrison government’s decision to cancel his visa on the grounds of health and good order. Djokovic was due to play his first match this evening but instead he flew out of the country late last night, bound for Dubai. People in the UK may no longer be legally required to self-isolate after catching Covid, according to unsourced reports in the Telegraph. Official advice to self-isolate will remain in place but there will be no fines if it is ignored. The report claims plans will be worked up over the coming weeks, with an announcement possible in the spring, as Boris Johnson is keen to permanently revoke emergency coronavirus laws. This comes as the health secretary, Sajid Javid, cuts the self-isolation period from seven days to five days if someone tests negative twice in England. This change applies from tomorrow. The Omicron covid wave has reached a new high in France, according to Reuters. The average number of new infections has risen to 297,019 – the highest daily average reported so far. There have been 13,894,255 infections and 126,869 coronavirus-related deaths reported in the country since the pandemic began. The French parliament has approved a range of measures including a vaccine passport. The new law, which will come into force in the coming days, will require people to have a certificate of vaccination to enter public places like restaurants, cafes, cinemas and long-distance trains. This comes after President Emmanuel Macron, said he wanted to “piss off” unvaccinated people by making their lives so complicated they would end up getting the COVID vaccine. Reuters reports: France is in the grips of its fifth COVID-19 wave with daily new cases regularly hitting record levels over 300,000. Nonetheless the number of serious cases putting people in ICU wards is much lower than the first wave in March-April 2020. While the latest daily UK covid case numbers are certainly encouraging, they are not completely unexpected. Since the 11 Jan people who test positive with a lateral flow test (LFT) no longer need a confirmatory PCR test. Although LFT results are supposed to be registered, it is possible not everyone is officially logging them. This could be contributing to daily case rates hitting their lowest point since mid-December. Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter, the chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at the University of Cambridge, warned earlier this month before the change came into force: “It will become much more important that people report positive lateral flow tests otherwise nobody will know what’s going on. There’s already a problem with daily cases, with people not getting tested or not reporting results.” However, it should be noted that some experts believe cases could be plateauing. Dr Susan Hopkins, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) chief medical adviser, said cases appeared to be “plateauing” in parts of the country. Meanwhile, Prof Linda Bauld, a professor of public health at the University of Edinburgh and chief social policy adviser to the Scottish government, said Omicron cases in the UK appeared to be “stabilising”. Covid infections are rising fast again in US nursing homes. About 32,000 cases have been identified in nursing homes in the week ending 9 January – a near sevenfold increase month on month. A total of 645 covid related deaths among residents were recorded in the same week. This is leading to a range of measures including new restrictions on family visits and renewed efforts to vaccinate residents and staff. AP reports: Nursing homes were the lethal epicentre of the pandemic early on, before the vaccine allowed many of them to reopen to visitors last year. But the wildly contagious variant has dealt them a setback. Latest daily case numbers from the UK show they are at their lowest point since mid-December, but Sunday’s figures do not include new Scottish infections. A total of 70,924 people in England, Wales and Northern Ireland tested positive for coronavirus in the last 24 hours, the government reported on Sunday. The figures normally include cases from Scotland. This is a fall from the 81,713 on Saturday. The last time new case numbers were this low was 14 December. Since then, more than 4 million positive tests in the UK have been reported, as Omicron took hold. Another 88 people have died with 28 days of a positive Covid test, taking the death toll to 151,187. A total of 174,233 people have died with Covid-19 on their death certificate. I’m Tom Wall. I’m taking over the blog now. Get in touch about anything you think we should be covering. It’s been another day where the controversy about parties in Downing Street, the home of the UK government in Westminster, has led the headlines. The highlights include: The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, accused prime minister Boris Johnson of breaking the law, saying that “industrial scale partying” had taken place during lockdowns (see 9:52). Starmer himself rejected accusations that he had broken Covid restrictions when he was photographed eating and drinking with others in late April 2021, saying “there was no party, no breach of the rules. There is absolutely no comparison with the prime minister.” The Conservative party co-chair Oliver Dowden appeared on both BBC and Sky to say the prime minister should not resign, that he was sorry, and it was “totally wrong” that parties took place. He said the “party culture” in No 10 would be changed. Sky also saw an emotional account from presenter Trevor Phillips, who talked about when his daughter died during the spring 2021 lockdown. Dowden said current restrictions in England could be lifted by the end of January. The former UK prime minister Tony Blair has said he could understand how rule-breaking parties in No 10 could happen, but that they were still inexcusable. From outside the UK, Covid news includes: World tennis No 1 Novak Djokovic has been deported from Australia after court threw out an appeal against his vaccination status, and his visa was cancelled. Authorities in Thailand have reported the country’s first death from the Omicron variant, an 86-year-old Alzheimer’s patient. Amnesty International has urged Italy to change its strict anti Covid-19 restrictions to avoid discriminating against unvaccinated people. Vaccination is now compulsory for people over 50, in order for them to use some services and public transport. The billionth Covid-19 vaccine as part of the global Covax scheme was delivered in Rwanda on Saturday night. The Austrian government has proposed setting the minimum age for Covid-19 vaccinations at 18, and rolling out the latest restrictions from 1 February, Reuters reports. Protests continued in Europe against restrictions on unvaccinated people. In Malta hundreds of people marched in the capital Valletta, the biggest demonstration in the country so far. Farmers joined protesters in Amsterdam against stringent Covid curbs which mean hospitality in the Netherlands is closed until at least 25 January. Italian police have arrested a nurse in Palermo for allegedly pretending to give Covid vaccines to anti-vaxxer activists so they could benefit from official health certificates. Thousands of people have demonstrated in Amsterdam city centre in opposition to Covid-19 measures and the vaccination programme. Infections in the Netherlands have hit new heights in recent days, 36,000 cases were confirmed on Sunday, as protesters turned out and marched with banners and yellow umbrellas. The country has seen protests in other cities – and Sunday’s demonstration saw farmers join the march in the capital, parking tractors along the central Museum Square. The crowd played music, chanted anti-government slogans and then marched along thoroughfares, blocking traffic, Reuters reports. The Dutch have faced some of the strictest lockdown measures in Europe. A new lockdown was introduced in mid-December as the health system came under pressure. Amid growing public opposition, prime minister Mark Rutte on Friday announced the reopening of stores, hairdressers and gyms. Bars, restaurants and cultural venues will stay closed until 25 January. Novak Djokovic’s family has spoken after the tennis star was deported from Australia on Sunday. In a statement they said they were disappointed. “Despite the scandalous behaviour towards Novak, we believed that the sport would win,” they said. They claimed the court ruling was related to “politics and all (other) interests”. Italian police have arrested a nurse in Palermo for allegedly pretending to give Covid vaccines to anti-vaxxer activists so they could benefit from official health certificates to travel and access bars, restaurants and public transport in the country. Investigators used a hidden camera to film the nurse, a 58-year-old woman working at a major inoculation centre in the Sicilian capital. The clip, released on Saturday on Twitter, shows the health worker apparently loading up a dose of Covid-19 vaccine and then emptying the syringe into a tissue before injecting it into the arms of anti-vaxxers. Police said the woman’s own booster dose was fake and arrested her on charges of forgery and embezzlement. The number of patients in hospital in Ireland has fallen week-on-week for the first time since the Omicron variant triggered a sharp rise in cases. Ministers have said they are increasingly hopeful they will be able to end restrictions around hospitality and entertainment, and it will depend on whether pressure on hospitals eases. According to official figures, there were 965 Covid-19 patients in hospital on Sunday, down from 984 a week before and a peak of 1,063 the previous Monday. The number peaked a year ago, when more than 2,000 people were receiving hospital care. The number of patients needing intensive care treatment is 88, down from a peak of 221 a year ago. “I’m very keen to see the reopening happen at an ambitious pace over the next few weeks,” deputy prime minister Leo Varadkar told the national broadcaster RTÉ. Curbs introduced in December include the closure of nightclubs and a cut to the capacity of indoor events, with closing times for bars and restaurants at 8pm, Reuters reports. There are fresh protests in Malta against Covid rules on Sunday – and they’re the biggest yet, according to Reuters. Hundreds of people were marching in the capital Valletta against new measures requiring a Covid certificate to enter entry most venues including restaurants, gyms and bars. Malta’s take-up of the Covid jabs has been one of the best in the EU. Almost three-quarters of adults would have taken the additional booster jab by Sunday, according to health ministry data. But a health minister said the new rules, which come into force on Monday, are needed to defend against the Omicron variant of the virus, now accounting for well over 90% of new cases. Sunday’s protest was organised by a group of small political parties, but the main opposition Nationalist party has also criticised the new rules, saying they do not strike the right balance between public health and people’s freedoms especially when there has been a high take-up of the vaccine. Since the start of the pandemic, 502 people have died with Covid in Malta. The island has recorded a vaccination rate of some 95%. The former UK prime minister Tony Blair has said he could understand how rule-breaking parties in No 10 could happen, but that they were still inexcusable. Blair said he did not want to “get into questions of resignation or not” when asked whether Boris Johnson should resign over the “partygate” allegations. PA Media reports that the former Labour leader told Times Radio he could “understand people feeling enraged and very angry” about the claims of lockdown-contravening events, but that he could also see it “from the perspective of Downing Street”. He added: “The people in Downing Street would have been working under the most enormous pressure, enormous difficulty. I understand how it happened. “But the trouble is, you can give an explanation but you can’t really excuse it. People were obeying restrictions, often with massive personal cost and anguish and grief, and it just shouldn’t be allowed to happen, frankly. “But I guess he (Boris Johnson) knows that.” Supporters of Novak Djokovic had gathered to hear the court’s decision about the tennis player’s Australian visa. Some of them expressed their dismay at the decision not to overrule the Australian government. See what they had to say: The Austrian government has proposed setting the minimum age for Covid-19 vaccinations at 18, and rolling out the latest restrictions from 1 February, Reuters reports. The conservative-led government in Vienna said it intended the rule to apply to all people aged 14 and above, making it the first European Union country to make vaccinations compulsory for the general population at large. Thousands have marched against the plans, but chancellor Karl Nehammer said: “This is not a fight between the vaccinated and unvaccinated.” People who remain unvaccinated will not be able to access services and face fines. Nehammer said the measure was to avoid future lockdowns. Nearly 72% of Austria’s population has a valid vaccine certificate, but far right parties in the country have sought to exploit any scepticism. Elsewhere in the UK Sunday morning media rounds, the former head of the vaccines taskforce said a new long-term inoculation strategy is needed for Covid. Dr Clive Dix told radio station LBC that “to just keep vaccinating people” to protect the population is a “waste of time”. He said: “We need a focused approach for the vulnerable people. So, I think we’ve got something like 2% of the over-60s still not vaccinated. “We should have a highly-focused approach to get those people vaccinated and anybody else who’s vulnerable.” He added that he wasn’t convinced of the case for vaccinating younger, non-vulnerable people: “We’ve seen that because we’ve seen these huge, huge levels of infection but what they (boosters) do do, and it’s absolutely clear, they stop people getting seriously ill and dying. 85% of the people who get seriously and dying are the vulnerable and the elderly, so they’re the ones we should focus on.” The billionth Covid-19 vaccine as part of the global Covax scheme was delivered in Rwanda on Saturday night. The body, co-led by Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, World Health Organization (WHO) and Cepi (Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations) has sent vaccines to 144 countries across the globe in a push to get vaccines distributed to poorer countries. Joanna Rea, director of advocacy from UNICEF which works with Covax, said: “This is a remarkable milestone in the largest vaccine procurement and supply operation in history. Yet, with so many people still waiting to be offered a single dose, more needs to be done urgently. “The need for a predictable and steady supply of vaccines remains, as well as the vital funds to deliver vaccines into the arms of the people who need them the most.” Novak Djokovic has now left Australia hours after the full federal court dismissed the world No 1’s bid to restore his visa. The Serbian tennis player was seen boarding an Emirates flight from Melbourne to Dubai after the court rejected his challenge to the decision of Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to cancel the visa. The flight left shortly after 10.30pm local time (11.30am GMT). Here’s our full story: Restrictions in England could be lifted by the end of January, according to a government minister. Oliver Dowden told Trevor Phillips on Sunday that current indications are “encouraging”, ahead of Plan B rules being reviewed in 10 days. “I’m under no doubt the kind of burdens this puts hospitality, wider business, schools and so on under, and I want us to get rid of those if we possibly can,” he said. “The signs are encouraging but, clearly, we will wait to see the data ahead of that final decision.” Amnesty International has urged Italy to change its strict anti Covid-19 restrictions to avoid discriminating against unvaccinated people. A recent decree by Italian prime minister Mario Draghi made vaccination compulsory for people over 50, and for anyone to be able to use public transport and some other services. The human rights charity asked for alternatives to be considered, including mask wearing and Covid testing to allow unvaccinated people to go to work and use public transport. Current rules are in place until 15 June. “The government must continue to ensure that the entire population can enjoy its fundamental rights, such as the right to education, work and medial treatment, with particular regard to non-Covid patients who need urgent surgery,” it said, according to Reuters. World tennis No 1 Novak Djokovic has boarded a plane to leave Australia after a court cancelled his visa on Sunday. The player got on to an Emirates flight from Melbourne heading for Dubai, hours after the Australian federal court upheld the government’s cancellation of his visa over his decision not to be vaccinated against Covid-19 – bringing an end to a saga that has run on since 5 January. Authorities in Thailand have reported the country’s first death from the Omicron variant. An 86-year-old woman from the southern province of Songkhla died a month after the government brought in travel restrictions for foreign visitors as Omicron spread. “The woman is a bed-ridden, Alzheimer patient,” health ministry spokesman Rungrueng Kitphati told Reuters. The country reported 8,077 new infections and nine deaths on Sunday, bringing the total to more than 2.3 million cases. Nearly 22,000 people have died from Covid since the start of the pandemic. Another sign of unhappiness in the Conservative party ranks in parliament was on display this morning on one of the regional politics shows on BBC One. Speaking to Politics Midlands, Mark Garnier, MP for Wyre Forest in Worcestershire, said “[The apology] was a start. I think one of the things for someone like me is that this is not the first apology we’ve had. We’ve had an apology for the Owen Paterson stuff, we are still waiting to hear more potentially about ‘wallpapergate’. It is frustrating as a Conservative MP finding yourself having to be put on the defensive all the time.” The chair of Garnier’s local Conservative association is the latest local official in a safe seat who has called for Johnson to resign. “Whether you interpret the events of May 2020 as a work event or as a party, there are too many people there, it was against the rules, Boris Johnson knew he had broken the rules,” they said. Garnier, a minister in Theresa May’s government, said that he has not sent in a vote of no confidence letter, but adds that he thinks Johnson’s departure is likely: “We’re on a bit of a glide slope towards that.” Finally, Starmer is asked whether his poll lead is because of Johnson’s crisis rather than Labour’s turnaround in fortunes. “It’s a combination. Every time we are behind in polls, everyone says that’s the fault of the Labour party. Now we’re ahead in the polls, I’m not going to deny the prime minister is in a mess of his own making. “We’ve got a new team in place, we’ve been out there with strong policies. Yesterday, I was announcing our plan for the NHS on mental health; while the prime minister is dithering we are out there with strong proposals for the country. I hope now we’ve got the chance to be heard, and we’re going to take it.” That’s the end of the Sunday morning national politics shows in the UK. The Labour leader is then asked if he has broken any Covid rules, Raworth referencing a photograph on the front page of the Daily Mail over the weekend showing him drinking and eating with others in a building during Covid lockdowns in April 2021. Starmer replies that he hasn’t. “I was in a constituency office days before an election. We were working in the office and we stopped for something for food then we carried on working. There was no party, no breach of the rules. There is absolutely no comparison with the prime minister. “We had stopped to eat a takeaway while we were working in the office. This was a few days before the May elections. We were really busy, we’d been at it all day on Zoom calls, members calls in the office.” He adds: “It shows just how far the Conservatives are sinking that they’re trying to pretend there’s some comparison between industrial scale partying and this. “People will look at the photos and make their own minds up.” Raworth asks him what he’ll do if Johnson doesn’t resign. Starmer says: “I have always resisted calling for him to resign. But the prime minister has degraded the office of prime minister and lost all authority, not only in his own party but in the country. “When he tries to persuade the public how to behave in the rest of the pandemic, he won’t be taken seriously.” Starmer says that Sue Gray’s report is a fact-finding mission and will not rule on whether Johnson broke Covid restrictions nor say he broke the law. Raworth asks that if she finds he didn’t break rules, would he retract comments asking him to resign. “I am clear in my own mind that the has broken the rules, broken the law. He has apologised, and apologised to the Queen. I’m not doing Sue Gray down, I know her, she’s a woman of great integrity and respect. “If you look at her remit, it is to establish the facts. She will say ‘this is what happened, this is when it happened, this is who was there.’ I think it is extremely unlikely to say that the prime minister committed a criminal offence.” The BBC has just reported that Novak Djokovic is on his way to the airport to take a plane back to Dubai. And Australian journalist Paul Sakkal says the tennis player will leave at 10.30pm local time: Labour leader Keir Starmer is now up. He opens by saying that the prime minister broke the law by attending at least one of the parties. “I think he broke the law. He’s as good as admitted he broke the law. Downing Street has now apologised to the Queen for some of the parties that have gone on. “I think it’s pretty clear what’s going on. There was industrial scale partying going on, not much of it is being denied. The facts speak for themselves. The prime minister broke the law and then he lied about it.” He added: “When I first challenged the prime minister about it, he said ‘I’ve been assured there were no parties.’ “Then the Allegra Stratton video came out, I challenged him again and he said ‘I’m furious. I’ve just found out about these parties. I’m furious. “Then it comes out last week he was at one of the parties and his third defence is ‘I was there but I didn’t realise it was a party.’” Dowden is asked whether there will be any further revelations to come out about other parties. “To the best of mine and the government’s knowledge, this is the full extent of it. “This is why we set up this Sue Gray process, because if further allegations to come out, all of them have to be brought to the fore, he is allowing everyone to bring any further concerns that they have, Sue Gray will get to the bottom of these concerns.” He said that Johnson is responsible for the culture in Downing Street. “The prime minister is responsible for it, and you saw in his statement to parliament he was taking responsibility for it. You see it again in his response to the Sue Gray report, he will take responsibility for it.” Oliver Dowden says the culture in Downing Street needs to be changed, and understands the anger felt by people. He’s repeats the process under way with Sue Gray’s investigation, and that Boris Johnson will make a statement to parliament afterwards. He said: “We were dealing with this unprecedented pandemic, working on plans for the vaccine rollout, which meant we had the most rapid vaccine rollout in Europe, twice. “It allowed us to have one of the most open economies in Europe, and get the economy back to where it was before the pandemic. That is where our focus was.” Oliver Dowden is being interviewed by Sophie Raworth on BBC One’s Sunday Morning programme. Dowden said he didn’t notice a party atmosphere on 20 May, moments after giving a press conference to the nation on Covid restrictions. People must have been arriving as he left, Raworth adds. “I didn’t see people coming in or going out. This is why it’s important there’s a full investigation, and that’s why it has been set up. “This event was totally wrong. It shouldn’t have happened. The prime minister has rightly apologised. People feel angry about what’s been going on in Downing Street.” Streeting tells Trevor Phillips that the Labour party isn’t calling for a vote of no confidence in the government as it would rally the Conservatives. “We could call a motion of no confidence in the government - we’ve been around the block with this before, that would galvanise the Conservative party.” He added: “I’ll make no bones about it – Boris Johnson carrying on is great for the Labour party. “If I’m thinking purely through the prism of party politics, then my message is: ‘Keep him on, knock yourselves out, you’ll be literally knocked out at the next election’. “But we are still in the middle of a national crisis here and the prime minister’s actions and judgments matter.” Oliver Dowden will be back in a TV studio shortly as he appears on BBC Sunday Morning with Sophie Raworth. Labour leader Keir Starmer will also appear. Serbia’s president has reacted to an Australian court’s decision to uphold the cancellation of Novak Djokovic’s visa. Reuters quotes Aleksandar Vučić as saying he had spoken to Djokovic after the ruling. “I spoke to Djokovic and told him we cannot wait to see him,” Vučić told reporters. “I told him he is always welcome in Serbia.” Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting follows Oliver Dowden on Sky News’ Trevor Phillips on Sunday. He is asked whether if he was health secretary he would relax Covid restrictions given Omicron is less dangerous than previous variants. Streeting said he would follow the data. He raises concern about the impact on other parts of the country. He said: “We don’t want any restrictions or measures that aren’t absolutely necessary. While London might be over the peak, other parts of the country are bearing the brunt of it. “The goal is to make sure we never have to go into another lockdown again. And what we can move forward as a country, protecting public health, lives and liberties.” Here is some more reaction to the news that Djokovic will be deported from Australia: Trevor Phillips now speaks movingly about the death of his daughter that weekend, who had been ill and was isolating. “She had stuck to the spirit and letter of the rules. There will be thousands of people who have that story in their background, and you are in there telling me about a civil servant’s inquiry. It will not answer that anger. Does the prime minister really understand why people are angry?” Oliver Dowden responds: “It is totally wrong that there has been any way in which those rules have not been fully obeyed in Downing Street. I am trying to offer to you an explanation of how the government is seeking to move forwards with this. “The prime minister has a sincere sense of remorse over what happened, as do I, as do other members of the government.” Djokovic made a statement following the court’s decision. Here is what he said in full: I would like to make a brief statement to address the outcomes of today’s court hearing. I will now be taking some time to rest and to recuperate, before making any further comments beyond this. I am extremely disappointed with the court ruling to dismiss my application for judicial review of the minister’s decision to cancel my visa, which means I cannot stay in Australia and participate in the Australian Open. I respect the court’s ruling and I will cooperate with the relevant authorities in relation to my departure from the country. I am uncomfortable that the focus of the past weeks has been on me and I hope that we can all now focus on the game and tournament I love. I would like to wish the players, tournament officials, staff, volunteers and fans all the best for the tournament. Finally, I would like to thank my family, friends, team, supporters, fans and my fellow Serbians for your continued support. You have all been a great source of strength to me. Sky News presenter Trevor Phillips reads out a list of parties that have been confirmed as taking place. He asks Oliver Dowden whether he thinks it’s “shameful” that they happened while others were following rules. “Yes it was completely unacceptable that this happened. I’m happy to use whichever adjectives that you use to express my anger at what happened. The prime minister is angry about what happened and there needs to be a change in the culture. “It’s important to find the full facts of what happened. It’s important to get that full picture. The prime minister will make a statement to parliament and be held accountable in parliament for his actions.” Conservative Party chair Oliver Dowden has backed Boris Johnson in an interview on Sky News. He said the prime minister was right to apologise, but the success of the booster rollout meant he should stay. Dowden said he had been angered by recent revelations about parties. “It was the prime minister who made that call about having a mass booster programme which has ensured we’re getting through the worst of Omicron. “He made the call around having a further lockdown in the face of that Omicron variant. He made the right call and meant we have been able to have the most open and the most vaxxed economy in Europe.” Good morning from London, where the main Covid-19 news is the decision overnight by an Australian court to deport world No 1 tennis player Novak Djokovic over his Covid status. The court rejected a challenge to the decision of the Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to cancel the visa on the basis Djokovic’s presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he is a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. It’s the latest turn in a saga that began on 5 January when Djokovic arrived in Melbourne and was then held under armed guard over concerns about his visa, and whether he was exempt from vaccine requirements in a country that has tight Covid rules. He won a court appeal, before Hawke then revoked his visa. In a statement, Djokovic has said he respects the court’s ruling and will leave the country. Elsewhere, newspapers in the UK this morning are leading with claims that Conservative MPs are ready to oust prime minister Boris Johnson after a week where the furore around parties in Downing Street during Covid-19 lockdowns intensified. I’m Harry Taylor and I’ll be at the helm as we bring you the latest developments in this story, and any other Covid-19 news from around the world for the rest of Sunday. If you have any tips or suggestions, you can contact me by email or Twitter, where my DMs are open.Banks in New Zealand are rejecting home-loans over minor frivolous spending, including a $187 Kmart Christmas shop and a daily drink bought at a corner store, and money spent on pets or petrol, pushing the government to investigate whether banks are overreacting to new finance rules designed to protect vulnerable borrowers from predatory lenders. The Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act (CCCFA), updated in early December, requires all lenders to complete thorough checks to ensure loans are suitable and affordable for their customers. But finance leaders and opposition politicians say the rules have compelled banks to take an ultra-conservative approach to lending, pushing homeownership further out of reach for many as the country battles a housing crisis. There has been a sharp dip in home-loan approvals since the new rules were introduced – from about 30,000 a month to 23,000 in December – according to Centrix, a credit reporting agency. “One in five mortgage loan approvals appear to have been hit by the new CCCFA regulations. Consumers that were previously approved are no longer,” its managing director Keith McLaughlin said, adding that this amounts to a decrease in lending of $1.9bn from November to December. The chief executive of Financial Advice NZ, Katrina Shanks, said the new rules required banks and other lenders to go through an individual’s spending habits with a fine-tooth comb. Entertainment, food (including take-aways), gym memberships, clothing, personal care, childcare and more are included. Before the rule changes, the banks had the ability to determine some of these costs as “discretionary spending”. A December survey of Financial Advice NZ’s members revealed roughly 300 examples of lenders being restricted in the loans they could offer to would-be borrowers because of the rules, Shank said. “What has happened is the net is so wide on who this new prescription is applied to, that it has hit the average New Zealander. Most New Zealanders wouldn’t be considered vulnerable, but the way this legislation has been written, it captures all New Zealanders.” The rules also make directors and senior managers of lending organisations personally liable for up to $200,000 if found to be breaking the rules, which has made banks extremely risk-averse, Shanks said. The New Zealand Bankers’ Association chief executive Roger Beaumont told Stuff the law change meant banks had “much less flexibility or room for lender discretion than was previously the case.” The minister of commerce and consumer affairs, Dr David Clark, has now asked the council of financial regulators “to bring forward their investigation into whether banks and lenders are implementing the CCCFA as intended”. “Banks appear to be managing their lending more conservatively at present, and this is likely due to global economic conditions. It may also be that in the initial weeks of implementing the new CCCFA requirements there has been a decision to unduly err on the side of caution.” Clark added that a number of factors affecting the market have occurred at the same time as the rule changes, including increases to the official cash rate, changes to how much a bank can lend against mortgaged property compared to the value of that property, and an increase in house prices and local government rates.As Omicron spread to at least 50 people in Hong Kong last week the government looked to one place in particular for blame – the city’s flagship airline, Cathay Pacific. Two crew were accused of breaching their home quarantine, going shopping or meeting friends, and spreading the highly transmissible variant in the city. As numbers rose, infection flow charts were published marking cases with the airline’s brand while the government launched inquiries and threatened legal action. Pro-Beijing figures and state media called for punishment. The airline had just come off a government ban on flying key international routes, a punishment for carrying Covid-positive passengers. Around the same time the ban was imposed in late December, quarantine rules were tightened after a pilot tested positive, and then again just days later after three crew also did, and then again after the latest incidents. On Tuesday, Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, described the airline as “a very big noncompliance case” and accused it of sending some crew back to the territory on empty cargo flights to access shorter quarantine periods. “This has to be put under full investigation, and we will take legal action once we have the full evidence of what wrong they went into,” Lam said. The accusations are the latest chapter in a troubled few years for Cathay, as it navigated Hong Kong’s Covid-19 measures as well as changing politics. The punitive action against the airline has damaged morale as staff face job requirements unheard of just three years ago. Last year, Cathay staff spent a total of 200 years – 76,000 nights – in hotel quarantine or in Hong Kong’s government facility at Penny’s Bay. The whole aviation industry suffered when international travel plummeted in 2020 and 2021, but Cathay was uniquely vulnerable with no domestic market to fall back on. Flights between Hong Kong and London were cut from five to at most one a day. The airline pivoted to cargo but that too suffered. Cathy reported a $2.8bn (£2bn) loss in 2020 and cut thousands of jobs, despite receiving a $5bn government bailout in June of that year. A $972m loss was reported in the first six months of 2021. Cathay had already found its way into the government’s bad books in mid-2019, when it refused to sanction any staff who participated in the pro-democracy protests. In August that year, the Chinese civil aviation authority banned Cathay crew members who had protested from staffing flights in or out of mainland China. After a management change, at least 26 staff who participated in the protests were later reportedly fired. A busy airport to just 165 passengers “It’s quite obvious that the flag carrier for Hong Kong is in deep trouble,” said Frederik Gollob, the chair of the European chamber of commerce in Hong Kong. “Cathay is of course a corporate company but has also had a social function for Hong Kong for decades. “It’s certainly not a great sign seeing almost all flight activity for passenger flights [drop] and the significantly reduced capacity on the cargo side happening at the moment, as a result of very strict regulations for Covid-19. “We’re extremely thankful to all the Cathay crew and the company for doing everything they can to keep us connected to the outside world and keeping up goods flow. Also the international carriers who do the same.” Hong Kong’s pandemic border restrictions are among the strictest in the world, with bans on flights from seven countries and transit passengers from another 140. On a single day last week, just 165 people flew into what was once one of the world’s 10 busiest airports. Arrivals must go into 21 days of expensive quarantine, while thousands of close contacts are also forced into government quarantine at Penny’s Bay. After the Omicron outbreak the centres this week reached breaking point, with reports of power outages, food shortages and people confined for longer than ordered because staff were too overrun to release them. Deflecting attention The breaches by crew were serious, but observers have also noted the pressure on Cathay appeared to grow as the government faced scrutiny on legislators who were also accused of breaching guidelines on avoiding large gatherings. Dozens of legislators were sent to Penny’s Bay after they attended a birthday party with a suspected case, including the pro-Beijing firebrand Junius Ho, who took to social media to rail against the government’s system having finally experienced it for himself. Questioned about the comparison, Lam distanced herself from taking responsibility for subordinates despite demanding Cathay’s senior management to do so days earlier. Cathay has said it will cooperate with both inquiries, and apologised for the “disruption and anguish” for the “unacceptable noncompliance” by the crew members, who have reportedly been fired. But the airline’s chair, Patrick Healy, said the alleged breaches overshadow the overwhelming majority who had been professional under “incredibly challenging conditions”. The rules for airline crews in Hong Kong have changed frequently, especially in the last month. Tightened quarantine rules have led to staff shortages, flight cancellations and the suspension of cargo services – the one arm still making money. On Christmas Day last year, 25 imported cases of coronavirus were found – Korean Air, Emirates and Cathay were banned from running particular routes. Also in December the government ordered flights operating in and out of mainland China could only be staffed by crew from a “closed loop” of flights and hotel quarantines for consecutive weeks before heading home after another fortnight in quarantine. “The crew who joined that are literally just travelling from hotel to aircraft, aircraft to hotel for months,” said Grace Siu, the external vice-chair for the airline’s flight attendants union. When the rules changed after the breach, there was little notice for staff, she said. “Many of us were not in Hong Kong, we were outside the city or in flight, and got the message that we have to go to the hotel to do quarantine and not home.” Siu said the union did not have data on staff who have left, but it does field plenty of queries from struggling members. She said most staff had complied with rules that have taken an enormous toll, as they have done on flight crews globally, adding that the crackdown over a couple of breaches had hit hard. “Of course it affects the whole crew’s morale,” Sui said. Earlier this month the airline union posted a meme to its Facebook page. In the retro illustration styled as a 1950s holiday scene, a young snorkel-wearing boy gives a thumbs up from the mouth of a great white shark. Below the image says: “Stay Positive!” Further restrictions On 31 December, Andy Wong, the general manager of corporate affairs at Cathay, said further restrictions would lead to dramatic disruptions to the supply chain, and could lead to reductions in flights in order to protect crew and maintain general safety. On Tuesday Lam told people to prepare for higher prices and item shortages because of the new rules, but that the city had no choice if they were to fight the outbreak. Gollob said the international business community had raised their concerns with government last year, but the continuing crisis worried them. It is increasingly difficult to maintain a life in Hong Kong with family abroad, or to attract staff to the city – including airline crews for either a permanent stationing or simply manning a flight that could end with them in Penny’s Bay for weeks. “I feel that the international community has been extremely resilient in those two years but energy levels are, I would say, close to zero, and it’s increasingly hard to maintain the status quo,” he said. In a video message to staff, Healy thanked them for their sacrifices during the pandemic, including extended time separated from family. “What you have been through during the past two years is quite simply unparalleled.”The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, says Novak Djokovic was deported because he tried to breach entry rules at the border, even though the immigration minister did not dispute the tennis star’s belief he had a valid medical exemption. The Serbian tennis player boarded an Emirates flight from Melbourne to Dubai on Sunday night, hours after the full federal court upheld the minister’s decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa. Morrison said on Monday the world men’s No 1 had failed to comply with “the rules”, that to enter Australia that “you either have to be vaccinated or you have to have a valid medical exemption and show evidence of it”. “It’s as simple as that,” the prime minister told 2GB radio. “This is about someone who sought to come to Australia and not comply with the entry rules at our border. That’s what this is about.” The health minister, Greg Hunt, also argued on Monday that Djokovic’s medical exemption “wasn’t valid”. But the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, did not make alleged non-compliance with entry rules a central plank of his reasons for cancelling Djokovic’s visa a second time on Friday. In his formal decision, Hawke said he assumed that Djokovic “entered Australia consistently” with Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) documents, even though the minister noted there was a dispute about this in the earlier court proceedings. “For present purposes, I will assume that Mr Djokovic’s position is correct rather than seeking to get to the bottom of this here,” Hawke wrote. Hawke said he weighed that up as a factor against cancelling the visa, but added: “That I am assuming he currently has a medical reason not to be vaccinated does not ultimately affect my reasoning on health and good order as explained below.” The immigration minister also noted Djokovic – who cited a recent Covid infection as a reason for not being vaccinated – had received a supportive letter from Tennis Australia. “I have taken into account that upon receipt of this letter, Mr Djokovic considered that he had a valid medical exemption to come to Australia, and that he would therefore be entitled to remain in Australia.” In his reasons, Hawke also said Djokovic had an “extensive compliant travel history” and acknowledged “that he has personally made no attempt to contravene any Australian law”. The minister said Djokovic’s travel declaration “has a false answer” to a question about travel in the 14 days prior to coming to Australia, and the tennis star “should have been more careful”. “While I will assume that Mr Djokovic has not breached any laws in circumstances where his agent says that she is to blame, I am still concerned because Australia Travel Declarations are important documents, and the information in them should not be false,” Hawke said. But the minister said his decision would have been the same regardless of the travel declaration issue. Hawke’s overarching argument for cancelling the visa was that Djokovic’s presence in Australia “may pose a health risk to the Australian community” because it “may foster anti-vaccination sentiment”. The immigration minister used powers under section 133C(3) of the Migration Act to cancel Djokovic’s visa “on health and good order grounds, on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so”. Morrison denied on Monday that the decision to cancel the visa had the potential to encourage anti-vaccination elements even more. “Well, I don’t believe so, and because we’ve made it very clear that the rules are the rules,” he said. Morrison also denied a double standard, given that several Coalition politicians had been spreading anti-vaccination messages. The prime minister said 2GB host Ben Fordham was “conflating two different issues”. “In Australia, if you’re an Australian, you’re a citizen, you’re resident and you’re a citizen, you can be here and you can express your views,” Morrison said. Morrison left open the possibility that Djokovic might be allowed back into Australia at some point over the next three years. Asked what Djokovic would have to do to be allowed back into Australia next year, Morrison said: “I’m not going to sort of precondition any of that or say anything that would not enable the minister to make the various calls they have to make. I mean, it does go over a three-year period, but there is the opportunity for them to return in the right circumstances and that would be considered at the time.” The rules say that a person who receives an adverse decision will not be able to be granted a visa for a period of three years, except in certain circumstances including compelling circumstances that affect the interests of Australia. Labor’s home affairs and immigration spokesperson, Kristina Keneally, welcomed the court’s decision to uphold Hawke’s cancellation of the visa, but said the Australian government “never should have granted Novak Djokovic that visa in the first place”. “This is a series of unforced errors on Mr Morrison’s part, and it’s a mess on our borders,” Keneally told ABC TV. “We are now an international embarrassment, thanks to Mr Morrison’s bungles.” Keneally said some of Morrison’s own MPs and senators have been discouraging vaccination “for months”. “Mr Morrison cannot pretend that he is a wolf, tough on Novak Djokovic, but a lamb in front of his own party room, unwilling to tell people like George Christensen to pull their head in,” she said. Djokovic arrived in Australia on the evening of 5 January. He believed that a visa granted on 18 November and a medical exemption approved by Tennis Australia and a Victorian government independent expert panel would be sufficient to enter Australia. Djokovic’s visa was first cancelled by the Australian Border Force hours after he arrived at Melbourne airport and he was taken to a detention hotel. Last Monday a federal circuit court judge restored Djokovic’s visa, concluding it was unreasonable for the ABF to renege on a deal to give him more time at the airport to address the exemption issue. Hawke then cancelled Djokovic’s visa on Friday on the basis Djokovic’s presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he is a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. On Sunday, chief justice James Allsop announced the court unanimously dismissed Djokovic’s application to overturn the cancellation, with costs to be paid by the tennis star. Allsop explained the decision of the court did not reflect on “the merits or wisdom of the decision” but rather whether it was so irrational as to be unlawful. In a statement on Sunday, Djokovic said he was “extremely disappointed” with the ruling, but said he respected it and would “cooperate with the relevant authorities in relation to my departure from the country”.Retailers charging “beyond outrageous” prices for rapid antigen tests are being referred to the federal police for investigation, as supply issues continue to hamper Australia’s testing regime. The referrals were disclosed by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission as union leaders accused the federal government of putting workers “in harm’s way” by failing to provide free and accessible rapid antigen tests. Union leaders said after an “emergency” meeting on Monday that free rapid antigen tests were needed for the whole community, not just essential workers, and they vowed to write to all employers urging them to protect employees. The chair of the ACCC, Rod Sims, said on Monday the consumer watchdog had received many reports of price gouging, which is now illegal under new laws that prevent profit margins of more than 20% on tests. With reports of retailers charging more than $30 for a single hard-to-find rapid testing kit, Sims said the regulator was preparing to take action on the “beyond outrageous” price markups. “Clearly we are facing a supply issue. More supply is needed, we keep being assured that more supply is coming both from government agencies and the private sector,” Sims said. “But, when you have rapid antigen tests that are designed for use by trained professionals and they are being sold … without proper instruction, that is extremely concerning because people may take comfort from a test that they didn’t know how to perform properly, and I think that is an even worse outcome,” he said. “We have also had reports that look as if people have bought the goods … and then on-sold them at more than 20% markup and that is illegal under the government’s recent announcement, and we are referring anything that looks of that nature to the Australian federal police,” Sims said. He said the government was also looking at reports of some retailers breaking up wholesale packs of kits to sell individually, which is prohibited by the Therapeutic Goods Administration, and some suggesting the federal government was requisitioning commercial supplies. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “We have an eye to naming and shaming, but we are also looking at whether the conduct could amount to unconscionable conduct and we’re looking at what is being said to see whether consumers are being misled, as well as referring matters to the Therapeutic Goods Administration and the federal police in appropriate circumstances, so a lot going on,” Sims said. The health minister, Greg Hunt, has denied claims that have appeared on social media suggesting the commonwealth was requisitioning rapid antigen tests from pharmacists. He told ABC’s Radio National on Monday that the claims were “false”. “We have written to those that made them. We’ve seen them withdrawn, and that was, frankly, it was a plain lie,” he said. Sims said the regulator had received a letter from Hunt over the weekend on the matter giving assurance that the practice was not happening. Pharmacists claiming it was “would amount to misleading conduct”, Sims said. The regulator said while court action would take some time, the penalties available to the ACCC could “be extremely high”. “If we found large stores and chains engaging in this sort of behaviour, we won’t hesitate to take action and the penalties will be very large.” Sims said reports about price gouging had focused on tobacconists and petrol stations, but some pharmacies had also been reported to the regulator. While Hunt has defended the government’s procurement of the rapid antigen tests, the Victorian deputy premier, James Merlino, said on Monday the state would have preferred a stronger national approach. Victoria has ordered 44m tests, with 3m of these having already arrived. The government is prioritising these tests for the state’s priority workforce, at-risk Victorians and community organisations. “We’re trying to get as many as we possibly can and as quickly as we can. It would have been better if there had been a national approach [to procuring rapid antigen tests]. That did not happen,” he said. Union leaders met on Monday to discuss the “devastating impact the latest Covid wave is having on the health and incomes of working people”, according to a statement issued afterwards by the Australian Council of Trade Unions. The union leadership condemned “the failure of the Morrison government to respond to our requests to work with us during this crisis; or our demands for the provision of free rapid antigen tests, improved masks, fixing close contact definitions and restoring support for businesses and workers”. Union leaders expressed “their solidarity, respect, and deep gratitude to the healthcare workers of our country who are experiencing the full brunt of this wave of sick people”, adding that workers in those sectors were “exhausted and feel abandoned by governments who have encouraged ‘let it rip’ policies”. “We have determined that despite the prime minister not acting to keep working people safe, the union movement will,” the union statement said. “Accordingly, the meeting today resolved to write to all employers reminding them of their obligation to do all that is reasonable and practical to keep workers safe.” Workplaces should undertake risk assessments for Omicron in consultation with unions, workers and their health and safety representatives, the statement said. The unions said where working from home was not an option, the provision of free rapid antigen tests by employers to all workers would be necessary once supply was resolved, alongside upgraded masks and improved ventilation. “Where employers do not fulfil their obligations, the union movement determines to do everything within its power to ensure the safety of workers and the community. This may include ceasing work or banning unsafe practices.”New Zealand and Australia have sent planes to assess the damage from a huge undersea volcanic eruption and tsunami that hit the Pacific nation of Tonga on Saturday. The eruption sent a thick blanket of ash into the sky, contaminating water supplies, cutting off communications and initially preventing surveillance flights assessing the extent of damage. But on Monday, flights from New Zealand and Australia were finally able to depart. Videos shared on social media after Saturday night’s eruption showed people running for higher ground as the metre-high floods hit coastal areas and made their way inland while the sky darkened with ash. A sonic boom could be heard as far away as Alaska. There were still no official reports of injuries or deaths by Sunday evening, with communications limited. However, a UK woman is missing after being swept away on Saturday. Angela Glover, 50, who had lived in Tonga since around 2015 and ran a tattoo parlour in the capital of Nuku’alofa with her husband James, was swept away from the beach by the tsunami. “Angela and her husband, James, got washed away,” her brother Nick Eleini told the Guardian. “James was able to cling on to a tree for quite a long time, but Angela was unable to do so.” A search has been underway for Glover since she went missing, but Eleini had grave fears for his sister. “What are we, 48 hours later? I don’t think this is going to have a happy ending.” Families outside Tonga were waiting desperately for news, as communications remained down across most of the country, nearly 48 hours since the huge undersea volcano eruption, which could be heard and felt more than 2,000km away. Tonga’s cabinet held a crisis meeting on Sunday and was asking for assistance, said the office of Zed Seselja, Australia’s minister for the Pacific. A surveillance flight departed Australia for Tonga on Monday morning to assess damage to critical infrastructure such as roads, ports and powerlines and determine the next phase of the response effort. It was delayed due to the ash cloud blanketing Tonga but eventually took off. A Royal New Zealand Air Force Orion plane also managed to depart from Auckland on Monday to assess initial damage in the area. Aid agencies said thick ash and smoke had prompted authorities to ask people to wear masks and drink bottled water. In a video posted on Facebook, Nightingale Filihia said she was sheltering at her family’s home as volcanic ash and tiny pieces of rock rained down and turned the sky pitch black. “It’s really bad. They told us to stay indoors and cover our doors and windows because it’s dangerous,” she said. “I felt sorry for the people. Everyone just froze when the explosion happened. We rushed home.” Outside the house, people were seen carrying umbrellas for protection. A tweet on Sunday morning stated that the Tongan prime minister, Siaosi Sovaleni, said the tsunami warning remained in place and much of the country had sustained serious damage. Jacinda Ardern, the prime minister of New Zealand, told a news conference on Sunday that contact had not been established with coastal areas beyond the capital, Nuku‘alofa. “Nuku‘alofa is covered in thick plumes of volcanic dust but otherwise conditions are calm and stable,” Ardern said. “We have not yet received news from other coastal areas.” She said the main undersea communications cable was affected, probably due to loss of power. She added that power was being restored in some areas on the islands and local mobile phones were slowly starting to work. The New Zealand high commission in Nuku’alofa said the tsunami had damaged boats, shops and other infrastructure. The International Federation of the Red Cross expressed concerns about Tonga being “cut off from the rest of the world”. “From what little updates we have, the scale of the devastation could be immense, especially for outer lying islands,” said Katie Greenwood, IFRC’s Pacific Head of Delegation. The IFRC was particularly concerned about access to safe and clean drinking water as a result of saltwater inundation caused by the tsunami waves and ash fall from the volcanic eruption, as well as shelter for communities, particularly on the coastline. Dave Snider, the tsunami warning coordinator for the National Tsunami Warning Center in Palmer, Alaska, said it was very unusual for a volcanic eruption to affect an entire ocean basin, and the spectacle was both “humbling and scary”. The tsunami waves caused damage to boats as far away as New Zealand and Santa Cruz, California, but the damage did not appear serious. Snider said he anticipated the tsunami situation in the US and elsewhere to continue improving. Tsunami advisories were issued earlier for Japan, Hawaii, Alaska and the US Pacific coast. The US Geological Survey estimated the eruption caused the equivalent of a magnitude 5.8 earthquake. Scientists said tsunamis generated by volcanoes rather than earthquakes were relatively rare. As the tsunami struck on Saturday, a video shot from the roof of a building on the coast showed large waves breaching the coastal wall seconds apart, while a video shot from the New Zealand high commission in Nuku’alofa, where people ran for shelter, showed the downtown area of Patangata had been completely submerged, including the Royal Palace and Tonga’s largest bank. Another video, shot inside a church, showed children crying out as water surrounded the building and waves began lapping against the windows. In a video posted to YouTube after the eruption, Abraham Leilua begins by telling his followers that “it’s not that bad” but within minutes, as the water rises, he says “I have to run for my life” before ending the video. Southern Cross Cable Network said on Sunday it had been able to confirm contact with a communications centre in Tonga and work was under way to have internet and phone links restored. Ardern said the situation in Tonga was “hugely concerning”and New Zealand has made an initial NZ$500,000 (£249,000) available to Tonga The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said he was “deeply concerned” about the people of Tonga and that the US stood prepared to provide support. The volcano, Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha‘apai, at 1,800 metres high and 20km (12.5 miles) wide, is 65km (40 miles) north of Nuku‘alofa. US Storm Watch said the eruption was one of the most violent ever captured on satellite, while Tonga’s geological service said the gas, smoke and ash from the eruption reached 20km into the sky. The eruption could be heard 2,300km (1,400km) away in New Zealand. Satellite imagery appeared to show Tonga’s uninhabited Nuku and Tau islands completely eroded. Tonga has also been hit by two category five cyclones in the last five years: Cyclone Harold in April 2020 and Cyclone Gita in 2018. In Japan, about 230,000 people were advised to evacuate across eight prefectures as waves of more than a metre hit coastal areas, the public broadcaster NHK reported. The alert included areas hit by the deadly 2011 tsunami. With Reuters.The New South Wales chief health officer has warned deaths from Covid-19 are likely to spike in the coming days, as hospitalisation data shows unvaccinated people with the virus are 13 times more likely to end up in intensive care. Dr Kerry Chant issued the warning on Monday as the state recorded another 17 deaths and 29,504 new Covid cases, following a record week in which 126 people died from the virus in the state. “Given the broader community transmission of Covid I would like to flag that the number of deaths are likely to be higher over the coming days,” she said. Victoria announced 22,429 new cases of the virus on Monday and six deaths, while Queensland recorded 15,122 and seven deaths. Queensland’s chief health officer Dr John Gerrard said the Gold Coast, which has had a significant number of cases and hospitalisations, is expected to see a peak some time in the next week. The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, again urged unvaccinated people to get the jab, saying they needed “to give a damn about someone other than themselves”. Hazzard cited hospitalisation data which showed unvaccinated people were six times more likely to end up in hospital with the Omicron variant, and 13 times more likely to end up in ICU. That figure was backed up by the latest NSW Covid surveillance report, which showed to 1 January the hospitalisation rate was 9.1% among cases aged 12 years and older with no vaccine dose, compared to 1.2% of people who had received two doses. It comes as Sydney respiratory physician and lung specialist Dr Lucy Morgan revealed the strain on frontline health workers amid the surge in cases, saying she had been in a Covid hospital ward until 1am before fronting Monday’s press conference. “About every hour between 1am and 6am, I got another call about another patient sick enough to be admitted to my hospital with Covid illness,” she said. “In the short-term, that’s okay. But in the long-term … this is bad. It’s really hard on us and it’s really hard on the people of NSW. “Because this is leading to some delayed diagnoses, some longer waiting times for everything and a huge burden on our community as we try to keep everything ticking over.” Despite reintroducing some restrictions because of the surging Omicron wave, the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, insisted on Monday that there was no point introducing further curbs. “The only alternative is to go into lockdown,” he said. “We have do deal with the world as it is, not as we want it to be. We’ve said in the past … we were working to a vaccination program of 70%, to be at 95% means we can open up society.” Events support package for NSW Also on Monday the NSW government announced a package to support festival organisers in the wake of restrictions on major events in the state during the Omicron wave. The NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, announced the $43m in funding for event organisers who had lost money as a result of restrictions, and foreshadowed further support packages would be announced in the coming days as businesses complain that an effective “shadow lockdown” was having a major impact on trade. But that is unlikely to include an extension of close contact exemptions for hospitality workers, Perrottet said.The brother of a British woman who was swept away from the coast of Tonga by the tsunami on Saturday and is still missing, has told the Guardian he has grave fears for her safety. “What are we, 48 hours later? I don’t think this is going to have a happy ending,” an emotional Nick Eleini said. So far, no casualties in Tonga – which has a population of just over 100,000 – have been confirmed. Though there are unconfirmed reports that three people were swept away by the waves, and that two have so far been found. The impact of the tsunami, and the resulting ash cloud that has blanketed the islands, is feared to be enormous, with NGOs warning of contaminated drinking water, seawater ruining crops, as well as damage to homes and infrastructure. Eleini, who lives in Sydney, spoke to the Guardian as he was travelling back to the UK to be with his mother, Jennifer. His sister, 50-year-old Angela Glover, was swept away from the beach along with her husband and four or five of the couple’s dogs by a tsunami triggered by a huge volcanic eruption. Glover ran an animal rescue shelter in Tonga. “The tsunami hit around 5.30pm local time, I believe,” said Eleini. “Angela and her husband, James, got washed away. James was able to cling on to a tree for quite a long time, but Angela was unable to do so and was washed away with the dogs, I think four or five dogs. “They were housesitting a house on the west coast of the island [of Tongatapu, Tonga’s main island]. James went back to their proper house on the south coast of the island, but Angela didn’t turn up. James contacted the police and the British embassy there, where he was able to notify us of what happened. Eleini, who was crying as he spoke about his sister, said the search was ongoing. “One of the dogs has been found, but Angela hasn’t been found. “It’s excruciating. I can’t even believe the words are coming out of my mouth, to be honest.” Information out of Tonga has been almost impossible to gather since the eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai undersea volcano on Saturday afternoon local time, followed by a tsunami, which saw 1.2-metre waves crash across the islands, swirling around buildings and into homes. The undersea communications cable, which is key to Tonga’s communications network, was apparently damaged and families outside Tonga have been waiting desperately for news, as communications remained down across most of the country. Families in the Tonga diaspora in Australia, New Zealand and the US are already raising funds for recovery efforts and preparing for rebuilding programs. Roughly 20% of Tongans live below the poverty line, and the country’s GDP per capita sits at just above US$5,000. Much of the economy of the country is based on remittances, with Tongans overseas sending money back to the islands. Glover’s husband, James, was able to contact her family in the UK via a satellite phone supplied by the British embassy to inform them of what had happened. The huge undersea volcano eruption, believed to be the biggest in 30 years, could be heard and felt more than 2,000km away. Two people have drowned off a beach in northern Peru after unusually high waves were recorded in some coastal areas after the volcano. The deaths occurred on Saturday on a beach located in the Lambayeque region, Peru’s National Institute of Civil Defence said in a statement. Glover, who was born in Brighton and has a background in marketing and advertising, has been living in Tonga since about 2015. She set up an animal shelter called Tonga Animal Welfare Society to care for and rehouse stray dogs. “She always wanted to travel the south Pacific, and she’s always been drawn to swimming with whales, and Tonga’s one of the places that you can do that,” said Eleini. “She married James in about 2014 and talked him into following her around the Pacific and they settled in Tonga.” James Glover had a tattoo parlour in London before moving to Tonga. He set up the Happy Sailor Tattoo Parlour in Nuku’alofa, the country’s capital. Eleini believes his sister could have been at Ahau, a village on the eastern side of a small spit of land on the west of Tongatapu, when the tsunami hit. “I kind of thought if they were at home, they would’ve been alright, but that’s a very small spit of land, only a few metres above sea level. All I can speculate is that the waves came and washed them away.”An artist has accused Lego of recreating a leather jacket he made for Queer Eye cast-member Antoni Porowski without the artist’s permission, claiming that a toy jacket included in a Lego set based on the Netflix show is a “blatant copy” of his design. James Concannon, whose clothes have been regularly worn by Porowski on the popular program, filed a lawsuit against the Danish toy giant in a Connecticut district court last month. The designer, who is seeking damages, alleges that one of the outfits included in the set for Porowski’s figurine copies “the unique placement, coordination, and arrangement of the individual artistic elements” on the jacket. In the lawsuit, Concannon alleges that Netflix had consistently asked him for his consent to show his clothes in Queer Eye episodes since 2017, which he gave. Porowski and Concannon later became friends, with Porowski sending Concannon the jacket to create a custom design for him in 2018. The following year, Porowski wore the jacket in an episode in the show’s fourth season. Concannon alleges that Netflix never sought his permission to feature the jacket on the show, but believed it was an oversight. The lawsuit states that Concannon contacted Lego after seeing the toy jacket in the set, which went on sale last year. He claims that a customer service representative offered him the set, which is based on the show’s loft and retails at US$99.99, for his six-year-old son as a form of compensation. However, another company representative later told him that the company did not give away its products for free. Concannon alleges that when his attorney contacted the company, Lego’s lawyers admitted that it had intentionally copied his design but rejected his attempt to send a cease-and-desist, arguing that Concannon’s decision to give the jacket to Porowski meant that Netflix had an “implied license” to do what it wanted with the design, including allowing Lego to recreate it. Guardian Australia has contacted Lego for comment.Australia’s visa cancellation regime has been exposed as “dysfunctional and dangerous” by the Novak Djokovic case, legal experts have said, arguing his expulsion is a “terrible precedent” that could lead to “political and populist” deportations. The Djokovic case has drawn public attention to the so-called “God powers” held by Australian immigration ministers, granting them extraordinarily broad powers to summarily cancel visas. Migration law experts say the Djokovic case – his visa was cancelled because the government believed he was a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment” – demonstrates the laws could be used to exclude a person who has previously expressed political views the government did not agree with. “Deportation of a person because of a purported risk as to how others might perceive them and then act sets a terrible precedent,” Michael Stanton, the president of Liberty Victoria said. “It can and will be used in the future to justify the suppression of legitimate political expression because others might engage in unrest.” “One danger of largely unfettered discretions, or ‘God powers’, is that decision making just becomes political and populist … eroding the integrity of the executive and the rule of law.” Liberty Victoria said thousands of visa cancellations had been summarily made since the Migration Act was amended in 2014, but are often legally defective, and carry severe consequences for those affected, including separation from family, indefinite detention and even forcible return to harm. The organisation said Djokovic was an exceptional case: the world’s number one tennis player had significant institutional support, the resources to mount a strong legal defence, and massive media attention on his case. “Because of the regime’s complexity, the timeframes, a lack of support and advice, and a lack of access to review, we cannot know how many people have been subject to unlawful decisions that they could not challenge. Even when people are able to challenge a decision, there is a clear inequality of arms given the vast resources of the commonwealth.” Greg Barns SC, spokesperson for the Australian Lawyers Alliance, said the government had established, for itself, a “very low bar” for excluding a person from Australia, “troubling in a society supposedly committed to freedom of speech and freedom of thought”. “The federal government’s attitude could see other high-profile visitors to Australia refused entry in an attempt to suppress alternate views. If, for example, a high-profile visitor to Australia expressed negative views about the Australia-US alliance, would the government ban this person because this view may encourage people to protest at Pine Gap? “This government’s obsession with harsh border policies combined with its arbitrary approach to visa cancellation and detention has created a debacle this week but, more importantly, risks setting a very dangerous precedent.” The immigration minister, Alex Hawke, cancelled Djokovic’s visa, arguing that his previously held views expressing scepticism about Covid-19 vaccines could incite “civil unrest”, encouraging others to eschew vaccination or protest publicly. In rejecting Djokovic’s appeal against the cancellation, the full bench of the federal court expressly said its decision did not reflect “the merits or wisdom of the decision” but only whether it was so irrational as to be unlawful. “Our concern is the federal government’s view that it did not have to prove that Mr Djokovic would foster views about vaccination that are contrary to the government, but simply that he may foster those sentiments,” Barns said. “This is a very low bar for excluding a person from Australia particularly in circumstances where the power to review or appeal the decision is so limited.” Djokovic, the defending Australian Open champion, cannot compete at this year’s event: it started Monday morning without him. But he might never play in the tournament – which he has won a record nine times – again. Because his visa was ultimately personally cancelled by the minister under section 133C(3) of Australia’s Migration Act, he has been automatically banned from applying to re-enter the country for three years. There are grounds for this ban to be overturned but they are defined narrowly, as extraordinary circumstances “that affect the interests of Australia or compassionate or compelling circumstances affecting the interests of an Australian citizen”. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, confirmed that Djokovic is now subject to a three-year exclusion. “It can be waived in compelling circumstances but that’s not a matter for today or tomorrow, that’s a matter for some time in the future,” Andrews told Sky News. “Anyone who has been excluded from entry to Australia or who had their visa cancelled; it is not going to be an easy or a straightforward process to get any entry into Australia.” The Visa Cancellations Working Group, the Asylum Seeker Resource Centre, and the Refugee Advice &amp; Casework Centre have repeatedly argued for an urgent inquiry into Australia’s “dysfunctional and dangerous visa cancellation regime”. Ministerial visa cancellation powers were vastly expanded in 2014 – when the prime minister, Scott Morrison, was immigration minister. “Since then, there has been a huge increase in visa cancellations, including in ‘immigration clearance’ at the airport. The system is now cumbersome, opaque, and alarmingly prone to error and injustice.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Visa cancellations made in “immigration clearance” at the airport – such as Djokovic’s – cannot be reviewed on their merits, they can only be challenged through the courts on narrow legal and procedural grounds. “At the airport, people are given as little as 10 minutes to respond if their visa is being considered for cancellation, often after a long flight or at irregular hours. They are not given access to legal advice or other support. As a result, visa cancellations made under a veil of secrecy remain unchallenged, and visa holders are summarily removed from the country and barred from re-entry.”The National party leader, Barnaby Joyce, has proposed to Vikki Campion four years after the high-profile relationship between the deputy prime minister and his political staffer was made public. The proposal took place at the Latitude 30 restaurant in Coffs Harbour on Sunday night. Joyce told Guardian Australia that Campion had said yes, and they were both “very happy”. He proposed with a Parti Sapphire ring, with the stone from New England. “She is really happy, I am really happy and I guess the boys are happy, but they are just the same, no change there really,” he said. He said that if Campion had said no, “I would still be at Latitude 30 getting smashed”. He also said his first preference for the proposal had been Noosa, “but everywhere was booked out”. The pair’s relationship, which began while Joyce was still married, was thrust into the public spotlight after Sydney’s Daily Telegraph published a photograph of a heavily pregnant Campion crossing the road in early 2018. The report revealed Campion was pregnant with Joyce’s son Sebastian, who was born in April that year, and effectively confirmed the end of Joyce’s 24-year marriage to his wife, Natalie. Joyce and Campion have since had another son, Thomas, who was born in 2019. Joyce was criticised at the time by the then prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, for his “shocking error of judgment” that had created a “world of woe” for the women in his life. Joyce was eventually forced to resign as a minister after a separate sexual harassment allegation was made against him. Joyce said he had resigned even though the allegation was “spurious and defamatory” and an investigation into the complaint by the National party concluded without making any determination “due to insufficient evidence”. The outspoken MP remained a backbencher until mid-2021 when he successfully mounted a leadership challenge to Michael McCormack, and returned as party leader and deputy prime minister. Joyce claimed he returned a “better person” after his three years on the backbench, saying “one learns from their mistakes”. At the time the affair was made public, Campion and Joyce complained about the intrusion into the pair’s privacy, but later did a tell-all interview with Channel Seven, which was reportedly worth $150,000. The MP for the seat of New England took particular aim at the media for its treatment of Campion, and the paparazzi-style photograph taken of her. “I thought that’s not who we are in Australia,” Joyce said. “That’s not the kind of people we are. I’m the public figure, go after me.” Turnbull also introduced a ban on ministers having sexual relations with their staff following revelations of the affair.Since the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha‘apai volcano erupted on Saturday, Seini Taumoepeau has barely slept. “I would say I’ve had four hours [of sleep each night] at the most,” says Taumoepeau, a Tongan-Australian artist and activist based in Sydney. Many in the Tongan diaspora community feel the same. Some, like Taumoepeau, have been tuning in to Facebook livestreams from Tongan churches, media outlets and community groups based in Australia, New Zealand and the US. “The first night I tried to force myself to sleep, and I couldn’t, so I tuned in to an online broadcast … Basically it was just a vigil [from New Zealand]. They said: ‘We’re going to pray and play music and wait,’ so everyone was waiting online together through the night.” On Saturday, the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha‘apai undersea volcano, 65km north of Tonga’s capital of Nuku’alofa, erupted in what is thought to be the largest volcanic event in 30 years. Satellite photographs showed a huge grey mushroom cloud billowing over the Pacific Ocean and the reverberations of the eruption could be heard in Vanuatu and Fiji. Some people reported mistaking the noise for thunder, or an eruption of their own – much nearer – volcano, and of feeling buildings shake for hours. The blast could be felt as far away as New Zealand, more than 2,000km away. Then came the tsunami. Waves of up to 1.2m washed ashore in Tonga, with videos showing water swirling around buildings, through city streets, crashing into a church full of worshippers. Pictures emerged of the sky turned black in the middle of the day; ash and pebbles rained down on cars while long lines of traffic snaked through Nuku’alofa as people fled the city for higher ground. And then there was silence. The all-important subsea communications cable, which is key to Tonga’s communications network, was apparently damaged and almost all contact cut off. For Australia’s 15,000-strong Tongan-Australian community and the more than 80,000 people who identify as Tongan in New Zealand, the wait for news has been heartbreaking. “We’ve heard nothing at all,” Taumoepeau says in Sydney. Her main concern is her uncle, who is paralysed and in a wheelchair and lives in Nukunuku village on the main island of Tongatapu. “He’s an important person, so we’re lucky in that regard,” she says, referring to Tonga’s strongly hierarchical social system. “He’s chiefly, so there are people strongly obliged to help him, even in a tsunami. So that’s very lucky – that’s a cultural obligation.” Even so, people are worried. “We weren’t able to contact him.” Normally, she hears from him daily. “I’m in contact with him every day via Messenger, not only because he’s a disabled person but also because my parents have already passed, so he’s my parent.” Initial reports coming out of Tonga are hopeful. On Sunday Jacinda Ardern said no reports of casualties had been communicated to her as New Zealand stood by ready to assist its Pacific neighbour. Jenny Salesa, the Labour party MP for Panmure-Ōtāhuhu, in Auckland, said she had been able to speak to a Methodist minister on the Tongan island grouping of Ha’apai on Sunday who reported there had been no casualties on Ha’apai’s main island. When she shared that news on Twitter, it was greeted with emotional replies from people with family in Ha’apai, who have been waiting, desperate for news. Salesa told the Guardian communication and internet lines were still down with the other islands. “Just not knowing is actually really heartbreaking for a lot of our families. It’s good news from Ha’apai that at least the main island has no casualties,” she said. “But we’re still waiting to see the effect of the tsunami on those coastal areas and the main island. “There are thousands of people … that live here and they are still waiting to hear whether their own family members are all right. We’re waiting very patiently and hoping – everything crossed – that not too many lives have been lost or washed out to sea.” Salesa said that from Ha’apai, there were reports of thick ash covering the ground, and concerns that drinking water would be contaminated. Taumoepeau said that without news from people on the ground in Tonga, diasporic Tongans have become the mouthpiece of the crisis, and have had the responsibility of keeping the disaster front of mind for international media, and keeping people anxious for news informed. “I found out and got to work and basically I haven’t stopped since then,” she said. “Given that there’s no communication from the country, the onus is on Tongans in countries where we have access to communication … Some individuals in communities have become news outlets. My Facebook page became the news outlet.” But Taumoepeau knows that the real work – of rebuilding, recovery and supporting family members – is still to come. “I say that I’ve been working non-stop, but really I’m spinning my wheels in my house in Sydney, on my social media feed. None of my plans with any of the Tongans I’m talking to has any effect on anything on the ground. That’s where the frustration is: the futile nature of all this energy being expended.”Two teenagers have been arrested in Manchester, north-western England, after the FBI said an armed British man travelled to Texas and took four hostages at a synagogue in what President Joe Biden called “an act of terror”. On Sunday night, UK counter-terrorism police said the pair, whose ages and genders they did not immediately confirm, been arrested in the south of the city as part of the investigation into the attack and remained in custody for questioning. Greater Manchester police said in a statement: “CTP [counter terror policing] North West and CTP International operations continues to assist the investigation being led by the US authorities, and police forces in the region are liaising with local communities to put in place any measures to provide further reassurance.” Earlier, Biden condemned a tense 11-hour hostage standoff at the Congregation Beth Israel synagogue in the Dallas suburb of Colleyville on Saturday evening, as the FBI named the armed assailant as Malik Faisal Akram, a 44-year-old British national. Akram was pronounced dead after the FBI stormed the building. All four hostages survived the siege and were unharmed, according to local police. UK security sources confirmed to the Guardian that the suspect in Texas had been a resident of Blackburn in Lancashire. This was later confirmed in a statement by Greater Manchester Police. The standoff began during a Saturday morning service at the Reform synagogue in the affluent city of around 26,000 residents. The service was being live streamed on Facebook when a man with a British accent could be heard shouting off camera. The feed was eventually cut hours later and police were called at around 10.41am. One male hostage, believed to be the synagogue’s rabbi, was released at around 5pm as negotiations continued throughout the day. Armed FBI officers stormed the building and rescued the three remaining hostages at around 9pm, authorities said. Details of the manner of Akram’s death have not been released. Counter terrorism police in London confirmed they were liaising with their US counterparts on Sunday as the FBI confirmed an active investigation but added they believed Akram had acted alone. Speaking to reporters on Sunday, president Biden described the incident as “an act of terror” and confirmed he had been briefed by the US attorney general, Merrick Garland. Asked by reporters how Akram could have procured weapons in the US, Biden said he did not have all the facts of the case but “the assertion was he got the weapons on the street. He purchased them when he landed.” It was not immediately clear how long Akram had been in the US before carrying out the attack. The US Department of Homeland Security did not immediately respond to questions about when or where Akram entered the country, and on what visa. The president said he had contacted the synagogue’s rabbi, Charlie Cytron-Walker, who posted an account of the incident to Facebook on Sunday. “I am grateful that we made it out,” Cytron-Walker wrote. “I am grateful to be alive.” The suspect became “increasingly belligerent and threatening” toward the end of the standoff, Cytron-Walker said in a statement released later Sunday. He said security training that his congregation has received over the years had helped him and the other hostages get through the ordeal, adding that without it, “we would not have been prepared to act and flee when the situation presented itself”. Earlier Sunday, Biden praised the “courageous work” of law enforcement officials who responded to the scene and sent “love and strength” to the synagogue’s worshippers and to members of the Jewish community. FBI special agent in charge, Matt DeSarno, said the hostage taker was specifically focused on an issue not directly connected to the Jewish community, and there was no immediate indication that the man was part of any broader plan. But DeSarno said the agency’s investigation “will have global reach”. During the live stream, Akram could be heard demanding the release of Aafia Siddiqui, a Pakistani neuroscientist suspected of having ties to al-Qaida, who was convicted in 2010 of trying to kill US military officers while in custody in Afghanistan. Siddiqui is in federal prison in Texas serving an 86-year sentence. The hostage-taker referred to Siddiqui as his “sister” on the livestream, but John Floyd, board chair for the Houston chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations – the nation’s largest Muslim advocacy group – confirmed Siddiqui’s brother, Mohammad Siddiqui, was not involved. Dramatic footage of the siege’s end, filmed by local news, depicted three people sprinting from the synagogue, followed briefly by a man who appeared to be holding a gun, who then retreats back inside the building. Dozens of armed officers then storm inside, a loud bang followed by a shots are then heard. On Sunday the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, condemned the incident in a statement posted on Twitter. “My thoughts are with the Jewish community and all those affected by the appalling act in Texas. We condemn this act of terrorism and antisemitism,” Truss said. She added: “We stand with US in defending the rights and freedoms of our citizens against those who spread hate.” Shortly after Akram was named as the hostage taker, a post on the Blackburn Muslim Community Facebook page was uploaded, purportedly written by his brother Gulbar. The post stated that Akram “was suffering from mental health issues” but the family were “confident that he would not harm the hostages”. It stated that family members had been sat in an incident room all night liaising with Akram, the FBI and hostage negotiators. The post claimed that Akram released all the remaining three hostages before “a firefight has taken place and he was shot and killed”. “There was nothing we could have said to him or done that would have convinced him to surrender,” the post states. It adds: “We would also like to add that any attack on any human being be it a Jew, Christian or Muslim etc is wrong and should always be condemned.” The Guardian has not confirmed the veracity of the post, but a written statement with the same words was reported by Sky News. The incident prompted statements of solidarity from the Jewish community. “Today we have felt the all too familiar sinking in our hearts, the outrage and horror of witnessing yet another antisemitic attack on a synagogue on Shabbat,” said Stosh Cotler, CEO of Bend the Arc: Jewish Action in a statement. “We worry that in the days ahead there will be those who try to use our community’s pain and trauma to fuel division or incite violence against other communities – we will not let them. We will reject any attempt, rooted in anti-Muslim bigotry, to hold an entire community responsible for the actions of one individual.” Zara Mohammed, secretary-general of the Muslim Council of Britain, condemned the hostage-taker’s actions. She said: “The act is all the more reprehensible since it was instigated at a place of worship where Jews were targeted. This was, quite simply, a hate crime and an act of antisemitism. We are thankful that the hostages are unharmed. Though some may seek to exploit such incidents for divisive ends, we must double our resolve to remain united against such hatred.” The incident marked the latest in a spate of attacks on Jewish places of worship in the US. In October 2018, a gunman murdered 11 worshipers at the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh. In 2019, one worshipper was killed and three injured at the Chabad of Poway synagogue in California. Incomplete FBI hate crimes data for 2020 indicated antisemitic hate crimes constituted the majority of targeted attacks on religious groups in the US with 676 recorded incidents.North Korea has launched two suspected ballistic missiles, in the fourth test this month, drawing condemnation from Japan and adding to pressure on the US. South Korea’s joint chiefs of staff said Monday’s launch appeared to involve two short-range ballistic missiles, fired east towards the sea from the Sunan airfield in the capital Pyongyang. Japan’s chief cabinet secretary, Hirokazu Matsuno, condemned the launch. “We strongly condemn the series of North Korean actions, including the repeated launches of ballistic missiles, that threaten the peace and security of Japan and the region, and the international community,” Matsuno said. Nuclear-armed North Korea has conducted three other missile tests in the space of two weeks, although none has involved long-range missiles. The North has, however, demonstrated advances in its weapons technology with tests of “hypersonic missiles” capable of high speeds and manoeuvring after launch, making them harder to detect and intercept. On Friday, the regime fired a pair of short-range missiles from train cars. Although North Korea has not fired an intercontinental ballistic missile or conducted a nuclear test since 2017, the recent string of tests involving smaller missiles have highlighted the international community’s failure to rein in the regime. “Every tactical missile launch flaunts how little sanctions have constrained the Kim regime, and how the US ... has failed to make North Korea pay a sufficient cost for short-range missile program development,” said Mason Richey, a professor at Hankuk University of Foreign Studies in Seoul. Japan’s coast guard issued a statement urging vessels traveling around the country’s coast to watch out for falling objects but no immediate damage to vessels or aircraft were reported. On 14 January North Korea carried out its third weapons test this month involved the firing drill of a railway-borne missile. At the time, South Korea’s joint chiefs of staff said it had detected what it presumed were two short-range ballistic missiles launched eastward from North Pyongan province on the north-west coast of North Korea. The North’s official KCNA news agency said on Saturday that a firing drill was held to “check and judge the proficiency in the action procedures of the railway-borne regiment”, which North Korea tested for the first time last September, designed as a potential counter-strike to any threatening forces. If Monday’s launch is confirmed, it would mark the fourth time North Korea has launched ballistic missiles since New Year’s Day, an unusually rapid pace of weapons tests. The series of launches prompted US president Joe Biden’s administration to impose its first sanctions against Pyongyang last Wednesday, and to call on the UN security council to blacklist several North Korean individuals and entities. Nuclear talks between Pyongyang and Washington have not been held since early 2019, when a summit between the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, and Donald Trump ended without agreement. Some analysts believe Kim is attempting to pressure the US into resuming negotiations that would see Washington make concessions. The US has said it is willing to talk “without preconditions” but insists it will not abandon its goal of ridding the North of its nuclear and missile capabilities. This year’s launches come at a time when North Korea faces mounting economic problems stemming from the closure of its border with China – by far its biggest trading partner – to prevent the spread of Covid-19. However, there are sings that the North is preparing to partially reopen the border for the first time since early 2020, with reports that a North Korean freight train crossed into China on Sunday.Depicting a rainswept Paris street, the Nazi-looted painting has long hung on the walls of one of Madrid’s top art museums. Its fate is now in the hands of the highest court in the US, in a case that has long pitted the Spanish institution against the heirs of Jewish refugees. At the centre of the US supreme court hearing, set to begin on Tuesday, is an 1897 painting by impressionist Camille Pissarro. For decades the piece – titled Rue Saint-Honoré in the Afternoon, Effect of Rain – graced the walls of the Cassirer family homes in Berlin and Munich after it was bought directly from Pissarro’s art dealer. In 1939, as escalating Nazi oppression made it clear the prominent Jewish family would have to leave Germany or risk death, Lilly Cassirer Neubauer scrambled to find a way to leave. She was told that exit visas could be obtained, but at a cost: the family would have to hand over its prized Pissarro painting. A Nazi-appointed appraiser offered a paltry $360, paid into a blocked account that the family was unable to access. Cassirer later spent years searching for the oil on canvas work, according to her heirs. After concluding it had been lost or destroyed, she accepted $13,000 in reparations from the German government in 1958 but did not waive her right to seek the painting’s return. More than 40 years later, her grandson Claude discovered that the painting was on display at Madrid’s Thyssen-Bornemisza museum. After Spain rebuffed his request for its return, he sued in his home state of California, setting off a legal battle that has rumbled on for more than 15 years. When Claude died in 2010, his son David took up the claim. “This has been three generations of the Cassirer family trying to take back what is theirs,” said the family’s attorney, Stephen Zack of the US law firm Boies Schiller Flexner. The turbulent past of the painting, whose value has been estimated at $30m (£22m), is not contested. “Unlike many cases where there is a dispute about the facts, no one disputes the fact that this painting was owned by the Cassirers and was taken by the Nazis without compensation,” said Zack. Instead the legal battle – including the question now being put to the supreme court – has centred on whether California or Spanish law should be used to determine the painting’s rightful owner. The painting changed hands several times before it was bought by Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza in 1976. It subsequently passed to Spain in 1993, when a state-backed non-profit foundation paid the baron $338m for much of his collection, to be installed at a museum bearing his name. In 2015 a California court ruled that ownership of the painting fell under Spanish law, meaning it was property of the museum as per a Spanish clause that defines ownership as six years of uninterrupted possession. The ruling was upheld by an appeals court in 2020. The Cassirers had asked the courts to apply local law. “Under California law, there’s no possibility of a person getting good title to a stolen piece of property,” said Zack. The appeal court, however, chided Spain for failing to abide by its “moral commitments” to return art that had been stolen by the Nazis. “It is perhaps unfortunate that a country and a government can preen as moralistic in its declarations, yet not be bound by those declarations. But that is the state of the law,” read the 2020 ruling. The Thyssen-Bornemisza museum referred all questions to a press note published in October after the US supreme court agreed to hear the case. “At the conclusion of the case … the foundation anticipates that its ownership of the painting – already recognised by the district court and the ninth circuit – will be affirmed,” it said. The museum highlighted the court’s finding that both the baron and the foundation had bought the piece without knowledge that it had been stolen. “The evidence demonstrated that in 1958, the German government paid the plaintiff’s predecessor, Lily [sic] Cassirer, her requested compensation (the then-fair market value of the painting) to compensate her for her loss,” it added. The case comes as heirs around the world continue to fight to reclaim some of the 600,000 artworks looted by Hitler’s Germany. In Spain the main governing bodies of the Jewish community have submitted briefs to the court in support of the Cassirer family, describing the years-long wrangle as exacerbating the deep wounds left by the Holocaust. “Further harm and offence is caused to the Jewish population in Spain when a government-funded institution publicly displays and claims rightful ownership over an artistic work looted by the Nazis during the Holocaust,” the Jewish Community of Madrid and the Federation of Jewish Communities in Spain said in their submission. Bernardo Cremades Román, one of the attorneys representing the organisations, contrasted Spain’s quiet, steadfast refusal to return the painting with the country’s high-profile effort to ease the path of citizenship for the descendants of Jews expelled from Spain in the late 15th century. “I think Spain is trying to put a good face out there.” Reluctance to heed the claim also clashes with Spain’s status as a signatory on the Washington principles, a 1998 agreement pledging to return artwork confiscated by the Nazis to its rightful owners or provide restitution, he noted. “It’s the right thing to do,” said Cremades Román. “If you see someone that’s been stripped of his or her property illegally, the right thing to do is to return that property. Regardless of whether it’s of Jewish nature or not.”The countdown to the end of the six-month-long talks in Vienna on the future of the Iran nuclear deal has begun. No deadline has been formally set, but if there is no progress in less than two weeks the process will come to an end leaving a dangerous vacuum. The White House has already been rolling the pitch preparing its political lines for a breakdown by saying the US withdrawal from the agreement by Donald Trump in 2018 has proved to be a disaster. If there is no agreement, the Biden team intend Trump will take the blame. Ned Price, the US state department spokesperson, warned: “The runway is very, very short – weeks not months.” Antony Blinken, the secretary of state, has given the same time frame but said such are the advances in Iran’s nuclear programme, including levels of uranium enrichment at 60%, faster progress is needed. Those close to the talks say they think there can be an agreement, but that from a western perspective it will possibly be so limited in scope it is will be seen as temporary. If so, as Enrique Mora, the chief EU negotiator has said, it will not be for lack of trying. Surrounded by the gilt of the Palais Coborg hotel in Vienna, the large and expert teams of negotiators meet daily in different permutations delivering non-papers to one another. The one thing that is constant is that Iran refuses to meet the US negotiators, so discussions are carried out indirectly via the European, Chinese and Russian delegations. Full-scale talks will resume on Monday, with both the UK and Germany represented by new chief negotiators, Stephanie Al-Qaq and Tjorven Bellmann respectively. Detail on progress is being kept to a minimum. Mikhail Ulyanov, the Twitter-happy Russian ambassador to the talks and a key interlocutor, occasionally sends out cryptic tweets designed to give a sense of momentum. There are occasional noises off, quite literally. Explosions across western Iran on Saturday night, the Iranian government assured a jumpy nation, were explained by lightning, not an Israeli attack. But the Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, has warned his country will not be bound by any agreement. Others are also seeking to influence the balance of forces in Vienna. A cast list of sceptical Gulf ambassadors have shown up to be briefed by the US special envoy, Robert Malley. The Iranian foreign minister, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, travelled to China to secure a 25-year partnership agreement, a move designed to show the inflation-wracked Iranian economy can if necessary survive without the west. Ebrahim Raisi, the Iranian president, will travel to Moscow this week with the same purpose. Meanwhile, Evin prison’s terrifying revolving door keeps turning, with Iranians linked to the west being either reprieved or punished. One morning last week, Aras Amiri, a British Council employee, was released to return to the UK – the final hiccup was a Home Office demand she pay £1,000 to renew her expired indefinite leave to remain visa. But later that afternoon it was announced the French-Iranian academic Fariba Adelkhah had her furlough withdrawn and was ordered to return to Evin, a possible punishment for the French being deemed by Iran to be the bad boys of the E3 talks in Vienna. From interviews and briefings Iranian officials have given at home, the sticking points are clear. On lifting sanctions differences remain on how to classify whether a sanction relates to the nuclear deal, and so now should be lifted, or is related to other issues, such as Iranian terrorism or human rights abuses that the US and others say must remain in place. A second issue surrounds the guarantees Iran is seeking that the US will not repeat Trump’s withdrawal from the deal in May 2018. The US cannot offer a legally binding treaty since the Senate would never agree to one. Price said: “There is no such thing as a guarantee in diplomacy and international affairs. We can speak for this administration, but this administration has been very clear that we are prepared to return to full compliance with the JCPOA [Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action] and to stay in full compliance with the JCPOA as long as Iran does the same.” A UN security council resolution might be a bare minimum of comfort for Iran, but is hardly binding on the parties. Tehran wants binding commitments that if the US quits the deal, the EU will do more to defy secondary US sanctions by injecting real cash into the abortive trading mechanism Instex set up by the EU to bypass US sanctions. A third issue is verification. What are the metrics by which Iran can verify that sanctions have been lifted in reality and not just on paper, and consequently that it must stop enriching uranium at levels of purity not allowed under the agreement? There has been loose talk that the US believes the lifting of sanctions could be verified in 48 hours, but Iran wants a longer process with benchmarks. The final issue is how to handle both the technical knowledge, including advanced centrifuges and large amounts of enriched uranium that Iran has acquired during the period it has ended its commitments to the JCPOA.It is a terrible day to be walking on the fells of the Lake District, but here we are, staggering along the Cat Bells ridge under a violent, cacophonous wind. A little punchdrunk, we retire into the Newlands Valley, where we go in search of more sheltered rewards. After a bit of educated guessing, we find what we’re looking for in the side of the great prow of Scope End: a narrow, misleadingly inconspicuous nook in the hillside. The Goldscope mine is the handiwork of German miners who were brought over to Cumbria in the 16th century at the behest of Elizabeth I, who needed extra copper to fund a looming war with Spain. Their efforts paid off; the vein at Scope End was so rich they renamed it “Gottsgabt” – or God’s Gift – which eventually became anglicised to Goldscope. We don headtorches and venture inside, stooping as we go. It is cramped, as you might expect from a tunnel system painstakingly chipped out from the hard Ordovician rock, 300 years before the invention of dynamite. In places I can feel a claustrophobic anxiety rising, but I manage to keep it down. If we had carried on, we would eventually have emerged back into daylight – remarkably, the two ends of this passageway, which were started on opposite sides of the mountain, meet almost perfectly in the middle. After 150 metres or so we reach a shaft, strung with timbers, which leads to other levels of the mine. I feel a hit of both claustrophobia and vertigo at the same time. I shiver at the thought of the peril, the pain, the darkness and exhaustion which working in this grim industrial hole must have involved, however skilled or well-paid the work might have been, and feel grateful for being born when I was. Not being speleological experts, we decide we’ve seen enough at this point, and return to the grey, gusty outside. But we have had a fascinating glimpse into the Lake District’s underworld, and a reminder of this Romantic landscape’s hard-bitten, unromantic past. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThis week, the full moon will cruise through three zodiacal constellations. First Gemini, the twins; then Cancer, the crab; and finally Leo, the lion. The chart shows the view at 2100 GMT on 17 January, looking east-south-east from London. The moon will be full and sitting just below the two brightest stars of Gemini: Castor and Pollux. The brighter of the two, and the star nearest to the moon, is the yellow-tinged Pollux, while the one above is the whiter but dimmer Castor. A day later, the moon will be smack in the middle of Cancer. Although with 99% of the moon’s visible surface still illuminated, it could be difficult to see the faint stars of the constellation. But the moon does make a straight line with two other bright stars. These are Procyon in Canis Minor, the lesser dog, and Sirius in Canis Major, the great dog. By Wednesday, the moon will be in Leo, poised between the orange-tinged glow of Algieba, and the brighter white light of Regulus. The view can also be seen from the southern hemisphere. From Sydney in Australia, it is best seen later in the evening, around midnight.Millions of Britons are causing themselves “silent harm” through hazardous drinking at home, experts have warned, as figures reveal levels of “higher risk” alcohol consumption have soared during the pandemic. While the new figures concern England only, the phenomenon has been seen in all parts of the UK. Eight million people in England are drinking so much wine, beer or spirits that it is harmful to their health, according to data from the government’s Office for Health Improvement and Disparities, with a large increase in the numbers drinking at levels considered to be dangerous. Prof Julia Sinclair, the chair of the addictions faculty at the Royal College of Psychiatrists, said the switch to drinking at home during the Covid pandemic was partly to blame for the rise, with drinking sessions sometimes lasting several hours longer than they would in a pub. Figures based on YouGov surveys show 18.1% of adults in England were drinking at “increasing or higher risk” in the three months to the end of October 2021, which equates to 8 million people. That is much higher than in February 2020, before the pandemic, when 12.4% or about 6 million people drank at these levels. In October 2019, 11.9%, or about 5 million people, were drinking at this level. The NHS recommends adults consume no more than 14 units of alcohol per week. Increasing or higher-risk drinking is defined by the alcohol use disorders identification test (audit) used by professionals, which asks questions about people’s drinking habits. It looks at how often people drink, how many units in one session, whether they ever feel guilty and whether they sometimes miss out on usual activities due to drinking. Sinclair said the latest data, which suggests more than twice as many men as women are drinking alcohol at hazardous levels, showed people were still dealing with uncertainty and anxiety caused by the pandemic while some had formed habits involving alcohol. Asked if current drinking levels could be considered the “new normal”, Sinclair told PA Media: “The best, most realistic, scenario is that the higher-risk drinkers go back over the next probably five years to normal risk drinking – back to where they were. But people won’t just suddenly flip back to where they were – none of us suddenly flips back. “What we’re going to see is that some people who were perhaps drinking at a higher risk but weren’t physically dependent will have pushed themselves into being physically dependent, and they’re not the group who can suddenly wind back from this. “What was really clear was that just even nine months of drinking, as we saw in 2020, was enough to push a whole load of people over the edge. We’ve yet to see the data from this year but my guess anecdotally would be that it is going to be substantial.” Sinclair said some people who never drank except when they went out or went to the pub were now drinking at home. “You then get some periodic times when you can also drink in the pub,” she said. “Do you suddenly change your behaviour to not drinking at home or does drinking in the pub now become the add-on?” At the moment, Sinclair said, the data suggests people were carrying on drinking what they began to drink at home and then drinking more on top of that. Many people have not yet reached the stage where they realise they have a problem and are causing themselves “silent harm”, she added. Drinking at home “can go on for hours” and people are not keeping track of their measures – “the drinks are not coming in units”, she said. Sinclair said patients were coming into hospitals in a “much more severe” state. “We’ve had more patients going into delirium tremens – the really kind of life-threatening part of alcohol withdrawal – who end up in intensive care,” she said. “I have seen more people in our hospital in that state [during the pandemic] than I’ve seen in the six years prior to that.”Christine Baranski is an “Oh, her …” kind of actor. Casual observers might not recognise her name, but they always, instantly, know her face. “Oh, her,” they say, when they see her starring in The Good Fight, the successful spin-off to the TV drama The Good Wife, in which she also co-starred. “It’s the woman who played Leonard’s mother on The Big Bang Theory and Meryl Streep’s high-kicking friend in Mamma Mia!” “Oh, her,” they say, when they spot her in comedy classic Bowfinger. “It’s the woman who brings sass and class to whatever she’s in.” Exactly. That’s her. With her high-toned enunciation and elegant bearing that verges on regal, Baranski seems like the human embodiment of Manhattan’s Upper East Side circa 1955, and when we connect via video call she initially fulfils all preconceptions. “Now, tell me about London, how are things going there? Oh, I’m so sorry,” she says. Her emphases and enunciations – “what” is “w-hat”, “gorgeous” is “gor-ge-ous” – make her a little reminiscent of theatrical characters from bygone eras, such as those in the musical Mame and the women in Follies. Baranski has appeared in both of those shows because, alongside her TV and movie career, she is a theatrical force, as at home in Broadway musicals as she is in TV dramas, and she has two Tony awards alongside her Emmy and SAG awards to prove it. Today, she is sitting in her elegant apartment on, yes, Manhattan’s Upper East Side, decorated with expensive looking wall-hangings and chic patterned curtains. The 69-year-old is looking pretty expensive and chic herself, with a trim dancer’s figure that suggests she’s not really one for big lunches. But she’s far warmer than her glossy exterior suggests, cooing delightedly when I apologise for the noise of my children (“Oh, your babies!”) and fretting that she won’t give me good enough copy. In fact, she is a far cry from the well-born lady she looks like – and invariably plays. “Even when I was studying acting at the Juilliard, I was often cast as the sophisticated best friend with the witty line, and it’s so funny to me because I do not come from a wealthy background. I’m from a blue-collar neighbourhood in Buffalo, New York, and if you’re writing for the Guardian, you could say that’s like Manchester,” she adds helpfully (although I reckon Newcastle is a closer English equivalent to Buffalo). Baranski grew up “a latchkey kid”, the daughter of a working mother who struggled to pay the bills after Baranski’s beloved father died when she was only eight. Her grandparents were Polish immigrants and she grew up in a Polish-American community. I tell her that I, too, am third-generation Polish and no one in my family sounds like her. “You know, I remember even in high school people would say: ‘You don’t sound like us, you sound English.’ I think I decided early on that I wanted to speak a certain way, and it was a projection on my part. I wanted to go to New York and be a theatre actress, and I’m living my image of the kind of woman I wanted to be,” she says. Was she rebelling against her background? “It wasn’t a rebellion, but by junior high [12 to 13 years old] it was clear to me I wasn’t going to stay in Buffalo. I was on fire once I realised how empowered I felt on the stage.” When she was a teenager, Baranski’s idol was Maggie Smith. Now, pleasingly, Baranski is playing what can be described as “the Maggie Smith role” in Julian Fellowes’ new HBO series, The Gilded Age, which can equally be called “American Downton”. It is set in New York, and in the 1880s as opposed to the war years. But otherwise, it’s got all of Fellowes’ hallmarks: bossy mistresses of the house, grumbling servants and fascinatingly bizarre snobberies. Here, the biggest snob is Baranski’s character, Agnes van Rijn. She refuses to let her young niece (Louisa Jacobson), who has just arrived in New York, mix with any of the “new people”, ie those whose ancestors arrived more recently than 200 years ago. Baranski fits the role like a lady’s hand in a satin glove. “Does anyone write a snob better than Julian Fellowes? That class of people who don’t even know what a weekend is,” she says, with relish. Fellowes had Baranski in mind when he created the part because years earlier, when they’d met at an industry event, she had told him she was a fan of Downton. She also mentioned that her husband’s grandmother was the author and heiress Elizabeth Drexel Lehr, “and Julian knew the Drexels well”, which is more than I do (quick research reveals they were an old American banking family). Baranski had never been in a period film or TV show, but has done plenty of restoration comedies and Shakespeare on stage, “so I know my way around a corset and wig”. When Fellowes finally finished writing The Gilded Age and came knocking, Baranski had only three words for him: “Yes, yes, yes.” As well as The Gilded Age, Baranski is the star of The Good Fight, which will soon release its sixth season. Between The Good Wife and The Good Fight, she has played the wildly adored liberal lawyer Diane Lockhart for 13 years. The danger of doing anything for so long, she says, “is you run out of colour, but we react to current events. We could be on until the ice caps melt.” As careers go, it’s not bad for a woman on the verge of 70, who didn’t even start acting on TV until her early 40s. “I can look back and think: ‘How often did I not get a role because I wasn’t pretty enough?’ But look at the position I’m in now – two great roles, [my characters are] both No 1 on the call sheet. I’m like: ‘Damn! Late 60s and here I am.’ There is progress!” she laughs. There is progress, but there is also Baranski, who has always felt more like an exception than a rule. After graduating from the Juilliard, she won her first Tony in her second Broadway play, when she played Charlotte in Tom Stoppard’s The Real Thing, in which Cynthia Nixon – who now plays her sister in The Gilded Age – played her daughter. Stephen Sondheim spotted her soon after, and she not only worked on most of his musicals, from Company to Assassins, but she also became his friend. “I was playing Mrs Lovett in Sweeney Todd in Washington, and Steve came to see our first run-through, which happened to be on my 50th birthday. Afterwards, I went out to a fish restaurant with my cast. Then, suddenly, Steve turned up! He said: ‘I never miss a 50th, and he drank glass after glass of wine, talking about what it was like to be part of West Side Story. I thought: ‘Who gets a birthday like this?’” she says. Although Baranski has an apartment in New York for work, her main home is in Connecticut, and it sounds as if she lives in a particularly exciting corner of the state, given that her neighbours include Meryl Streep, Patti LuPone and – until his death in November – Sondheim. “After Meryl and I did Into the Woods,” she says, referring to the 2014 film adaptation of Sondheim’s musical, in which she played Cinderella’s wicked stepmother and Streep starred as the witch, “I’d say to her: ‘Let’s get together with Steve!’ So I had the pleasure of some long dinners with him.” Baranski met her husband, Matthew Cowles, who was also an actor, when they appeared in Ibsen’s Ghosts in 1982. He offered her a lift home on his motorcycle “and the rest is history”, she says. They moved to Connecticut because he inherited his family home there, but raising their two daughters on theatre actors’ wages wasn’t easy. So, when Baranski was offered a role on Cybill in the mid 90s, the money was tempting, but the prospect of commuting to LA every week was not. The money won. “It was a very anguished decision. My girls were five and eight, I think, and Matthew stayed home with them. But when I read the script by Chuck Lorre, this guy I’d never heard of, and saw how he’d written the character Maryanne, with the dry wit and martinis, I thought: ‘Oh, I know how to play this.’” She did. The show was supposed to be a star vehicle for Cybill Shepherd, but Baranski instantly stole it, and at the end of the first season she won an Emmy. Shepherd did not. Lorre has since claimed that Shepherd was jealous of Baranski. Shepherd put it differently in her memoir, Cybill Disobedience, insisting that the reason she and Baranski didn’t get on was because Baranski was unfriendly. Alicia Witt, who played Shepherd’s daughter, later said that Shepherd “kinda said some pretty mean things about pretty much everyone she worked with, as I understand”. The show ended after four seasons. “I have never publicly gone into that,” says Baranski when I ask about Shepherd. “Yes, there were issues, but I prefer to take the higher ground and say, look, that show gave me so much. I was fine working with her. Politically, it did get difficult, but I wish her well.” And clearly she got on with Lorre better than Shepherd did, given that he later put her in his world-dominating sitcom, The Big Bang Theory. Even before Cybill ended, Baranski was getting offers of roles in films. One of the first she accepted was in the American remake of the French comedy classic, La Cage aux Folles, which was re-titled The Birdcage and directed by Mike Nichols, playing Robin Williams’ sort-of ex. Did she and Williams stay friends afterwards? “Not friends exactly – he was already a huge star and I lived back east. But he did give me a beautiful book at the end of shooting, about [the theatre actor] Katharine Cornell, who was also from Buffalo. Anyone who knew him would say he had the most extraordinary beauty, a kind of warmth and sweetness …” she trails off fondly. In The Birdcage, she has an especially memorable scene in which she – in the world’s tiniest miniskirt – and Williams dance, and I tell her it’s astonishing how she looks basically the same in that as she does in her dance scene in Mamma Mia!, despite the two decades between the two films. “I find it a professional obligation to stay in shape. If we’re talking girl talk, I do pilates, because it keeps me toned and strong. As an actor, you have to protect your instrument, so I wouldn’t smoke now because it affects the voice. You have to be able to do whatever they need you to do, even after 14 hours of work,” she says. Baranski is, to use that very old-fashioned theatrical term, a trouper. But given that we’re talking girl talk, I say, was it ever hard for her husband that she was so much more successful than him? She considers her words carefully before answering. “All successful women know this: you pay a price for being the person who gets more wattage. I remember once, on the red carpet, a photographer actually shouted at him: ‘Get out of the way, you’re standing in her light.’ Matthew was so gracious, saying: ‘Of course, of course.’ But I just cringed inside, it was my Judy Garland moment,” she says, referring to the scene in 1954’s A Star is Born, when James Mason is shoved aside by photographers to get a photo of Garland. “I think every marriage is supremely challenging, but my late husband was enormously supportive and very proud of me, and I think we managed it quite well. He was an exceptional person.” She starts to recall a time when he encouraged her to take a part when she was wavering, but suddenly breaks off, crying. Cowles died in 2014. We turn to more cheerful subjects, namely, their daughters, Lily, who is an actor, and Isabel, “who has given me three beautiful grandsons. They. Could. Not. Be. Cuter!” she says with emphasis, but the tears are still there. I apologise for bringing up painful memories. “Oh no, I’m happy to know that the love I have for him is still so real. Too often, we look at our lives and we have regrets, and what makes good copy is people bad-mouthing each other and talking about how hard it was. But I’m not that person. I look at myself and I say: ‘How lucky was I?’” The Gilded Age will be available from 25 January on Sky Atlantic and streaming service NOW.Where do you start with a story that involves counter-terrorism police doing background checks on a tiger, has its roots in the mental health problems of Nazi soldiers, and features an investigation into whether a beehive hairdo can be used as a weapon? What’s more, weaving in and out of all of this, there are two German magicians in mullets and shiny suits seemingly capable of floating around in the air, one of whom nearly dies on stage after a white tiger bites clean through his neck. This was the problem facing Emmy-winning film-maker Steven Leckart, who had long felt that the extraordinary story of Siegfried and Roy, whose performances with exotic animals electrified Las Vegas, deserved a proper telling. The result is Wild Things, an eight-part podcast detailing how Siegfried Fischbacher and Roy Horn rose to international stardom with a whole zoo’s worth of performing jungle cats, then had their live career effectively ended when a tiger called Montecore attacked Roy on stage, nearly killing him. “As a child of the 80s,” says Leckart, speaking via Zoom from his Los Angeles home, “Siegfried and Roy have always loomed large for me. And no one has ever properly examined their story – or the attack – in depth.” To do so was a mighty undertaking: over the course of 50 years, Siegfried and Roy performed 30,000 shows to 50 million people, generating over $1bn in ticket sales. Their act fused gigantic, mind-boggling illusions with the most exotic animals on earth, sparking an explosion in families coming to Vegas shows, at a time when bills were dominated by topless showgirls. The duo suspended tigers above crowds on flaming disco balls and made elephants vanish into thin air. After their shows, they would hang out with their jungle cats in their suite at the Mirage hotel, before returning to their $10m Moroccan-style villa the Jungle Palace, or their 100-acre residence Little Bavaria, where German marching music played through concealed speakers. Their celebrity acquaintances included Michael Jackson (who wrote them a theme song), David Lee Roth (who gifted them goats) and Pope John Paul II (who gave them a fragment of Saint Francis of Assisi’s shinbone). In 1998, the then US President Bill Clinton joined them after a show, his secret service sharpshooters training their weapons on the tigers. A Saturday Night Live spoof had them introducing a special Night of a Thousand Tigers. “They were hyperbole manifested,” says Leckart. “Everything about them was bigger, was louder, was dialled up to 11, which is a deliberate Spinal Tap reference. But what kept them going for so many years was their incredible skill and the way they progressed their show.” Wild Things takes listeners through this journey, which has surprisingly sad origins in Germany. Both Siegfried and Roy’s fathers were violent, rage-filled alcoholics, scarred by years of fighting as Nazi soldiers. Roy’s lifelong love of animals started when he adopted a stray dog that protected him and his mother from his father’s fists. Siegfried sought refuge in magic, teaching himself tricks from books after watching an entertainer swallow razor blades in a town square. The budding illusionists met as teenagers on a German cruise ship, where Roy worked as a bellboy after fleeing his family and Siegfried was a steward with a magic show in the evening. Unimpressed by the spectacle of rabbits being disappeared from hats, Roy decided to scale things up and get him a cheetah instead, so smuggled one out of a zoo. It marked the start of their signature fusion of magic and jungle cats. Legend has it that a furious captain kicked them off the ship, but Leckart tells a different story: “I heard that the captain was really mad about it, but the crowd loved it so much that he let them carry on.” In 1966, the duo’s big break came when Grace Kelly (AKA Princess Grace of Monaco) invited them to perform at her annual Red Cross gala in Monte Carlo. Their cheetah, Chico, fled through a celebrity-packed crowd, straight past Kelly and into the kitchens. When Siegfried nonchalantly jumped off the stage, the crowd assumed it was all part of the act. A standing ovation and newspaper headlines followed. Within a few years, they were regular performers in Vegas, before bagging a headline slot with the city’s first full-length magic show. Eventually, a rival hotel would poach them in a flamboyant stunt in which they were helicoptered in to sign a $57m contract. Their new venue had 1,500 seats and it sold out, twice a night, for a decade. Listening to Wild Things – its first two episodes have just dropped – you do wonder: “Isn’t some of this cruel to animals?” We hear lively stories about the magicians removing baby tigers from their mother. A supposedly humorous anecdote involves a panther bursting a waterbed after it’s locked in a bedroom during a party, while a pacy anecdote about two tigers being stolen does rather skip over the fact that they had been left outside a deli locked in the back of a truck. This can’t all be OK, can it? “We do go – in depth – into the question of animal welfare and safety in a subsequent episode,” says Leckart. “What we uncover is not just shocking, but really disturbing.” Initially, though, Wild Things concerns itself with the 2003 tiger attack. By the time it happened, Siegfried and Roy had been performing alongside exotic animals for 44 years, repeating the same show every night for an entire decade. It was so routine that – as the cast left Roy on stage to deliver a spotlit monologue to seven-year-old white tiger Montecore – they knew every word and gesture that was coming. Or so they thought. Montecore bites Roy through the neck, slicing his vertebrae and severing an artery that cuts off the blood to the right side of his brain. He drags Roy about, coating the stage in so much blood that one onlooker says: “I’m thinking to myself, ‘He’s gone. He’s not going to make it, man.’ This was fucking hell on earth.” Another shocked voice says: “It took four men and a fire extinguisher to get the tiger off him.” In the ambulance, Roy manages to gasp: “Montecore is a great cat. Make sure no harm comes to Montecore.” Soon he is flatlining in hospital and the Mirage car park is filling up with praying, weeping fans. Police enter the hotel to find drinks abandoned on tables and a stage still slicked with blood. So intense is the media spotlight that the police decide to use officers normally assigned to counter-terrorist cases. The question is: was the tiger attack a crime? And this is where the podcast, which had been compelling enough, really shifts into another gear. It would be unfair to give away its many surprises but (spoiler alert) Leckart’s team discover that the investigation entered truly bizarre territory, including animal activists, homophobes in the crowd, ultrasonic devices and a woman near the stage with a large beehive hairdo. Montecore’s background is probed, too. “This is why we called the podcast Wild Things,” says Leckart. “We would just find new and wild bits of information at every turn. What’s even more bizarre is the separate investigation into animal cruelty by the USDA. The twists and turns of where that goes is bananas.” Roy was left partially paralysed on the left side of his body. He claimed that Montecore didn’t actually attack him, insisting that he had suffered a stroke and the tiger was trying to take him to safety. He continued to live with Montecore until the jungle cat’s death in 2014. To this day, there has been no widely accepted explanation of the incident, which led to the Mirage closing the show. Leckart, however, thinks he’s succeeded where the counter-terrorism detectives failed. “We absolutely solve the question of what happened with the attack,” he says. “We come to a very clear conclusion. My view on the cause changed throughout the making of the series. But you will not leave the podcast without forming an opinion on what happened.” Roy died of Covid in May 2020 at the age of 75. Siegfried succumbed to pancreatic cancer the following January. He was 81. Both had retired from showbusiness a decade earlier. Siegfried and Roy were the highest paid magicians Vegas had ever had and a statue to them now stands outside the Mirage. They pulled off extraordinary stunts night after night, but their greatest illusion was ultimately, and tragically, exposed: the idea that these beautiful, exotic creatures could be tamed. “A wild animal is always a wild animal,” we hear Roy say early on. “Don’t ever forget that.”Any minute now, no? Surely this is it for Boris Johnson. The party is over. He has managed to get away with it before, but, as someone yelled with relish at prime minister’s questions last week: “Not this time!” The polls do indeed look bad for the first time in a long while, and a more troubling portent for the prime minister is how the “r” word – resignation – has become thrown about not as a far-fetched demand but as a real possibility. But little of this should be confused with a meaningful and long-term change in voters’ attitudes towards Johnson and the Conservative party. That is an easy thing to miss amid the media circus of analysis and fortune-telling. The period after a large breaking political story involves such breathless commentary that it creates its own fables of fallen gods and a seething populace. But look closer, and there appears to be much less pressure of the kind that we have been told has been “building” for days, weeks, months now, and which would be needed to topple Johnson. Listen to phone-in radio callers and you will hear people in despair at what they had to go through while No 10 was partying, but also many who, despite acknowledging that the optics are bad, do not think they amount to that much. “It’s disgusting,” a longtime Labour supporter who voted Tory for the first time in 2019 told the Guardian. “People aren’t going to stick to the rules when they hear stuff like that.” Then he added that he would probably still vote Conservative at the next general election. To such voters, No 10’s parties can be infuriating but, at the same time, irrelevant. In the list of offerings that Johnson and his party made to the country, his uprightness did not feature in the brochure: moral fibre isn’t really what he and the government were elected for. In that sense, Johnson is a contracted private service provider – as long as he delivers, then as clients, his supporters don’t really care what he gets up to outside of the tasks he has been hired for. Those tasks are broadly Brexit and a shiny, prosperous country where jobs and funds have been cut or confiscated from those less deserving. Those two tasks, at heart, are about contempt for communal rule of law, and limiting sharing resources with others. They are about making our own minds up regarding which laws we would like thank you very much, and creating two classes of people. Flouting rules, and having a party because a privileged few enjoy rights that others don’t, seems not an aberration but quite in keeping with the English exceptionalism values that resonated with so many in 2016 and 2019. It is no wonder Tory supporters are not storming the gates of Downing Street. In 2019, in the middle of a government shutdown triggered by Donald Trump’s demand for funding for a border wall with Mexico, one news report produced a chilling quote. Crystal Minton, an employee at a prison affected by the shutdown, told a reporter that she did not object to Trump’s objective of building a border wall with Mexico, just the way he has gone about it. “I voted for him, and he’s the one who’s doing this,” she said. “I thought he was going to do good things. He’s not hurting the people he needs to be hurting.” To Trump voters, there was a transaction, a sort of informal constitution, that ran parallel to all the codified principles of government and protocols of office. You take care of us, and reserve cruelty and disdain for others. At its heart, this transactional relationship is the one that binds many Conservative voters to Johnson, and his post-Brexit party. The terms of this transaction are not even subtle or dog-whistled. “Taking back control” and “getting Brexit done” became the sum total of the government’s promises and manifestos. Over at the border, home secretary Priti Patel not only designs evermore cruel means of making life difficult for refugees, she performs that cruelty, marketing herself as a no-nonsense sheriff who is cleaning up this town. The sub-clauses in the contract that flow from these two headline items all, one way or another, are about preserving the financial and cultural assets of Conservative voters. Maintaining an economy built on protecting private capital and property values, shifting the blame for low wages and unemployment on to immigrants rather than poor regulation of employers, and forging a synthetic supremacist national identity through relentless culture war posturing on colonial history, statues, flags and national anthems. The strength of the deal is not just in its promises. Let’s assume partying in lockdown and cronyism do “cut through”. What is the alternative to this current Conservative contract? It might fray, but there is a vacuum in its absence. On the right, there is no other vision, other than perhaps one that only firms up the brutal terms of this transaction under members of the cutthroat Free Enterprise Group of MPs, who have none of the supposedly softening geniality of Johnson. So MPs will express disgust in private and come out to bat for him in public. The rightwing press will yell at him for letting the side down like a pantomime villain, but never contemplate a true alternative that will get in the way of their lucrative pushing of myths about the woke and immigrants. They will simply scold him then tell him to get his act together. Even Labour has embraced the terms of the agreement, rather than challenged it. Keir Starmer’s criticism is laser-focused on Johnson’s character, but otherwise writes his own contract to the country around a cold financial logic that still trades in the same promises of deserved reward for hard work, where people get the share of the pie they are entitled to, rather than promoting an economy where dignity and prospects are a shared endeavour. And then there is Johnson’s ubiquity – the way he seems to be everywhere in the country’s political and cultural life – and the numbed resignation that it breeds. In the same way that one death is a tragedy and millions are a statistic, one Johnson or Tory lie is a crime but several is just how things are, is how the game is played. The impunity that got him this far normalises his behaviour, lends it an almost affectionate sense of familiarity, and results in even more indifference to what he does. I make no prediction. Public sentiment is not a science, and things can change quickly. But I’ll make a wager. As long as the Tories hurt only who they “need to be hurting”, no frivolity or recklessness will be terminal. That is an indictment of Johnson and the Tory party, of course – but even more so of those who, whether comfortable in wealth or struggling in scarcity, have come to the conclusion that for them to win, others must lose. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistTina Leverton was 62 when she bought her first pair of ballet shoes. She says slipping her feet into the soft leather was very emotional. “I felt utterly transported. I took a photo of them and sent it to my daughter. I said: ‘I’ve waited a long time for these.’” A few weeks earlier, Leverton had taken the first ballet class of her life, after an advert in a freesheet caught her eye. It showed older women at the barre. “It really evoked a strong memory from when I was a child. I thought: ‘Let’s go for it.’” The class was near Leverton’s home in Mumbles, on the Gower peninsula in south Wales. “As I came in the door, I twirled around,” she says. “Big smile on my face. From the minute I started, it was wonderful. It felt like coming home.” Leverton had longed to dance as a child. From the age of four, she repeatedly drew pointe shoes, although she has no idea where she saw them or how she learned their “beautiful shape”. If an adult asked what she wanted to be, she always answered: “Ballet dancer.” When she was nine or so, she accompanied a friend to classes. The friend danced. Leverton watched, “all the time imagining I was dancing with her”. Leverton’s parents were first-generation immigrants, born in India before partition. Her father was a train driver on the underground in London; her mother held two cleaning jobs and worked in a cafe near the family home in the north of the city. “We were poorer than other people, but it never bothered me,” Leverton says – not even when her parents told her they couldn’t afford ballet. “They were so busy trying to survive.” Nonetheless, she harboured dreams of being a ballerina. “But they were just that: dreams.” Although her parents felt shame – at the shortage of money, at being immigrants – it didn’t pass on to her. “I guess I’ve just got a really lucky disposition. I’m generally quite contented. My mother used to say: ‘If anyone asks, tell them you’re Spanish or Portuguese.’ It’s only when I met my current husband, who’s a psychotherapist, that we explored that together. It was very emancipating to say to people: ‘Actually, I’m from Pakistani heritage.’” Leverton went to art school, then veered towards customer service. Eventually, she stopped drawing. Then, when her daughter was three, Leverton took her to ballet. “She loved it. And I loved it. I was living vicariously through her.” She sees now that her love of ballet “has been lying dormant. It’s come to the forefront at just the right age for me.” Had she known as a child that dancers with low arches and “poor turn-out from the hip” rarely excel, she “would have been crushed”. Instead, she has watched herself grow. At first, a grand plié – lowering to the floor with bent knees – was out of the question. “I’d bend down and couldn’t get up again,” Leverton says, laughing. It has taken three months to master the pirouette, while leaping and landing on one foot presented “a psychological barrier”. Being overweight, Leverton feared her ankles wouldn’t take it. “But they can,” she says. “I love the struggle, the challenge, learning something new. When I get it, I feel absolutely elated,” she says. “People in their 60s have a lot of self-limiting beliefs: ‘I can’t do it,’ ‘I’m not good enough.’ And maybe they’re not good enough. But it doesn’t matter,” she says. Ballet has been transformative. At a medical appointment a few months after Leverton’s first class, a nurse measured her at 163cm (5ft 4in) – half an inch taller than she had thought. She made the nurse double-check. She attributes the discrepancy to improved posture. Her muscle tone has improved, too, and her lower back pain has eased. Dancing has brought new friends, a “sisterhood of older, more independent women”, working towards a team award with the Royal Academy of Dance. And then, of course, there is “the feeling, the joyfulness. Ballet is all the therapy I’ll ever need.” Leverton now plans to buy some pointe shoes: “I will get some – and I’ll draw them.” • Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?More than 1 million women in the UK could be forced out of their jobs this year because their employers are failing to support them as they go through the menopause, researchers have said. A survey of 2,000 women aged 45 to 67 across the UK experiencing menopause symptoms found that this lack of support is having a direct impact on their decisions to leave the workplace. The women said it was the second most devastating impact on their career to date, only just behind having children. It found that a quarter of the women surveyed (24%) are unhappy in their jobs because of a lack of support, with 63% noting that their place of work has not introduced any kind of policy to make things easier for women going through menopause. Terri Eva’s symptoms are so bad that she has been on sick leave from her job in a children’s centre for the last six months. “My symptoms mean that being at work, without any support, is like torture,” she said. “My joints are so painful that I can’t move without agony. My head is in such a muddle that I can’t keep two thoughts in it at the same time and the anxiety is so bad it wakes me up at night.” Eva will have to return to work shortly to avoid her pay being halved. “I’ve always loved my work but the thought of having to go back is terrifying,” she said. I also pay the mortgage on our home and can’t see how my family will survive if my salary is cut,” she said. “But I’m terrified of going back. My managers are sympathetic but don’t offer any real support.” Gillian Archibald has left three jobs over the last seven years as she struggled to find employers who can help her cope with her symptoms in the workplace. “I don’t think employers have any idea how debilitating and soul-destroying it is for women who have worked their entire lives and want to continue working to feel a shadow of their former selves, but to not receive any meaningful support to keep working,” she said. The House of Commons women and equalities committee will hear evidence on Wednesday afternoon on how the law protects women in the workplace who are experiencing menopause symptoms. The evidence session, which will be the third of the committee’s inquiry into menopause and the workplace, will explore the relevant and applicable law and question whether it is fit for purpose. MPs will also examine the case for reforming existing legislation or introducing new laws. In total, one in four of those questioned by Research Without Barriers said a lack of support from their workplaces had left them deeply unhappy in their jobs. “Women should never be pushed out of the workplace because of their biology. Menopause is a natural part of women’s life course, and shouldn’t mean the end of their career,” said Rachel Carrell, the founder of Koru Kids, which commissioned the research. “As a society, we need to support older women with flexible working and health support so they don’t fall out of the workplace needlessly.” Nearly three-quarters of women who took part in the research said their workplace did not have a forum or space where they could talk openly about the menopause with their colleagues or employers, exacerbating their feelings of isolation and distress. Diane Danzebrink, the founder of Menopause Support, said the research was “shocking but sadly not surprising”. “Women supported through menopause will remain in the workplace and achieve their full potential and employers will retain valuable members of their teams,” she said. “It’s a win-win situation for employers and employees, it’s as simple as that.”Scotland’s beloved son and national bard Robert Burns has done more than any other poet to export the 18th-century Scots language around the world, through the new year classic Auld Lang Syne and his other famous works. His lyrics, such as “we twa hae run about the braes/and pou’d the gowans fine”, may be incomprehensible to many, but the fame and influence of a man annually celebrated on 25 January has endured over more than two centuries. His line from To a Mouse, “the best laid schemes o’ Mice an’ Men/ Gang aft-agley”, is said to have inspired John Steinbeck’s 1937 classic novella Of Mice and Men. Yet Burns was advised not to write in Scots by one correspondent, who believed it would limit his audience, according to new research. Dr John Moore, a Scottish physician and travel author, who wrote regularly to Burns, warned him that London readers would not connect to his works. Burns, obviously, ignored the advice, and the rest is history. Academics at the University of Glasgow’s Centre for Robert Burns Studies looked at about 800 letters written by Burns and 300 to 400 letters from his friends and admirers “In the correspondence, we get closer to Burns the man than anywhere else: his letters reveal his triumphs, failures, anxieties, fears and joys,” said Dr Rhona Brown, a senior lecturer in Scottish literature at the centre “Two of Burns’s relationships stand out – with Dr John Moore and Mrs Frances Dunlop [a Scottish heiress and landowner] – as we have both sides of the correspondence. “What is fascinating, for example, is that early on Moore advised Burns not to write in Scots. He cautioned Burns that he was limiting his audience and felt that London readers wouldn’t understand or connect with the Scots language. Dunlop advised him to avoid political subjects. “But Burns is his own man and ignores the advice and carries on regardless. I think history has now shown that he was right.” People around the globe will celebrate Burns Night on 25 January to celebrate the anniversary of the poet’s birth on that date in 1759. The correspondence will be published as part of the new Collected Works of Robert Burns published by the Oxford University Press. Dr Craig Lamont, a research associate in Robert Burns Studies at the University of Glasgow, said: “Burns sends Dr John Moore a long, heartfelt letter giving a detailed account of his childhood and life up to 1787: this letter is now known as Burns’s autobiographical letter. “In response, Moore asks Burns to ‘divide your letters when they are so heavy’, because ‘I was obliged to pay six &amp; eightpence for it.’” The team will premiere their video documentary on the Editing Robert Burns for the 21st Century: Correspondence project at 10am on 17 January. The centre will also host an online question and answer session on 20 January so that members of the public and Burns scholars can find out more about the project, with more information available via GlasgowBurns. • This article was amended on 17 January 2022. Scots, in which Burns wrote much of his best-known poetry, is widely regarded as a language, not a “dialect” as a previous version described it.Buying an electric vehicle (EV) has clear benefits: EVs are better for the environment and have lower lifetime running costs than internal combustion engine (ICE) cars, and offer some of the best safety ratings and in-car tech on the market. But if you’re still feeling cautious, you’re not alone. We address your top five EV concerns. Myth 1: It will be hard to find a charging station In a 2021 survey by the Electric Vehicle Council (EVC), more than half of respondents said they would consider an EV for their next car, and 92% agreed public charging infrastructure was important in encouraging them to make the purchase. Public charging stations are on the rise in Australia, with the EVC reporting a 24% increase in the installation of fast charging facilities and a 23% increase in standard charging facilities over the 12 months to August 2021. There are currently around 3,000 public charging points across Australia – or one charger for every 7.2 vehicles on the road. “As the demand for EVs continues to rise, we’re seeing our roads and infrastructure evolve to meet the continued growth of the EV market,” says Peter van der Westhuyzen, an executive director in Macquarie’s personal banking business. “There are a growing number of charging facilities at workplaces and shopping centres, some service stations now offer rapid chargers, and you can increasingly find on-street parking charging facilities as well.” How easy it is to find a charger might surprise you. There are about 3,000 public charging points across Australia – or one charger for about every seven EVs on the road. That number is continuing to grow, supported by apps and websites showing where they are located and any associated costs. EVs can also be charged using regular wall sockets, so you may not need a special charger at home. When you consider that the average Australian only drives about 40km a day, charging through a standard wall socket overnight will top up the battery and provide more than adequate range for most drivers. Myth 2: EVs are only good for urban driving It’s important to consider your lifestyle when choosing an EV, so you can ensure you get a model that’s most suited to you and what you will use it for. “EVs are definitely a convenient car option if you live in an urban area,” van der Westhuyzen says. “But they are also a great option outside of city areas – and there are interactive maps that make it easy to find charging infrastructure along your journey.” Van der Westhuyzen says it’s important to do your research, just as you would with petrol stations if you were driving your ICE vehicle long distances or outside a metropolitan area. You may find your battery range will get you to and from your destination without having to charge in between. Just like ICE vehicles, EVs are made with lots of different journeys in mind. Myth 3: My EV won’t perform as well as my current car “More and more of our customers are telling us they love the driving experience,” van der Westhuyzen says. The EVC survey also shows a growing interest in EV performance: three-quarters of people indicated performance would encourage an EV purchase in 2021, compared to only 48% in 2020. 75% of people indicated performance would encourage an EV purchase in 2021, compared to only 48% in 2020 (Electric Vehicle Council). Driving an EV definitely doesn’t mean compromising on performance. Many family EVs available today will provide acceleration that is similar to what you’d experience in much more expensive ICE cars, and there are many other factors that make the driving experience a pleasure. “EVs are quiet to drive, the acceleration is powerful yet smooth and the interiors are spacious,” van der Westhuyzen says. “We’ve heard some drivers tell us they’re worried an EV won’t do what their current car can, but it’s good to understand what is important to you.” If you need towing capacity, increased storage space inside the car or exhilarating performance, there are EVs available today that will provide what you need. In the next two to three years, Australia will welcome more brands and models that offer even more diversity. Myth 4: EVs are expensive, and the financing is too complicated There are various cost considerations to take into account with owning any kind of vehicle, and EVs are no exception. Even though EVs might be slightly more expensive to buy than a comparable ICE car, this cost may be offset by lower running costs and less frequent maintenance, and half of us are prepared to pay more for an EV. “It’s likely purchase prices will also come down as the market becomes more competitive,” says van der Westhuyzen. “It’s also worth considering state-based subsidies and other incentives for EVs which help with affordability.” Van der Westhuyzen says Macquarie is committed to helping Australians reduce their carbon footprints and transition to EVs. Macquarie’s EV specialist car-buying service offers a discounted finance rate only available for new EVs and charges no fees. “Our experts can help you find the right EV, negotiate the price, manage the trade-in of your old car and, if required, organise finance at a competitive rate for any new EV,” van der Westhuyzen says. Depending on where you live, Macquarie may even be able to deliver your new EV to your home, fully charged and ready to go. Myth 5: I can’t take my EV on a road trip This is a very common myth – and easily busted. Many EV makes and models now come with a range of 350-600km on a single charge, or about the same as an ICE passenger vehicle. Many EV models now come with a range of 350-600kms on a single charge. The ideal road trip might simply mean adjusting your habits. “Like with any extended drive, planning ahead is important – and perhaps more so when driving an EV,” van der Westhuyzen says. “It’s also worth considering that the charge time varies according to which EV model you drive. For some EVs on the market, a 15-minute charge at a public fast charger will give you approximately 300km of driving distance.” Overall, it’s not that different from taking your ICE vehicle on a road trip: check that your EV is fully charged, and research the charging infrastructure available along your holiday route and at your destination. An unexpected bonus of taking your EV on a road trip might be increased internal storage, courtesy of no petrol tank or exhaust system. The environmental benefits, the low ongoing running and maintenance costs, and high performance of EVs make them an attractive proposition for conscious consumers looking for new ways to extend their positive impact. With expert financing options available, and more choices on the market than ever, will 2022 be the year you make the switch to a greener drive? Find out how Macquarie can help you transition to an electric vehicle. Finance is provided by Macquarie Leasing Pty Ltd Australian Credit Licence 394925, a subsidiary of Macquarie Bank. Terms and conditions apply.Bisma Amjad plays cricket. She aspires to play internationally and was picked for Pakistan’s under-19 World Cup squad. But when the pandemic came, because she was a woman, there was nowhere for her to practise, so she dressed as a man to play alongside male cricketers at “gully cricket” – the street game. “Boys used to play gully-cricket even during the pandemic,” she says. “But the movement of girls was restricted, so we couldn’t play at all. I had no option than to dress like a man and practise with them,” says Amjad, 19, who has bowled at first-class and regional matches. In traditional circles in Karachi, Amjad hears constant comments such as “your skin will turn darker” or “it is a boys’ game and you are wasting your time. Do a course that will help you after marriage.” She says that many girls from conservative families or rural areas dress like boys so they can play cricket without being noticed. “A friend of mine has chopped her hair off so she could go and play without being known as she is a girl,” says Amjad. “Women who play sport have to struggle a lot in our society.” Amjad’s father supported her and drove her to matches but when he became ill she had to stop playing for a few months. “After my father recovered and I got his permission, I learned to ride a bike so I could commute on my own,” she says. Cycling brought its own problems. “Men would say ‘look, look, she is riding a bike. She used to wear a headscarf, what happened to her?’” she says. Fiddling with a cricket ball, she says: “I give my savings to my parents to show that I earn some money. I keep telling them, give me a few months more, I will prove it.” They have now given her one year to break into the national team or else drop cricket. Amjad was chosen forPakistan’s under-19 squad to play the World Cup in 2021, but it was cancelled due to the pandemic, and now she has to keep playing first-class cricket to have any hope of making the national team. Cricket is the most widely played and watched sport in Pakistan. But not women’s cricket. Excitement is building for the start of the seventh season of the Pakistan Super League (PSL) for men’s cricket on 27 January. The league hosts six teams from different parts of Pakistan and promotes cricket, helps male players earn a living and a place in the national team. The Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) has yet to propose a time frame for the women’s league it had promised three years ago. Its chairman, Ramiz Raja, has confirmed that there will be one. The news has delighted the Pakistan women’s cricket captain, Javeria Khan. “That is very welcoming since it would encourage more women to play cricket,” she says, adding: “Men have a lot of such tournaments where they can show their talents but women do not have such opportunities. “Here, a woman has to work twice as hard as a man to prove her talent,” she says. “Gender discrimination exists all over the world, but in Asia, the issue is more rampant.” Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly: Khan says that when the PCB began work on the structure of women’s cricket, players started getting contracts. “When you see incentives in the profession, then you invest for it too. PCB has been doing talent-hunt programmes and sending teams all over the country.” Khan considers herself lucky to have had support from her family despite coming from a rural area, Torghar, in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. She says: “My father took pride in me and he used to tell people in our village when my match would take place. They would listen to it on the radio. “All families should support their daughters to play cricket and sports,” she says. “Culture is a huge hindrance but we can fight that with education.” Asfa Hussain, 16, an emerging talent from Karachi, hid her cricket from her father. Her mother used to drop her off and pick her up from the cricket academy in secret. “When he came to know about it, he became really upset. It was my mother who convinced him to give me a chance to prove myself,” Hussain says. “The moment I got selected for an under-17 trial it made my father very proud. I am lucky to have my parents’ support and they bear my expenses. We are paid less by the regional teams and get no payment at club level.” Hussain played for the club that won the Sindh province championship last year. She says: “The game is expensive. You have to take care of your diet, transport, the gym and also buy the best equipment if you are a batsman. “The PCB has to give incentives to female players. Men’s cricket gets TV coverage, we don’t get that. “When women’s cricket is shown on TV broadly, only then can we fight the stereotypes against it. We will start getting sponsors too,” she says. Hussain played alongside the boys at her school and says the state has to invest in girls’ cricket at schools. Khan agrees, and says: “Our main issue is grassroots cricket and once we have hunted for talent from schools, these players can be nourished and trained.” The PCB allocated 5.5% of its budget to women’s cricket and 19.3% to men’s international cricket in 2020. In 2016 Bismah Maroof, a former Pakistan women’s cricket captain, raised the issue of the significant gender pay gap with the PCB after it emerged that the country’s male cricketers made the equivalent of nearly $77,000 a year, while their female counterparts made only $12,000. However, the PCB refused to answer questions on pay and the development of women’s cricket when approached by the Guardian. Najam Sethi, a former PCB chairman, says: “Even urban families are not inclined to send their daughters into professional sport, forget about rural areas. Now with school cricket dying out – [because of] land scarcity and expenses – prospects of women in sports are not good.”Euphoria 10.05pm, Sky Atlantic The irresistibly edgy show that has parents raising one suspicious eyebrow at their teenage offspring continues like it’s Skins on a never-ending trip. Talking of which, the series opener saw plenty of events at a New Year’s Eve party, including Rue and Jules kissing and Nate ending up unconscious after a fight. What happens next? Episode details aren’t being shared in advance, but creator Sam Levinson has said: “If season one was a house party at 2am, season two should feel like 5am – way past the point at which everyone has gone home.” Hannah Verdier Bradley &amp; Barney Walsh: Breaking Dad 8pm, ITV Celebrity travelogues are always self-indulgent but it’s hard to begrudge the Walshes: father and son successfully renew their funny grump v chump dynamic as they drive 3,000 miles across Europe. A rope swing off the roof of a Croatian football stadium soon has Walsh Sr effing and jeffing. Jack Seale Geordie Hospital 8pm, Channel 4 Here’s a big bag of Geordie charm to warm up a January night. This six-part documentary series follows staff at Newcastle’s two main hospitals, including cheery clinical nurse specialist Sean (“C’mon, I’ve got you – ignore my smelly armpit,” he tells a patient) and Poppy the staff welfare dog, who is returning to bring smiles to faces for the first time since the pandemic began. Hollie Richardson Kelvin’s Big Farming Adventure 8.30pm, BBC One What do you do after you’ve won Strictly? Kelvin Fletcher bought a semi-derelict Peak District farm and is attempting to revive it. Jaunty rookie mishaps ensue in the company of wife Liz and neighbour Gilly, but by the end of the episode it’s clear the task, which Fletcher takes all too seriously, is more daunting than first predicted. JS Keeping Up With the Aristocrats 9pm, ITV Lord, give us strength – Simon Callow is taking us behind the scenes of a British aristocratic social season. In the first of three parts, we see Lord Ivar Mountbatten clean his own windows (with a copy of the Guardian) and Princess Olga Romanoff mow her own garden. A guiltily moreish watch. HR Couples Therapy 10pm, BBC Two “Babe, can you behave yourself – you don’t get to be the bad guy.” And we’re back in the couple therapy waiting room, ready to be a fly on the wall again in sessions with Dr Orna Guralnik. This week, Mau talks about why he needs sex every day, while Evelyn admits she doesn’t trust Alan, and Elaine realises something about her childhood trauma. HR Film choice Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (Ang Lee, 2000), 6.40pm, Great! Movies The most celebrated in a wave of turn-of-the-millennium wuxia movies (a martial arts genre originating in China) that wowed western audiences, Ang Lee’s 2000 film still stands up. From vivid green bamboo forests to the dust-yellow Gobi desert, it’s an adventure of relentless visual splendour, as skilled swordspeople (and unconsummated soulmates) Chow Yun-Fat and Michelle Yeoh seek a mysterious thief. Could it be the imperial governor’s soon-to-be married daughter (Zhang Ziyi)? Forbidden romance and kung fu action in one stylish package. Simon WardellTop story: No-confidence letters piling up Good Monday morning to you, Graham Russell here with the latest news to start the week. The prime minister has dealt a serious blow to the BBC’s funding in what critics say is a diversionary tactic to escape accountability for the “Partygate” revelations. With reports that dozens of Tory backbenchers have written letters of no-confidence, Boris Johnson ally Nadine Dorries said the BBC’s licence fee would be abolished in 2027 and the broadcaster’s funding frozen for the next two years, potentially leading to thousands of redundancies. Other measures under what has been called Operation Red Meat are said to involve a renewed drive to stop people crossing the Channel in small boats, measures to tackle the NHS operations backlog, extra investment in skills and the lifting of Covid restrictions on 26 January. Lucy Powell, the shadow culture secretary, said: “The prime minister thinks those reporting on his rule-breaking should pay consequences, whilst he gets off free”, while Ian Murray, the shadow Scottish secretary, described the announcement as “a last-ditch attempt [by Johnson] to save his failing premiership”. The timing of the announcements is highly convenient, writes Heather Stewart, and gives Tory rightwingers something to cheer as Johnson’s future hangs in the balance. * * * ‘An act of terror’ – Two teenagers have been arrested in Manchester by counter-terror police over the Texas synagogue standoff in which the attacker was named as a British national. The pair are being questioned after suspect Malik Faisal Akram, a 44-year-old who had been a resident of Blackburn in Lancashire, took four people hostage at a synagogue in a Dallas suburb on Saturday. He was pronounced dead after the FBI stormed the building. All four hostages were unharmed after what Joe Biden described as “an act of terror”. * * * ‘It’s excruciating’ – A British woman is feared to have been swept to her death in the tsunami sparked by the eruption at the weekend of an underwater volcano in Tonga. Angela Glover, who runs an animal shelter there, has not been seen since being hit by the wave, which also caught up her husband and the couple’s dogs. “One of the dogs has been found, but Angela hasn’t been found,” said brother Nick Eleini. “It’s excruciating. I can’t even believe the words are coming out of my mouth, to be honest.” Australia and New Zealand have sent planes to assess the damage from the eruption that has blanked the area with ash, contaminating water supplies and cutting off communications. * * * Pandemic pressures – Eight million people in England are drinking so much wine, beer or spirits that it is harmful to their health, government data shows, with a large increase in the number drinking at dangerous levels. Before the pandemic, the figure stood at about 5 million. The switch to drinking at home was partly to blame, said Prof Julia Sinclair from the Royal College of Psychiatrists, with drinking sessions sometimes lasting several hours longer than they would in a pub. “Just even nine months of drinking, as we saw in 2020, was enough to push a whole load of people over the edge.” * * * ‘I thought that was my ambition over’ – Ruth Davidson, the former Scottish Conservative leader, has said she considered not running for the leadership amid fears her mental health records would be exposed. Davidson, who was diagnosed with clinical depression while at university, said her fears were prompted by the press accessing the medical records of Gordon Brown’s son, which “felt like a really egregious breach”. Davidson said she hoped being able to open up about mental health issues on her own terms would help others realise it is not career-ending, as she had once feared. * * * Burns after reading – Robert Burns, the revered Scottish bard behind Auld Lang Syne, was advised not to write in Scots because no one in London would understand it, new research has shown. Dr John Moore, a Scottish physician and travel author who was a regular correspondent with the poet, “cautioned Burns that he was limiting his audience” and told him to avoid political subjects too. When Burns sent Moore a long letter detailing his entire childhood, Moore wrote back urging him to divide his letters up next time because he was “obliged to pay six &amp; eightpence for it”. The correspondence will be published as part of a new collected works by the Oxford University Press. * * * Today in Focus podcast: Afghan female MPs fight for their country in exile After a harrowing escape from the Taliban, Afghanistan’s female politicians are regrouping in Greece to fight for their country. Amie Ferris-Rotman reports on the work of the Afghan women’s parliament in exile. Lunchtime read: Christine Baranski on Sondheim, stardom and snobbery As she prepares to star in the new “American Downton”, the 69-year-old actor talks to Hadley Freeman about her blue-collar roots, her friendship with Stephen Sondheim — and the pleasures of late-career fame. Sport Andy Murray has said “physically I’m in a pretty good place” as a Djokovic-free Australian Open finally got under way after more than a week of off-court wrangles. You can follow our live blog here for all the latest action at Melbourne Park, which has so far seen Naomi Osaka safely negotiate a tricky opening encounter, Rafael Nadal progress with ease but a big shock for British men’s No 1 Cam Norrie, beaten in straight sets by American Sebastian Korda. (PS OK if you want the latest on Djokovic click here.) Jonathan Wilson writes that perhaps the strangest aspect of Rafa Benítez’s time at Everton is how well it began, with 14 points after seven league games. But the problem was that Benítez is Benítez and a significant part of that identity is bound up with Liverpool. Turning to cricket, England have for some time been collapse specialists but even by their standards the Ashes Test in Hobart was a spectacular explosion of fortune, says Tanya Aldred. Joe Root appears keen to lead England into a new era regardless. In netball, England kept alive their hopes of a first Quad Series title after overcoming an eight-goal deficit to defeat New Zealand 49-46 and book their spot in Wednesday’s final. Business Scotland’s largest auction of permits to construct offshore windfarms is expected to raise up to £860m today when the results are announced. There are hopes the amount of electricity generated in Scottish waters will double in the next decade, creating tens of thousands of jobs. A “game of corporate chicken” could end with Amazon UK refusing to accept Visa credit cards this week, unless a last-minute agreement can be reached. Mintel said 89% of Britons shopped at Amazon last year. The pound is buying $1.367 and €1.197. The papers The Guardian leads with Boris Johnson’s reported Operation Red Meat, with the headline: “PM accused of attacking BBC to save his own skin”. The i sees it more as “Operation dead meat” after speaking to senior Tories, and the Mirror looks at “Johnson’s scapegoats” with a report that other heads will roll in order to keep his job safe and that the prime minister was at another party in 2020. The Telegraph says Johnson has already been questioned by inquiry head Sue Gray over the “Partygate” scandal. Elsewhere, the Times reports on the other prong of Johnson’s distraction strategy, with his call for the military to help stop Channel boat crossings “as part of an attempt to save his premiership”. The Express talks of Johnson’s plan to win back popular support with the headline “PM: fightback plan to level up Britain” but makes no mention of the attack on BBC funding. The Mail focuses on the republication of a photo of Keir Starmer having a beer with colleagues last year at a constituency office at a time when household mixing was allowed only when working. The headline is: “Starmer must say sorry for drinks in lockdown”. You can read more on that story here. The Sun reports that the Queen will not intervene in Harry’s efforts to pay for police protection while in the UK, while the Metro covers the deportation of Novak Djokovic with the headline: “Go pack Djokovic”. The FT reports the latest on Unilever’s bid to buy a healthcare venture from GSK and Pfizer. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.More than one in 10 fish oil supplements tested from among 60 large retail brands are rancid, while nearly half are just under the recommended maximum limit, according to independent tests. Conducted over several years by Labdoor, which analyses vitamins and supplements based on criteria such as purity, label accuracy and nutritional value, the tests measured common US-branded fish oils, available globally, against international voluntary standards of rancidity. Some fish oils recorded levels 11 times higher than recommended limits. Rancidity arises when a product becomes oxidised. In fish oil, a rancid example can involve a strong fishy taste and rotten smell. “It was fairly frequent,” said Dan Mark, Labdoor’s research director. “For us, they would start to smell and feel off.” The rancidity is often masked by flavourings, which are added to most fish oils to reduce the fishy taste and smell. Other evaluations are producing similar results. A combination of global studies since 2015 showed that an average of 20% of fish oil products have excess oxidation. “That means if you go out and buy fish oil, there is at least a one in five chance of you getting an oil more oxidised than the recommended level,” said Dr Ben Albert, fellow at the University of Auckland, whose research focuses on the health effects of fish oil. Fish oils are extremely popular, particularly in the US, where they are consumed by more than a third of adults who use dietary supplements. They are touted as an alternative to eating fish for getting omega-3 nutrients, and as beneficial for heart disease, improving brain function and strengthening metabolism. Many have flavourings added. “Flavouring is added to fish oils to help mask fishy smell and taste, and … might make more oxidised oils more palatable for people to take, so it could also be used to hide oxidation of the oil,” said Albert. Albert said smell was not a reliable indicator of oxidation. “Some fish oils will smell more than others, but if they don’t smell bad, that doesn’t tell you it’s not oxidised,” he said. Given that the supplement market is largely unregulated, voluntary limits for oxidative quality were created by the Global Organization for EPA and DHA Omega-3 (GOED), an industry body with about 170 members that aims to increase consumption of omega-3s. The recommended limit was set at 26, an arbitrary and unitless measure of oxidation, and is the most common and strictest worldwide benchmark for fish oil quality. So, the higher the number, the more rancid the oil, though it is important to note that it is an indication of quality, not safety. The GOED maintains that the majority of its members’ fish oil products are within the limits. But according to Labdoor’s analysis, conducted on products between 2014 and 2018, fish oils under the brand names Carlson Labs and Puritan’s Pride, which retail in chains such as Walmart and Amazon, had rancidity grades significantly higher than the suggested limits: 281.8 for Carlson’s Norwegian cod liver oil and 37.1 for Puritan Pride’s soft-gel fish oil. Other brands that exceeded limits were Oceanblue, with an oxidation value of 73.9, and Nature’s Answer, which tested at 34.4. Half of all products tested by Labdoor bordered on the GOED limit, at an average of 24.4. Oxidation is a normal process in all oils that contain polyunsaturated fatty acids. Fish oil is particularly susceptible to oxidising, which happens faster when exposed to heat, air or light. It is also prone to oxidisation because of its long supply chain, which often lacks appropriate preventive measures. Most fish oil comes from anchovetas in Peru. Annual catches exceed 4m tonnes, mainly used for aquaculture, with an estimated 38,000 tonnes of anchovy oil extracted for supplements, according to GOED. Once harvested, the oil is often sent to China for extraction and distillation, before coming back to North America or Europe to be packaged. At each step, the oil must be handled quickly and at low temperatures. “To prevent oxidation, you have to focus on it from the beginning when the fish is caught, because when the oil is oxidised you can’t restore it back to freshness,” said Bo Martinsen, an omega-3 specialist and co-founder of the fish oil company Omega3 Innovations. Whether rancid fish oil is harmful remains unclear. So far, sporadic studies have shown that highly oxidised fish oil capsules can have a negative impact on cholesterol levels. When tested in high doses in animals, the oils were shown to have toxic effects. “It certainly tells us that oxidation changes the way these oils work,” Albert said. “The fact that we know from animals that the effects change when it’s oxidised would mean that a reasonable human consumer would want to avoid oxidised oils – but they can’t do that themselves.” Whether it is harmful or not, rancid oil is likely to be less effective than fresh fish oil, according to Martinsen. He points to changes in the chemical composition of highly oxidised oils that may reduce their benefits. Again, however, the research is not conclusive. The GOED has been pushing back on criticism for years. After a 2015 study by Albert noted that 92% of products in New Zealand exceeded one of the recommended oxidation limits, it conducted its own replication study in 2017 and the results were much lower, with less than 20% of the products exceeding the limits. Gerard Bannenberg, director of technical compliance at GOED, said: “I don’t think people need to be concerned about oxidation. The level we’re talking about is very low. Even if the product is slightly oxidised, it’s very unlikely that it will harm our health.” Only Nature’s Answer responded to the Guardian’s request for comment, maintaining that typical results for their fish oil ranges have a total oxidation value of 10. Any results over 25, such as in Labdoor’s tests, indicate improper handling and storage, they say, which is likely to be in the supply chain before being tested. Albert said: “The GOED recommended limit is not a magical number that means something important for how that pill will act in your body. In principle, we should have regulatory levels at which health effects change, but we don’t know those levels.” In general, he warned, fish oil supplements are hard to trust.Q My parents own their house outright. In the garden there is a separate cottage that I would like to move into and renovate. Can I: (a) get a loan for the works; and (b) be able to eventually register it as a separate dwelling with my parents’ consent? JG A You could take out a personal loan to fund your renovations but you wouldn’t be able to take out a mortgage on the property because you don’t own it. A more sensible way of going about things would be first to establish whether your parents want to give you or sell you the cottage. If they don’t, it doesn’t make much sense to renovate it, especially if you have to take out a personal loan to pay for the work as they are much more expensive than mortgages. If your parents do want you to have the cottage, you would be able to take out a mortgage on it. The money from the mortgage would be made available on the day that the transfer of ownership is completed. The cottage and any land that came with it would then be registered in your name at the Land Registry.I live in London and rely on the public network to charge up my electric car, a Renault Zoe. A few years ago, Lidl introduced rapid chargers, which was great, and I started using its stores, leaving my car on charge while I shopped. On a Sunday in late October, I needed to charge my vehicle, and, as all units around me were in use, I drove to the Lewisham Lidl I normally use. I arrived at 8am, charged the car for an hour, paid, and left just after 9am. The store was closed at the time. A few weeks later I received a £90 demand for failing to register my number plate (in that closed store), reduced to £45 for prompt payment. The rationale was that I was using the car park outside store operating hours, and that I was not a customer, despite the fact that I had paid the £10 cost to charge my car. I imagined it was a mistake but the parking company, Parking Eye, refused to void it. I was told I could appeal but that I would lose. There were no signs on the charger warning drivers that they would be fined if they used it outside the store’s opening hours. I have wasted a huge amount of time over this crazy situation. TG, London Lidl has won praise for its network of fast EV chargers, but has clearly had a bit of a short-circuit when it comes to its parking policy. Lidl tells me that the store in question offers 90 minutes’ free parking, but requires customers to validate their car registration number inside the shop to, in effect, show they are using the store. It says the same rules apply to those using the rapid chargers, whether the stores are open or not – hence the ticket. Lidl has agreed to waive the charge, and conceded that the matter needs to be addressed. “Our teams are looking into this to prevent it happening again,” it says. It’s absurd it wasn’t waived after you showed proof you’d been using the charger, but that’s the crazy parking world the UK has become. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsLight trails and shows are more popular than ever this Covid-ridden winter: inventive and mostly outdoors, they brighten the long, dark nights. For those of us drawn to their sparkle, the good news is they’re not just for Christmas. These cities, gardens and resorts are hosting illuminated trails and festivals of light in January, February and March. Book ahead, and wrap up warm. Love Light, Norwich During the biennial Love Light festival in Norwich, the city’s landmarks become artworks. Cupid is projected onto the castle and psychedelic neon swirls across the western front of the cathedral. There’s after-dark bicycle ballet and a sound-and-light sculpture in Chapelfield Gardens, a heart-shaped mirror ball in the Forum and light graffiti scribbles across flinty medieval walls. The streets are alive with parades and performances on the suitably pandemic-defying theme of love and belonging. Watch shadow puppets in the marketplace, fiery marsh ponies on Cathedral Green and a glowing octopus and jellyfish, with a fleet of illuminated boats, as they process through the streets on Saturday evening. 17-19 February, 5.30-10pm, free, lovelightnorwich.co.uk Spectra Festival of Light, Aberdeen The soaring facades and gothic gables of the world’s second-largest granite building, Marischal College in central Aberdeen, are among the epic canvases for this mid-Feb festival. This year has been designated Scotland’s Year of Stories. Spectra draws on the theme to present new commissions around the city centre, as lines and images from Scottish prose and poetry illuminate grey stone walls. Light-formed artworks play across Marischal Square and the surrounding streets. And there are related events in Aberdeen art gallery, which won a 2021 architectural award as Scotland’s Building of the Year and is open until late. 10-13 February, 6.30-9.30pm, free, spectrafestival.co.uk Nymans, West Sussex The National Trust’s light trails have been increasingly popular recently. They offer a relatively safe chance to meet outdoors and enjoy dramatic settings picked out by shimmering pea lights and multicoloured lasers. This year, the grounds and formal gardens of the mock medieval mansion at Nymans are full of interest even in winter. Mossy tree roots, tall lime avenues and conical conifers are the setting for fantastical creatures, lantern-hung walkways and firelit lawns. The family-friendly trail takes about an hour to wander through, leading past themed illuminated spaces with matching music. 11-27 February, 2-6 March, time slots from 6.15pm (earlier some nights). Tickets from £16.50/£12 adult/child. Parking £8 for non-members; hourly buses to and from Crawley, nationaltrust.org.uk Illuminate, Derry The towers glow and the gardens are studded with fire: Derry’s new festival of lights this February aims to showcase the city’s history. Derry is the only completely walled city left in Ireland and the 17th-century walls are a monumental surface for light artists to work their magic. Digital projections turn familiar buildings and fortifications into huge audiovisual animations that play for a few minutes as visitors walk past. The trail charts five eras in the city’s history, from early settlement on a wooded island in the River Foyle to 21st-century cultural centre. There are ticketed concerts, too, in the Guildhall, Saint Augustine’s Church and other venues. Besides the festival, Derry Girls fans looking forward to series three in 2022 could tuck in to a Derry Girls-themed tea, cream horns and all, at the Everglades Hotel, a pint in the Walled City Brewery , and catch a huge mural of the cast near Badgers Bar . 17-20 February, 24-27 February, free, derrystrabane.com Ignite: Fire and Fantasy, Tyntesfield, Bristol Another new installation at a National Trust property, this trail lights up the golden limestone turrets and pinnacles, arched doorways and oriel windows of neogothic Tyntesfield. Victorian businessman William Gibbs, whose family made a fortune from nitrate-rich guano, turned a Georgian mansion into a palatial gothic revivalist fantasy. Flickering among the long lawns and neat formal terraces there should be curving banks of flame, glowing firmaments and galaxies. And there’s hot chocolate to ward off the chilly night air. 11-27 February (not 15/16), 6pm-9pm, £16.50/£12 adult/child, parking £8 for non-members nationaltrust.org.uk Spectacle of Light, Haughley Park, Suffolk The bulb-dotted hearts at Haughley Park near Stowmarket hint at one of many reasons for running this spectacle over Valentine’s Day rather than yuletide. This brick manor house in the Suffolk countryside is a popular wedding venue, and while the festival is bound to attract families, it’s also aimed at couples looking to wander romantically through tunnels of light and sip mulled wine together in the gardens. The contemporary glass sculptures dotted throughout the gardens gleam in the lights, and the 1,000-year-old oak and giant redwood create a wild setting. The 10 acres of woodland with bluebell carpets are also open on selected Sundays in April and May to raise money for the local church. 4-27 February, Fridays and weekends, 5.30-7pm, from £18/£9/£46.80 adult/child/family, haughleypark.co.uk Winter Lights at Bluestone national park resort, Pembrokeshire This eco-friendly, activity-packed resort spills across 500 acres of wooded countryside in the Pembrokeshire Coast national park. Hundreds of self-catering lodges and cottages are ranged around a private village, spa and waterpark with beaches and coast path nearby. As part of the package, the village becomes the Light Garden and, from 4pm to 9pm, there’s an illuminated Wonder Wood trail around the lake, with a maze and rainbow bridge, giant glowing owls, incandescent pillars and a fire for toasting marshmallows. Bookable extras include craft workshops, bowling and buggies. Until 24 March, midweek packages from £269 for four nights in a four-person family lodge, bluestonewales.com Light Festival, Battersea Power Station, London The newly public riverside area in front of Battersea Power Station has six illuminated installations by international artists on display until the end of February. Huge, tiger-shaped lanterns made from recycled materials pulse with low-energy LED bulbs; a big-pixel screen turns visitors’ movements into blocks of light. There are light-emitting antennae, a post-apocalyptic sunset and a fluorescent greenhouse. The power station’s distinctive walls and chimneys were constructed over more than two decades from 1929, to form one of the world’s biggest brick buildings. It was decommissioned in the 1970s, and its £9bn regeneration now covers 42 acres. Some of the bars and restaurants in the project’s Circus West Village are offering Light Festival menus, and a new Battersea Power Station tube station opened in September 2021. 13 January-27 February, free, batterseapowerstation.co.uk Winter Forest Lights breaks, Center Parcs, various venues Center Parcs has been offering its trademark woodland cabins-plus-swimming pools combo for decades now. They took full advantage, once reopened, of domestic holidaymakers stranded for summer in the UK, and in 2021 identified a potential new site in West Sussex. The existing resorts in Cumbria, Bedfordshire, Nottinghamshire, Wiltshire and Suffolk have installed thousands of little bulbs, colour-changing lights and glades of luminous flowers to turn the wooded paths into a forest “wonderland” after sunset. There’s a whimsical accompanying storybook, a themed village and various wintry activities as optional extras. 10 January-27 February, Winter Forest Lights breaks start from £529 for a midweek (four-night) break in a two-bedroom lodge, centerparcs.co.uk Dark Skies festival, Outer Hebrides For a totally different kind of light show, travel to the Outer Hebrides and hope for fine evenings. There’s a chance of seeing the dancing green and violet clouds of the northern lights, given the right atmospheric conditions. Away from light pollution of big towns and cities, sights like the Orion Nebula are easily visible with the naked eye (it looks like a fuzzy star on Orion’s sword, but it’s a swirling cloud of dust and gas 1,344 light years away). In February, the sun sets soon after 5pm, so there’s plenty of time to stargaze. Then warm up with music and theatre, film and food at the Dark Skies Festival, led by Stornoway arts venue An Lanntair. This year’s programme includes science-based comedy, talks on astronomy, poetry, a night swim and weather-proof stargazing. 11-25 February, tickets from £4, free film screening on opening night, lanntair.comAfter nearly two years on the Covid frontline, there is one image that haunts Prof Mohammed Munavvar. It is of a visit to Preston cemetery, where a friend had been laid to rest. There he saw a pristine row of gravestones, each planted in the last year. They were all his patients. He knew every single name: “That was terrible, really. It was very traumatic. Even now I think about that image.” Munavvar is a senior respiratory consultant at the Royal Preston hospital in Lancashire. He and his colleagues have treated nearly 5,000 coronavirus patients since 14 March 2020. The vast majority have survived but many have not. The hospital recorded its 904th coronavirus death overnight last week. While ministers talk of encouraging signs that the Omicron wave may be receding in parts of England, staff at the Royal Preston are struggling to keep their heads above water. The hospital has seen a near four-fold increase in Covid patients since Christmas Day, rising to 103 when the Guardian visited last week. It is one of the largest hospitals in a region with the highest infection levels in the UK and two neighbouring NHS Trusts have declared critical incidents. Despite a recent slowdown in admissions, the “horrendous” levels of staff absence means the pressure is ratcheting up. “Staffing has become more of an issue this wave than it has previously,” said Dr Shondipon Laha, a consultant on the critical care ward. “Almost every day we’re struggling to make sure that staffing is provided adequately. And because our staff are incredibly conscientious, they are doing it. But you do wonder how long they can keep doing it for.” A Nightingale field hospital is being erected in the Royal Preston car park in a sign of what is to come. One of only eight in England, the 100-bed facility will cater to the whole north-west of England and is expected to be full within weeks. The hospital’s restaurant and two sports halls are being readied as an emergency back-up. “It does kick you in the stomach,” said Kelly Fielding, the Covid ward matron, as trolleys of lasagne, sandwiches and fruit are wheeled to the beds of its 34 patients. “You think: ‘Here we go again.’ My main fear as a manager was how are staff going to feel about it. Psychologically, are they prepared for another wave?” A physician of 30 years’ experience, Munavvar said he and his colleagues felt like “sheep being dragged to the slaughterhouse” in the first year of the pandemic, when they were surrounded by the disease every day without the protection of the vaccine. A lasting memory is of going into work each day with a “hollow feeling that, at any time, any of us could die”, he said. Taking shallow breaths behind his oxygen mask, Brian Swindlehurst, 75, said he had “done everything right” in trying to avoid Omicron. He wore masks in public, stayed home where possible, received the vaccine at the first opportunity. Yet Covid caught up with him in the new year, before he was able to get a booster jab due to being on medication for another condition. Swindlehurst will stay on ward 23 for several more nights before he can return home to Christine, his wife of 54 years. A whiteboard beside his bed gives a positive two-word prognosis: “Getting better.” That is thanks to the vaccine, he says: “It could have been a different story. It saves your life.” Nearly half of the Royal Preston’s 103 Covid patients are either unvaccinated or of unknown status – the latter usually those who are too ill to ask. About 30% are double-jabbed and 20% have had a booster jab. On the critical care ward, five of the six coronavirus patients have not had a vaccine. Behind soundproof glass that dulls the whirr and beeps of life-saving machinery, a man in his thirties is hooked up to a ventilator, his left leg hanging limply from the side of his bed. He had not been vaccinated. “The ones who are not vaccinated are the ones who are getting extremely ill,” said Munavvar. The success of the vaccination programme is clear in the numbers: at the height of the first wave, there were about 60 patients in the Royal Preston’s critical care unit and only the lucky made it out. Today there are six, in addition to several more recovering long-term from Covid. Most unvaccinated patients are not “anti-vaxxer” conspiracy theorists, doctors say. They are either younger people who did not expect to get seriously ill, or those who say they simply have not got around to it. “It stresses and it saddens a lot of the staff because it’s frustrating,” said Dr Laha, an executive on the national Intensive Care Society. The outcome for unvaccinated people who end up in critical care is grim, however young they are. About 30 to 40% of those on a ventilator will have a “very poor” outcome, said Dr Laha, while those who do survive will need a tracheotomy – a tube inserted into the windpipe through the front of the throat – to help them breathe. The average stay in critical care is two weeks but the recovery time for many is measured in years, not months. As we talk, a patient on a ventilator is wheeled outside in his hospital bed for a rare breath of fresh air, nearly two months after he caught coronavirus. Although there are far fewer patients in critical care, the level of staff absence is taking a huge toll. One in 10 of the hospital’s staff are off work, in line with the average across NHS England, but on the Covid ward about 30% of staff have been ill or isolating since Christmas Day. On some night shifts before Christmas, there were only two nurses and three healthcare assistants for 35 patients. “The staffing pressures just before Christmas were horrendous. It was awful,” said Olivia Robinson, a 22-year-old nurse on the Covid ward. “You would be at home worried about coming in for the next shift. You’d never sleep for worrying about what you were walking into.” The stress became so great that Robinson, who qualified a year ago, left her staff job for a role that means she can choose her shifts. The latest NHS figures suggest hospitalisations across England are stabilising, giving ministers confidence that the system will be able to cope. Suggestions that the government could lift the working from home guidance on 26 January, when the plan B legislation expires, has prompted warnings from NHS leaders against “dangerous complacency”. Doctors at the Royal Preston expect patient numbers to rise again in the coming week due to people mixing and going on holiday around the new year. When this wave has passed, there will be no time to rest. Each of the almost 4,000 Covid patients treated by Munavvar and his colleagues need a follow-up consultation. Some will require support for years. “Where do we find the space to do that, the time to do that?” he asked.The author Zora Neale Hurston once joked: “I am the only negro in the United States whose grandfather on the mother’s side was not an Indian chief.” In part, Hurston was alluding to the embarrassment some African Americans felt about their “debased” African lineage, a notion that lies at the core of the poet Honorée Fanonne Jeffers’s ambitious debut novel. Epigraphic reflections on race by WEB Du Bois, a founding father in 1909 of the interracial National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), who proposed that a “talented tenth” (an elite 10% of the African American population) would transform black people’s lowly standing, hover over chapters of the novel. Its breezy yet detailed 800 pages flit between a fable-like backstory of enslaved Africans who forged liaisons with Creek Native Americans (both brutalised by European traders) and a tragic, contemporary family saga of descendants of the enslaved. Originating from Chicasetta, a fictitious town in Georgia, the Garfields are the book’s focus. The protagonist, Ailey Pearl Garfield, daughter of light-skinned parents who describes herself as a “gourd filled with secrets”, narrates as a reserved, watchful guide. On entering puberty, she becomes increasingly conscious of the family’s pretensions and hypocrisy, as well as her sexual abuse by a relative. Ailey’s branch of the Garfields, numbered among the black Americans who migrated from southern states to Washington DC, are riven with societal anxiety over maintaining their middle-class status. Chief among them is the fragrant, white cotton glove-wearing matriarch Nana, whose aroma “took you to a better place in the world” than that of the southern relatives who “ate pig offal and covered their living room furniture in plastic”. No matter their elevation, there’s still the tug of inherited shame, a condition psychologists have termed “post-traumatic slavery syndrome”. The Garfields, though, are not minded to reflect on bewildering accounts that their ancestors were betrayed by signares – women of European and African blood who sold them into bondage. The novel’s quiet tone mirrors the pared-back language of enslaved women such as Beauty, whose response to ritualistic humiliation is to make “a bare spot in her mind [which] she crawled into”. Ailey may yearn to crawl out of the darkness of buried family secrets, but she’s determined to at least acknowledge the uncomfortable past. Emotionally and spiritually, she’s closer to her southern relatives. This novel’s spiritual heart is also found in the languorous south, the location of African Americans’ unshowy resistance to racism, most evident in Ailey’s Uncle Root. The retired, pioneering schoolteacher moves to the segregated “silk stocking district” to live among white families, who welcome him with a bucket of spoiled fried chicken and an overripe watermelon left on his doorstep. His defiant answer to the bigots is to eat the watermelon with relish. Uncle Root’s mischief gives a welcome boost to an otherwise sober novel, fuelling the sputtering engine of humour that intermittently powers the book. At one point, Uncle Root recalls a pilgrimage in his youth to meet Du Bois, when the great scholar visited Atlanta. Du Bois, whose lifelong work was a demand for black people to be shown respect, closes the door in his young admirer’s face. What are we to make of this slight? It’s surely a glimpse of the loathing that only kith can feel for kin, echoed in the tensions between those members of the Garfield clan deemed to have failed or succeeded in life. Throughout the early 1900s, African Americans lived in awe of Du Bois, a proselytiser of black intellectual advancement through the arts and books especially, as a strategy for achieving what the historian David Levering Lewis has called “civil rights by copyright”. In a sense, Jeffers is in dialogue with Du Bois about the wisdom of downtrodden people constantly striving for perfection. Ailey’s two sisters illustrate this conundrum: one, carrying on the family tradition, is a dispassionate Ivy League-educated doctor, the other is a perilous junkie. Eyeing her sisters, Ailey comes to believe that maybe ordinariness is good enough. Jeffers captures the compromises and delusions of the “talented tenth”. Their lives, though, have been rendered regularly by equally able authors. Less well known are the stories of Afro-indigenous people and the inner lives of the enslaved that Jeffers tenderly evokes. In doing so, she chimes with Ailey’s ancestor, who aims “to praise the blood that calls out in dreams, long after the memory has surrendered”. • The Love Songs of WEB Du Bois by Honorée Fanonne Jeffers is published by Fourth Estate (£20) in the UK and Australia ($32.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIt’s a cold winter’s day, and I’m standing in a room watching my dog stare fixedly at two flower pots. I’m about to get an answer to a burning question: is my puppy a clever girl? Dogs have been our companions for millennia, domesticated sometime between 15,000 and 30,000 years ago. And the bond endures: according to the latest figures from the Pet Food Manufacturers Association 33% of households in the UK have a dog. But as well as fulfilling roles from Covid detection to lovable family rogue, scientists investigating how dogs think, express themselves and communicate with humans say dogs can also teach us about ourselves. And so I am here at the dog cognition centre at the University of Portsmouth with Calisto, the flat-coated retriever, and a pocket full of frankfurter sausage to find out how. We begin with a task superficially reminiscent of the cup and ballgame favoured by small-time conmen. Amy West, a PhD student at the centre, places two flower pots a few metres in front of Calisto, and appears to pop something under each. However, only one actually contains a tasty morsel. West points at the pot under which the sausage lurks, and I drop Calisto’s lead. The puppy makes a beeline for the correct pot. But according to Dr Juliane Kaminski, reader in comparative psychology at the University of Portsmouth, this was not unexpected. “A chimpanzee is our closest living relative – they ignore gestures like these coming from humans entirely,” she says. “But dogs don’t.” That appears to be the result of domestication, she adds, with puppies even younger than Calisto showing the same response, yet wolves do not – even if they have been raised by humans. “Dogs have been selected to pay attention to our gesturing, information that is coming from us,” she says. A key question, Kaminski added, is whether dogs and children understand gestures in the same way. “That in some sense also helps us understand our own species a bit better,” she says, adding the comparison to other animals – and in particular dogs – can help shed light on which aspects are unique about human communication. In the next experiment Calisto watches as West places cheese under one pot, and reveals the other is empty. West then swaps the pots around. The experiment investigates whether dogs understand the idea of “object permanence” – the realisation that, in this case, the treat has moved with the flower pot. “We’ve done this with dogs, in quite a large group of dogs, and they struggle,” says Kaminski. Calisto, however, picks the correct pot on three out of four attempts. Kaminski is cautious. Perhaps, she says, Calisto was a bit too close to the pots and could smell the treat. While many dogs find the experiment tough, that too has yielded insights. Some of Kaminksi’s most famous work was with Rico the border collie, a dog with an incredible ability to learn the names of items. “I found him on German TV, basically,” she says. At first Kaminski thought Rico was picking correct objects based on cues from humans – similar to the case of “Clever Hans”, a horse who appeared to have incredible intelligence. But Kaminski’s work revealed Rico really was using the spoken word to select specific objects: he learned the labels of more than 200 items. And he wasn’t the only dog with the ability, as a number of research teams have shown with various breeds. Kaminski and colleagues are now looking to find other such canines, having recently launched a project called “Finding Rico”. “I don’t expect us to find more than 50 dogs worldwide that that can do this,” Kaminski says. But while Rico was smart at learning labels, Kaminski notes he struggled with the idea of object permanence. Cleverness in canines, it seems, is complex. “It is not that we are thinking that we have like an Einstein dog in front of us that knows everything,” said Kaminski. “We think we have dogs that have a special skill or a special set of skills that enables them to be very good at learning labels.” Calisto’s skill appears to be pulling the puppy dog eyes. But maybe that’s not surprising – Kaminski’s work has also revealed dogs produce more facial expressions when someone is looking at them, in particular raising their eyebrows which makes their eyes look bigger. Is it a deliberate ploy? “I think that they have some voluntary control over that,” says Kaminski. “But I don’t think that they have learned to sort of modify their face in a particular way to kind of get a specific reaction from their owner.” Kaminski says the eyebrow movement could be something that humans unconsciously selected for, perhaps because it makes dogs look like infants. Among other research, she and her team are probing the matter, including whether the movement has particular meaning for dogs. Has Kaminski’s work has changed her view of canine intelligence? She points out while some say dogs are as intelligent as a two-year-old child, others take the opposing stance, suggesting dogs are unable to think flexibly. “It’s just confirmed, I guess, over and over is that the truth is somewhere in the middle,” says Kaminski. “And we are still at the very beginning of understanding what they really understand.”It seemed that Joe Biden would be bad for business in “Make America great again” world. In theory, the US president, a white man with working-class roots and moderate policy positions, was a more elusive target for Donald Trump’s increasingly extreme support base than other prominent Democrats. But after his first year in office, it transpires that Biden is not too boring to be a rightwing boogeyman after all. “He’s our best salesperson,” said Ronald Solomon, a merchandiser who sells a $21.99 T-shirt depicting the president with an Adolf Hitler-style mustache and the slogan “Not My Dictator”. “Sales for Trump stuff and anti-Biden merchandise is the highest it’s been except for the three months leading up to the 2020 election.” The demonization of Biden as a Hitler, Stalin or anti-white racist bears no relation to reality. But for many Republican voters it appears to stick, the product of relentless conservative media attacks, the president’s own missteps, and seething frustration during a seemingly never-ending pandemic. At first Biden did excite less animus than Barack Obama, the first Black president who was subjected to conspiracy theories about his birthplace and the rise of the populist Tea Party movement. Biden never had to go through the misogyny endured by Hillary Clinton. His policy record was also non-incendiary. When Trump supporters gathered at the annual Conservative Political Action Conference under the banner “America vs socialism”, the biggest hate figures were Senator Bernie Sanders, a democratic socialist from Vermont, and Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a liberal Latina from New York. Since moving into the White House, however, Biden has granted Sanders a prominent voice in shaping his policy agenda. The unexpected scale of the president’s ambition to spend trillions of dollars on coronavirus relief, the social safety net and the climate crisis has fed into a Republican narrative that he is a puppet of the radical left. And although Biden’s identity as a white man neutralised other “isms”, he cannot escape ageism. At 79, he is the oldest American president in history, his every verbal slip seized upon as cause to doubt his mental fitness. Last May, Fox News host Sean Hannity displayed a sippy cup with the presidential seal on it, floating the nickname “Sippy Cup Joe”. In August, Tucker Carlson told viewers of the same network: “Maybe the most important thing we’ve learned is that Joe Biden is not capable of running the country. Joe Biden is senile.” (Such commentators rarely note that Mitch McConnell, Republican minority leader in the Senate, is also 79.) Another popular line of attack is to compare Biden to Jimmy Carter, whose presidency in the 1970s ended in failure after one term. “Joe Biden Is Jimmy Carter 2.0,” said one such press release from the Republican National Committee. “On Joe Biden’s watch, America is grappling with a gas crisis, record-breaking inflation, weak leadership abroad, and Americans trapped behind enemy lines, all reminiscent of the Jimmy Carter years.” But there is no greater symbol of anti-Biden sentiment than “Let’s go Brandon”, a phrase that originated at a Nascar race in Alabama in October. Brandon Brown, a 28-year-old driver, had won his first Xfinity Series and was being interviewed by an NBC Sports reporter. The crowd behind him was chanting something that at first was hard to hear. The reporter suggested they were saying “Let’s go, Brandon!” to support the driver. But it became increasingly clear they were chanting, “Fuck Joe Biden!” So it was that “Let’s go, Brandon” became conservative code for insulting the president and went viral. On a Southwest flight from Houston to Albuquerque, the pilot signed off his greeting over the public address system with the phrase, leaving some passengers aghast. On Christmas Eve, when Biden fielded a few phone calls to the Norad Santa Tracker, Jared Schmeck, a Trump supporter from Oregon, said: “Merry Christmas and let’s go, Brandon!” Speaking from Las Vegas, Solomon, president of the Maga Mall, said he has a line of “Let’s go, Brandon” merchandise including banners, buttons, T-shirts for men and women and hats in four different colors. “One, it’s an attack on the mainstream media: this gal from NBC Sports immediately tried to make it like they were saying something that they weren’t,” he explained. “Two, it’s a way for Republicans that don’t want to use a four-letter word to have a chance to say something that attacks the president of the United States, who they can’t stand any more.” In a nod to the Trump base, Republican senator Ted Cruz posed with a “Let’s go, Brandon” sign at baseball’s World Series. McConnell’s press secretary retweeted a photo of the phrase on a construction sign in Virginia. Congressman Jeff Duncan of South Carolina wore a “Let’s go, Brandon” face mask at the US Capitol. Jim Lamon, a Senate candidate from Arizona, used the slogan a TV campaign ad. Critics point out that goading, provoking and outraging their opponents, known as “owning the libs”, has become the defining principle of a Republican party that lacks a coherent ideology of its own. McConnell reportedly told donors last month that he would not be putting forward a legislative agenda for November’s midterm elections because he was content to merely hammer away at Democrats. But with Biden’s approval rating hovering in the low 40s, and his Build Back Better agenda stalled in Congress, the Republican formula might be working. John Zogby, a pollster and author, said: “They have made significant inroads into demonizing him. In the beginning, of course, it was hard. He was a softer target, he was Uncle Joe, he had a high favorability rating and he’d been around a long time. “But definitely in the second half of this first year, the almost-mantras of the Republican party have gained hold: he’s too old, he’s a socialist, and then this whole ‘Let’s go, Brandon’ thing. Plus the fact that they’ve been able to successfully block the bigger initiatives so not only a socialist, but a socialist who can’t succeed, is the message.” Barbs and brickbats aimed at a Democratic president are hardly new. Before Obama there was Bill Clinton, who drew his share of rancor, vitriol and baseless conspiracy theories. In today’s hyper-polarized Washington, inflamed by social media, the incumbent can expect to have everything but the kitchen sink thrown at them. Allan Lichtman, a distinguished history professor at American University in Washington, said: “As long as you have the capital D as your political designation, you are a target for the Republicans. It doesn’t matter if you are a leftwing or moderate Democrat – it makes absolutely no difference. “Bill Clinton was a centrist. He was the head of the Democratic Leadership Council, dedicated to moving the Democrats to the centre, and yet they relentlessly attacked him, even impeached him. Republicans will oppose essentially anything that a Democratic president proposes and relentlessly attack them.” Others argue that Biden has done Republicans’ work for them with a botched Afghanistan withdrawal, a crisis at the southern border, the highest inflation for 40 years and an inability to curb the pandemic. The president’s newly aggressive stance on voting rights and safeguarding democracy has also rallied Republicans against him. Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster and strategist, said: “Incredibly, Joe Biden has a worse approval rating at this point than Donald Trump did and it’s not because of Republican critiques. It’s because of Biden’s failures. “He’s failed to communicate effectively. He’s failed to try to bridge the gap; in fact, he’s been promoting greater division. He’s promised too much on Covid and hasn’t delivered. And nothing bothers people more than rising prices because that affects everyone, whether you are working class, middle class or somewhat affluent.”Leaders in the US have struck a pessimistic tone about the Covid-19 pandemic in recent weeks amid rapid spread of the Omicron variant. Janet Woodcock, acting commissioner of the US Food and Drug Administration, recently testified before Congress that “most people are going to get Covid”. Dr Anthony Fauci, chief medical adviser to Joe Biden, has also said that Omicron “will ultimately find just about everybody” in terms of exposure, though vaccines make an important difference in who develops the illness. But Covid-19 is still a very serious disease with unknown outcomes, even for the less severe Omicron variant. Here top experts break down exactly why people should still try to avoid getting Covid-19 – especially in the next few weeks and months, as hospitals see unprecedented strain and effective early treatments are appearing on the horizon. Am I just going to get Covid no matter what I do? “That’s not true,” said Paul Offit, a professor of pediatrics in the division of infectious diseases at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. “I don’t plan on getting infected with Omicron. I’m vaccinated; because I’m over 65, I’m boosted. I wear a mask whenever I’m in public and indoors around people I don’t know. And I have no intentions of being infected with this virus.” While the more transmissible Omicron variant is infecting more people than ever before, taking proven precautions can still prevent illness from it: getting vaccinated and boosted, wearing high-quality masks, improving ventilation and avoiding crowds indoors. Should I just get it and get it over with? Planning to get Omicron in order to gain some immunity or get it over with is a terrible idea, said Eric Topol, a professor of molecular medicine at Scripps Research. “This is a real-deal virus where there’s unpredictability,” he said. “Some people can get very sick. Some people can get long Covid. Some people unwittingly will then get immunocompromised people sick”, leading to hospitalization and death. He added: “There’s too many liabilities, too many uncertainties and unpredictabilities when you get a virus with this known profile that can be very severe and lethal still.” And it’s not at all clear if recovering from Omicron would protect against future variants. If you’ve already gotten Omicron, it may have broadened your T-cell recognition and your B-cell memory and given you “a nice jolt of neutralizing antibodies”, Topol said. But “you can’t possibly make that assertion that Omicron will protect from the future”. But isn’t Omicron mild? Definitely not a guarantee. It is still a deadly illness. Omicon is less severe than Delta – but Delta was itself more severe than previous variants. “It can still be severe,” Topol said. He calls it less severe, not milder. “‘Milder’ caught on early, and I think it’s unfortunate it’s given this impression, because there’s so many people dying and winding up in the ICU.” In animal studies, Omicron was less effective than Delta at infecting lung tissue, making severe pneumonia less likely. And according to a new preprint study, which has not been published or peer reviewed, illness was shorter and hospitalizations were half as likely among those with Omicron versus Delta. But a lowered risk of getting very ill doesn’t mean no risk, Offit said. “You still could have all of those things happen to you – you still could be hospitalized, go to the ICU, require mechanical ventilation and die.” Is that why some people are still being hospitalized? The US has record-high hospitalizations, and cases are more than three times higher than our previous highest peak, a year ago. That’s because the other characteristics of Omicron – its immune-evasiveness and transmissibility – more than outweigh its relatively less severe symptoms. When more people get sick, there are more chances of the illness going very wrong. “A small percentage of a huge number is a very large number,” said Jorge Moreno, assistant professor of medicine at the Yale School of Medicine. Jerome Adams, the former US surgeon general, laid out the math: “If your enemy uses a weapon that’s one-third as likely to kill you, but four times as many people are shooting at you, you’re now 1.3 times as likely to die!” What about this idea of being hospitalized “for” versus “with” Covid? “I think that’s grossly inaccurate,” Topol said. He recently cared for a Covid-positive patient with chronic lung disease who was coded as hospitalized “with”, not “for,” Covid. That’s because the patient needed to be treated for the lung disease – but it had only flared up because of Covid. “We do have 150,000 US hospitalizations with or for Covid, which is well beyond any record and is completely overwhelming health systems,” Topol said. “So, this debate is just nonsensical.” There are cases where patients are undergoing surgery or getting treated for accidents when they test positive for Covid incidentally. But that’s not very common, experts said. It’s far more likely that Covid exacerbates another condition or causes a different illness to rise to the forefront: complications from diabetes, renal failure, strokes, heart inflammation or failure, asthma, emphysema, pulmonary embolisms. Does that mean the types of complications caused by Covid are changing? “This virus does things no other respiratory virus does,” Offit said. “You can have strokes, heart attacks, kidney disease, liver disease, and then whatever long Covid is.” Previous variants also created these types of complications. The difference with Omicron is, you might not need to be ventilated – but you’ll still need to be hospitalized, sometimes in the intensive care unit. “It may be causing a milder pulmonary problem, but it’s definitely still causing other problems,” Moreno said. “They may not require intubation; they may still require the ICU.” One major complication from Covid has been diabetic ketoacidosis. “It raises their blood sugars; it creates conditions that are more threatening for patients with diabetes,” Moreno said. “Those are very urgent and sometimes life-threatening conditions. They still require a lot of care. They still require a lot of time in the hospital.” What’s Omicron doing to hospitals? “The end result is our hospitals are filling up,” Topol said. “And it’s breaking the backs of the healthcare system, particularly the healthcare workforce.” Across the country, hospitals are nearing or passing capacity. On Thursday, Joe Biden promised to send the military to six states where hospitals are overwhelmed. There were already staff shortages due to death, disability and the emotional burdens of the pandemic. Now, more health workers are out sick with Omicron. “On top of that, we are adding the fact that the US is not closed. Back in March of 2020, everything was closed,” Moreno said. That meant there were fewer accidents happening and fewer infectious diseases spreading. “Last year, there was no flu, there was no RSV,” Offit said. “What we did by not just masking and social distancing, but by closing schools, closing businesses, restricting travel – we dramatically reduced the incidence of those diseases.” Now, hospitals are facing Covid plus other health emergencies, Moreno said. “It’s a perfect storm.” Do vaccines still help against Omicron? Absolutely. Unvaccinated people in particular are still at risk for pneumonia and other complications, and vaccinations can dramatically lower those risks. “If you’re unvaccinated, you will have a longer illness, you will get sicker most likely,” Moreno said. “There is some evidence that it’s not targeting the lungs as much – however, one thing with Covid is that it can do whatever it wants, right? So once it finds the host, once it gets in, it’s unpredictable.” But vaccination, he said, “makes Covid predictable”. “You never ever want to get a viral infection,” Offit said. “But the good news is, you don’t have to. You can vaccinate yourself so you can experience the immunity induced by natural infection without having to pay the price of natural infection.” Sometimes it feels like each wave will last forever. But are things getting better? “I do think that we are on the verge of getting past at least the bulk of Omicron,” Offit said. “You will start to see a decline.” And new treatments that are very effective at keeping Covid from getting serious are on their way. It takes time to manufacture them, but within months, the US should have millions of doses – which means getting infected with Covid in a few months could be much less risky with more tools to battle it.Check cancellation policies It is essential to check what will happen if you need to cancel transport or accommodation, whether you are booking the different elements yourself or opting for a package. Many may offer free cancellation but read the small print carefully – there will be a deadline for this, and it could be several weeks before your holiday is set to start. Read flexible policies carefully. Qin Xie from Hey Money Talk says flexible booking should mean not paying an admin fee or losing your deposit if plans change. “What’s included in flexible booking obviously depends on who you book with but amends are usually for travel dates and/or destinations.” If you are booking a holiday let only, book through a third-party site that has has a clear refund policy and which takes secure payments by credit card. Your contract is always with the company or person to which you paid the money. For example, if you book through Airbnb you need to contact the company for a refund, whereas with Vrbo you would need to contact the property owner. Tracey McLaughlin, a blogger at Mind Over Money Matters, is a member of the Air Miles scheme and has beenusing it to book her holidays – it offers more flexibility than paying for the flights with a credit card, she says. “Air Miles gives us the option to cancel our booking 24 hours before travel for only a £35 charge,” she says. “All accommodation, etc is also booked with free cancellation up to 24 hours before.” Protect your payments Put your holiday on a credit card, if possible – under section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act this gives you protection on purchases of more than £100, and will cover your costs if a holiday firm you have booked with goes bust. To benefit from the cover make sure that you book and pay directly with the holiday company, rather than using a third-party payment company such as PayPal. The Atol (Air Travel Organisers’ Licence) financial protection scheme covers flight-based holidays and is operated by the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA). Under the scheme, if your travel company fails you will be entitled to a refund or replacement holiday if you are yet to travel, or provided with accommodation and flights home if you are abroad. Flights booked directly with airlines are not protected under the Atol scheme. Keep the certificate you are given when booking safe. If you buy a coach, rail or cruise holiday from an Abta member your money will be protected by the association’s financial protection scheme. If your travel company fails and your holiday can no longer go ahead, you will be entitled to a refund if you are yet to travel or hotel costs and transport home if you are abroad. Consider a package holiday Travel agents have access to the latest up-to-date information, airline and holiday offers and are very knowledgable about amending holidays and alternative destinations, giving you extra peace of mind. It can be cheaper to buy a flight and accommodation separately. However, if you book a package you have more protection from the Package Travel and Linked Travel Arrangements Regulations 2018. The travel organiser or operator must inform you of any alterations to the package clearly and without undue delay. You then have the option to cancel with no penalty if the holiday changes significantly. Linda Reynolds of Personal Travel Agent says: “DIY holidays can be problematic at this time. I’ve heard of people turning up at hotels in Canada and the hotel was shut and locally there were no alternatives in their price range. Check your hotel is open. A quick look on their website or email to confirm your arrival should help.” Buy insurance You should always take out insurance at the time of making your booking. Check with the supplier that it covers your needs – if you know you want to go jetskiing, for example, does it include it? Make sure you look for details of Covid cancellation, medical fees and repatriation. Check the quarantine rules for the country you are travelling to – some, for example, will make you move hotel if you test positive. Ask your insurer what it will pay for if you have to extend your stay because you are quarantined and unable to travel hoe. If you are due to travel after your annual insurance expires, make sure you renew it before you travel. If the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) puts a warning in place for your destination during any gap in your policy, you won’t be covered. Keep up to date with latest news Regularly check the FCDO website for entry requirements to the country you plan to visit, and keep an eye on the UK entry requirements. The government website will state which Covid test is required and the timescales before leaving and returning. Emma Savage of Travel Counsellors emphasises the importance of complying with the entry requirements of your destination. “They all vary, so make sure you/your agent is fully briefed on what you need to do” The FCDO continuously reviews its travel advice for each country or territory to ensure it includes up-to-date information and advice on the most relevant issues for British people visiting or living there. You can also sign up for email alerts to get updates as they happen. Have all your paperwork ready When the time comes round for your break, make sure you have booked any Covid tests that you need – and shop around before you do. Rory Boland, the travel editor of Which?, said “The Covid testing system for travel has been operating for a year now, and travellers are still being exposed to providers that fail to deliver tests on time or advertise prices that are not available.” Check reviews on sites such as Trustpilot, or try the comparison website Covid19-testing.org. Reynolds advises that you make physical copies of everything. “As well as your booking documents, print a copy of health forms, attestation if applicable, passenger locator form and confirmed test results,” she says. Don’t rely on the airport’s wifi to download your vital documents.Vodafone has struck a five-year deal to sponsor Wimbledon and has signed Tim Henman and Laura Robson as brand ambassadors, with the mobile firm also in discussions about a deal with the teen tennis star Emma Radacanu. Vodafone has signed a multimillion pound deal to become the official connectivity partner of the grass court grand slam event, as well as a wide-ranging collaboration with the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club and the Lawn Tennis Association (LTA) to promote an increase in the numbers of people playing the game at all levels. “There is a huge buzz around British tennis and Wimbledon is once again set to be a high point of the summer,” said Max Taylor, consumer director at Vodafone. “We want to build on this momentum long-term by supporting the grassroots to get players of all ages, abilities and backgrounds involved in sport.” The mobile phone company, which successfully gambled on sponsoring last year’s British &amp; Irish Lions tour of South Africa despite the threat posed by the pandemic, has also confirmed publicly for the first time that it is closing in on a deal with Radacanu. The 19-year old announced herself on the world stage at Wimbledon last year, going on to win the US Open in September and become the first British female player to triumph at a grand slam in 44 years. Radacanu is currently one of the hottest marketing properties in global sport with a string of deals, from Nike and Dior to Tiffany and Wilson, and in December announced new partnerships with Evian and British Airways. “I can confirm we are in talks with Emma Radacanu,” Taylor said. “We think she would be a fantastic ambassador and would be great for our partnership and ambitions around grassroots tennis. There is nothing formal to announce, but we are in talks.” Reports have suggested that a deal with Raducanu, who won BBC Sports Personality of the Year in 2021, could be worth £3m, but it is understood this figure is wide of the mark. Vodafone will use its first foray into tennis sponsorship to promote the benefits of next-generation 5G technology, showcasing augmented and virtual reality as well as “internet of things” technology during the tournament. “I will say that the 5G connectivity at Wimbledon this year will be fantastic,” said Taylor, who added that the sponsorship would be backed by a major ad campaign this summer. Taylor said a key element of the partnership was to support the LTA’s ambition to get 10% more children into tennis, and 1 million adults to play regularly, by 2025. The Wimbledon deal marks the latest ramping-up of Vodafone’s sponsorship strategy, which includes deals with Wasps rugby club and Formula E, with a number of new sports and entertainment deals understood to be likely this year. Sponsorship was once a major part of Vodafone’s marketing strategy, with deals spanning Formula One, the England cricket team and Manchester United. “It is really about timing,” said Taylor. “Years ago we had challenges with network and customer service, and some of the attention on sponsorship and partnerships fell away. This is a resurgent Vodafone in the UK. With the momentum we have got in the business, sponsorship is [once again] an important part of our marketing mix.”Human rights advocates have criticised the prime minister, Scott Morrison, after he wrongly claimed those held in detention in Australia for as long as eight years had not been recognised as refugees. Australia’s harsh border policies have been thrust into the spotlight since the detention of tennis star Novak Djokovic at the notorious Park hotel in Melbourne, where dozens of asylum seekers and refugees are detained indefinitely. Guardian Australia understands that there are 25 refugees and seven asylum seekers currently held in the Park hotel. Speaking to 2GB radio on Monday, Morrison was asked by presenter Ben Fordham how it was “acceptable” that refugees in the same hotel as Djokovic had been detained for almost nine years with taxpayers spending millions of dollars “to keep them in limbo.” In response, Morrison suggested the detainees were not refugees. “Well, the specific cases, Ben, I mean, it’s not clear that to my information that someone in that case is actually a refugee,” he said. “They may have sought asylum and been found not to be a refugee and have chosen not to return, and … that happens in this country, people aren’t found to be refugees and they won’t return.” But Elaine Pearson, the Australia director of Human Rights Watch, told the Guardian that most of those held in the Park hotel had been granted refugee status. “It’s an outright lie to say that these people are not refugees, when most of them have had their refugee status formally recognised for years,” Pearson said. “They’ve been through that process and it is established that they simply can’t return to their country.” “To somehow claim they are waiting around because they should be going home is absolutely inaccurate. And it is grossly misleading for our prime minister, who used to be the immigration minister, to be spreading this misinformation.” Pearson said Australia had a long track record of trying to cast doubt on the claims of people who seek asylum. “If you look at who’s being detained, it is men who have been shunted from one centre to another, in Australia or offshore, for more than eight years. At what point in time do you say they have suffered enough? They can’t simply continue to be used, for the rest of their lives, as a symbol of deterrence. They need to be allowed to move on with their lives.” Mehdi, a refugee held in the Park hotel who fled Iran as a child, aged 15, arrived in Australia by boat in 2013. He has marked nine birthdays since, either in immigration detention in Australia or held in offshore processing centres. His claim to refugee status was formally recognised by the Australian government in 2014. Mehdi – he only uses one name – has a “well-founded fear of being persecuted” in Iran, and he cannot legally be returned there. “I am a refugee. If I wasn’t, why would I endure such a difficult time as a child if I have the option to go back to where I came from?” Mehdi told Guardian Australia. Mehdi said he is still not safe in detention. Australia’s Nauru offshore processing centre, the government’s own reports reveal, was plagued by child physical and sexual abuse, violence and mental health trauma. The hotel where he is currently detained has been at the centre of repeated Covid-19 outbreaks. “The government’s treatment of detained children is not in line with Australian domestic law. Children may only be detained for the shortest appropriate time, and we were innocent children who were intentionally exposed to horrible experiences. “Depriving me of education, both when I was 15 and now, reflects a discriminatory attitude, because education is a right that must be upheld under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. I received minimal education in a world where knowledge comes first, an obvious right for children.” Nina Field, a detention advocacy caseworker with the Asylum Seeker Resource Centre, said those detained in the Park hotel had been held against their will by the Australian government for nearly nine years. “The people held in Park hotel are almost all refugees. They were brought to Australia from offshore detention in Nauru or [Papua New Guinea] for medical treatment – which for the most part they have not received. Instead, they have been left to suffer in limbo in detention centres and airless hotel rooms for more than two years. In these places, they sometimes have to wait for hours just to get a Panadol. “Now, the prime minister appears to be further demonising them by suggesting that they have somehow ‘failed’ in their refugee claims and are ‘choosing’ not to return. They have no such choice.” When asked about Labor’s position on those held in detention, Labor’s shadow home affairs minister, Kristina Keneally, said the party supported them being held in community detention while their cases were finalised. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Labor has been saying for months now, that if these refugees are able to live in the community they should do so,” Keneally said. “In fact, we agreed with Peter Dutton, when he said it was more cost-effective to have these people living in the community while the outcome of their cases are determined. It is really now up to Karen Andrews to explain why that’s not happening.” The prime minister’s office was contacted for comment.A juvenile humpback whale has been spotted in the Antarctic entangled in fishing gear, leading to calls from conservationists for better protections along migration corridors. The sighting last Wednesday by scientists aboard the Crystal Endeavour occurred at Mikkelsen Harbour on Trinity Island, on the western side of the Antarctic peninsula. University of California Santa Cruz PhD candidate Logan Pallin and Dr Natalia Botero-Acosta from the Colombian Antarctic program, approached the small whale to take a skin biopsy to help determine its genetic origin, sex, cortisol levels and diet. Pallin noticed the whale’s dorsal fin was missing, and it was trailing fishing gear and several buoys that had become wrapped around the fluke – the tail – where it was causing abrasions and cutting into the skin. The whale’s age is unknown but it is estimated to be about 18 months. As it was likely on its first migration alone, it had likely carried the gear over thousands of kilometres down the South American coast. It was last seen labouring to swim and is considered unlikely to survive. With humpback whale numbers now rebounding after being decimated by whaling, and climate change affecting the availability of food, the animals are increasingly moving through areas with higher levels of human activity. Simon Miller, an Australian Marine Conservation Society fisheries expert said it was difficult to tell what sort of net had entangled the whale and whether it was active or a “ghost net” that had been abandoned, broken or cut loose. “If they become wrapped up in a net like this juvenile, they are effectively dragging an anchor behind them which spells an untimely end unless they are freed,” Miller said. While it is possible to cut away the fishing gear, the process requires specialised equipment and trained teams as the manoeuvre is dangerous for both those carrying out the task and the whale. These are generally unavailable in the Antarctic. A report of the entanglement was circulated to other vessels in the area in an effort to monitor the whale, but Prof Ari Friedlaender of University of California Santa Cruz’s ocean sciences department said more needed to be done to stop a repeat in the future. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “My hope is that the more this type of situation is brought to light, the more can be done to minimise these interactions from happening,” he said. “Because nobody wants to see whales harmed like this, nobody wants to see people who fish have their livelihood dragged away as well.” Friedlaender said entanglements can be reduced with modifications to fishing gear to make it less likely to become caught, tangled and dragged and more information for fishers to better time operations. Miller said the incident shows the “vast reach impacts like fishing can have on threatened species”. “Whale entanglement can be avoided to an extent by not setting high risk fishing gear like lobster pots with long head ropes or gillnets in the areas through which humpbacks are known to migrate and congregate,” Miller said. “As humpback migration patterns and timings are regular, fishers should know where and when not to set their nets.”And that’s where we’ll leave you tonight. You can check our national Covid summary in the pinned post for all the details about today’s Covid numbers. Here are the other stories that made headlines today: World tennis No. 1 Novak Djokovic was deported and has arrived back in Serbia after the full bench of the federal court upheld the Morrison government’s decision to cancel his visa on the grounds of health and good order. The Australian prime minister Scott Morrison said the visa cancellation was because Djokovic didn’t comply with entry requirements – except that entry requirements were not the basis on which immigration minister Alex Hawke cancelled the visa. The TGA has today recognised Russia’s Sputnik V vaccine – the Gamaleya Institute vaccine (Sputnik V, Russian Federation) – for the purpose of establishing a traveller’s vaccination status when entering Australia. A New Zealand Defence Force aircraft has left Auckland on a reconnaissance flight to assess damage in Tonga, around 36 hours after the mammoth volcanic blast which caused a tsunami. The Royal Australian Air Force is currently undertaking surveillance activity over the affected area. Retailers charging “beyond outrageous” prices for rapid antigen tests will be referred to the federal police for investigation, as supply issues continue to hamper Australia’s testing regime. Unions will write to all employers warning them they have an obligation to do everything reasonable to keep workers safe during the Omicron wave, including making free rapid antigen tests available to all workers once supply issues are resolved. Thanks for sticking with us today. Have a lovely evening! This is pretty astonishing: Australian-trained doctors living overseas are treating patients in rural and regional New South Wales, to curb the bush doctor shortage. During his press conference just now, WA premier Mark McGowan was asked about the legal action being brought against him by Clive Palmer, which is due to start at the end of this month. The billionaire is suing McGowan in the federal court claiming that his public comments, including labelling him the “enemy of West Australia”, had damaged his reputation. The premier has lodged a counterclaim saying Palmer defamed him in several interviews. The premier brushed off questions about the lawsuit. “[Palmer] sues Western Australia all the time, he sues people all the time, I’m just one of those people,” McGowan said. “Obviously I’d prefer this didn’t happen, but he regularly brings these legal actions ... It’s just a never-ending story.” My colleague Daniel Hurst has a really interesting piece this afternoon comparing the grounds on which Novak Djokovic’s visa was actually cancelled with the rhetoric the government has been using around the deportation. Prime minister Scott Morrison says Djokovic was deported because he tried to breach entry rules at the border. But the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, did not make alleged non-compliance with entry rules a central plank of his reasons for cancelling Djokovic’s visa a second time on Friday. Here’s our full wrap of the NSW Covid situation for today from Michael McGowan. The New South Wales chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, has warned deaths from Covid-19 are likely to spike in the coming days, as hospitalisation data shows unvaccinated people with the virus are 13 times more likely to end up in intensive care. “Given the broader community transmission of Covid I would like to flag that the number of deaths are likely to be higher over the coming days,” she said. The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, again urged unvaccinated people to get the jab, saying they needed “to give a damn about someone other than themselves”. Read the full story: Mask wearing is likely to be a long-term thing, McGowan says. (It’s not that bad, WA, I promise.) McGowan says they aren’t going too hard too soon on Covid restrictions so they can “retain the capacity to step up measures over time” and because the community may tire of restrictions if they are introduced too soon. He points to the state’s track record: “Every outbreak we’ve had we’ve managed to eliminate over the last two years ... because we put measures in place very quickly.” There’s a question on when he expects an omicron outbreak to peak in WA – the suggestion is that it would be about six weeks after the expected peaks in the eastern states – but he sidesteps answering it directly, saying “it depends on the measures you put in place”. McGowan is urging the WA public not to ignore symptoms: “Do not ignore the signs, get tested,” he says. “We need to get test numbers up so we can understand where Omicron is… We suspect there are more cases in the community ... We cannot be complacent and we cannot drop our guard.” WA premier Mark McGowan is giving a press conference with health minister Amber-Jade Sanderson. He mentions the three new local cases recorded today, in addition to the nine returned traveller cases. One of the three local cases had not been in isolation so there are more exposure sites listed than yesterday. “The Omicron variant continues to be the biggest risk to our community,” McGowan says. Following Luke’s story in the post below, ACT Labor MP Alicia Payne has called continuing enforcement of mutual obligations “incomprehensible and dangerous”. A woman with chronic illnesses and an immunocompromised partner and the single mother of a toddler are among those being told they’ll have their benefits cut if they don’t attend face-to-face job agency appointments, despite an unprecedented surge of Covid cases. Welfare mutual obligations, which have been suspended in Covid-affected areas for much of the pandemic, were reintroduced nationally in late October. Last week the government rebuffed calls to pause them, despite soaring infection numbers. Guardian Australia has confirmed that while some job agencies are allowing people subject to mutual obligations to meet their requirements from home – by conducting meetings by phone or online, for example – others are insisting participants attend in person. Read more: Some more on the Tongan volcano disaster and the anxious wait for news from home in the Tongan diaspora, by Kate Lyons and Tess McClure. The oceanic eruption sent huge swells around the world – here’s a compilation of footage of some of them. The union statement also called for “new measures” to ensure safety at work: We have determined that despite the Prime Minister not acting to keep working people safe, the union movement will. Accordingly, the meeting today resolved to write to all employers reminding them of their obligation to do all that is reasonable and practical to keep workers safe. This will require each workplace to undertake a new risk assessment for Omicron in consultation with unions, workers and their health and safety representatives. In addition, where appropriate, sector-specific plans should be developed in consultation with unions. The unions said that for workplaces where working from home was not an option, the provision of free rapid antigen tests (RATs) by employers to all workers would be necessary once supply was resolved, alongside upgraded masks and improved ventilation. Union members will take whatever steps are necessary in their workplaces to ensure they are as safe as possible. Where employers do not fulfil their obligations, the union movement determines to do everything within its power to ensure the safety of workers and the community. This may include ceasing work or banning unsafe practices. The statement said free RATs were needed for the whole community to limit the spread and keep people safe, not just essential workers. The failure of the Federal Government to act and to provide free and accessible RATs puts us all in harm’s way. We are calling on the community to join us and demand the Federal Government reverse this decision. The union movement will work directly with the community to demand all members of the Federal Government be held accountable for the inaction of the Prime Minister. Unions will write to all employers warning them they have an obligation to do everything reasonable to keep workers safe during the Omicron wave. The call follows an “emergency” meeting of union leaders, called after the secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Sally McManus, complained of a failure of leadership by the prime minister, Scott Morrison. The ACTU issued a statement a short time ago reporting the outcomes of the ACTU leadership meeting. It said leaders from national unions had met to discuss “the ongoing health and economic crisis caused by the rapid spread of Omicron”. The statement said: Union leaders reported on the devastating impact the latest Covid wave is having on the health and incomes of working people. All unions express their solidarity, respect, and deep gratitude to the health care workers of our country who are experiencing the full brunt of this wave of sick people. The unions representing those workers report that they are exhausted and feel abandoned by governments who have encouraged ‘let it rip’ policies. The ‘let it rip’ governments have failed to prepare our health system and our community, and they are responsible for Australia suffering the highest per capita infection rates in the world. The union statement said essential workers were being expected to “put themselves in harm’s way to keep the country going and in many cases without the protections they need”. It said the union movement would “do everything we can to keep people safe and act to slow the spread of this latest wave of the Covid pandemic”. The statement also condemned “the failure of the Morrison Government to respond to our requests to work with us during this crisis; or our demands for the provision of free Rapid Antigen Tests, improved masks, fixing close contact definitions and restoring support for businesses and workers”. Bear with me, WA Health’s daily Covid update is a little confusing: they have recorded three local Covid-19 cases and nine travel-related cases to 8pm last night, which makes 12 new cases in total. However, the three local cases are the same cases announced yesterday afternoon. (Two are linked to the Cockburn cluster and the third is a known close contact of a previously reported case.) The other nine cases relate to returned interstate travellers and are in self-quarantine. Today’s total of 12 new cases brings means WA currently has 1309 active cases in total. Australia’s visa cancellation regime has been exposed as “dysfunctional and dangerous” by the Novak Djokovic case, legal experts have said, arguing his expulsion is a “terrible precedent” that could lead to “political and populist” deportations. The Djokovic case has drawn public attention to the so-called “God powers” held by Australian immigration ministers, granting them extraordinarily broad powers to summarily cancel visas. Migration law experts say the Djokovic case – his visa was cancelled because the government believed he was a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment” – demonstrates the laws could be used to exclude a person who has previously expressed political views the government did not agree with. Read more: OK so I appreciate this is a bit sideways from our usual fare on this here blog but if you love the Lego portrayal of, well, everything (who doesn’t?) you will be interested to know that Lego are now being sued for an apparent reproduction of a very particular jacket. I also share this because it was written by Guardian Australia’s new deputy culture editor Sian Cain, who has just moved back to our fair shores from the UK. Give her a warm welcome if you see her on the socials. The brother of a British woman who was swept away from the coast of Tonga by the tsunami on Saturday and is still missing, has told the Guardian he has grave fears for her safety. “What are we, 48 hours later? I don’t think this is going to have a happy ending,” an emotional Nick Eleini said. So far, no casualties in Tonga – which has a population of just over 100,000 – have been confirmed. Though there are unconfirmed reports that three people were swept away by the waves, and that two have so far been found. The impact of the tsunami, and the resulting ash cloud that has blanketed the islands, is feared to be enormous, with NGOs warning of contaminated drinking water, seawater ruining crops, as well as damage to homes and infrastructure. Eleini, who lives in Sydney, spoke to the Guardian as he was travelling back to the UK to be with his mother, Jennifer. His sister, 50-year-old Angela Glover, was swept away from the beach along with her husband and four or five of the couple’s dogs by a tsunami triggered by a huge volcanic eruption. Glover ran an animal rescue shelter in Tonga. Read the full story here: SA Health has released its detailed daily Covid update, topline figures of which were reported by the premier earlier in his press conference. Also, if you enjoy tennis, let me recommend you open another tab (don’t close this one!) and follow along with our other live blog, where my esteemed colleague Mike Hytner is keeping everyone updated with the latest on-court and off-court dramas. A lot has happened in the last 24 hours. If you missed the Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić’s comments on the Australian federal court’s decision to cancel Novak Djokovic’s visa and deport the tennis player, here is a handy 2-minute video to catch you up. Retailers charging “beyond outrageous” prices for rapid antigen tests are being referred to the federal police for investigation, as supply issues continue to hamper Australia’s testing regime. The chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, Rod Sims, said on Monday the consumer watchdog had received many reports of price gouging, which is now illegal under new laws that prevent profit margins of more than 20% on tests. With reports of retailers charging more than $30 for a single hard-to-find rapid testing kit, Sims said the regulator was preparing to take action on the “beyond outrageous” price markups. Sims said: Clearly we are facing a supply issue. More supply is needed, we keep being assured that more supply is coming both from government agencies and the private sector. But, when you have rapid antigen tests that are designed for use by trained professionals and they are being sold … without proper instruction, that is extremely concerning because people may take comfort from a test that they didn’t know how to perform properly, and I think that is an even worse outcome. Read the full story: On Friday, gas giant Santos agreed to settle a high-profile case alleging it had unlawfully tried to expand its fracking operations in the Northern Territory without notifying the pastoralists who owned the land on which it was drilling. The case was brought by Rallen, one of the country’s biggest landholders, which alleged Santos had failed to disclose plans to drill two new wells at Tanumbirini Station, in the Beetaloo Basin, where the Morrison government is attempting to drive a huge acceleration in fracking activity. Rallen alleged Santos was aware of “significant” environmental risks posed by the new drilling and was legally obliged to tell it of the proposal. It accused the company of acting in a “cavalier” way. The case settled on Friday for $400,000 and Santos said in a statement that it was barred from fracking at Tanumbirini Station until after 31 December 2022. The company said: Santos will work to improve the way it engages with landholders. Graeme Sawyer, spokesperson for Protect Country Alliance, said the case had exposed the “arrogance with which Santos treats landholders”. Sawyer said: This is a terrific blow to Santos. Protect Country Alliance congratulates Rallen Australia on standing up to this oil and gas giant bully and fighting for what is right. 878 cases were recorded by PCR test and 723 from rapid antigen tests. There are 52 people in hospital in the ACT, four people in intensive care and two on ventilators. Marshall defends the state of SA’s classrooms – that is, their ventilation capacity and similar conditions – and accuses the Labor party, who have been calling for air purifiers to be installed in classrooms before children return to school, of “undermining the public health messages on a daily basis.” SA premier Steven Marshall is speaking in Adelaide now. He’s talking about the return to school and return to work for teachers, and there’s a question about concerns from teachers about their safety. We still haven’t finalised what that return to work strategy will look like ... We’ve got provision in place for teachers to be able to return to work … we would really like to get a handle on what’s going to go through national cabinet on Thursday this week with regard to rapid antigen tests, but I am confident we’ll be able to find a middle course… I think we’ve got the balance right. We want to work with teachers, principals … we want to navigate a way through. On lockdowns being declared when there are potential outbreaks in residential aged care, again, he talks about “getting the balance right” regarding restrictions and processes: If an outbreak is declared we do like to have that opportunity for SA health to go and do an assessment… I would probably shy away from using the term ‘lockdown’, I think it would be reduced visitation arrangements… It’s a vulnerable community. South Australia has recorded 3829 new cases of Covid-19. PCR tests account for 2,860 of those and 969 were from rapid antigen test reports. 227 people are in hospital, 26 in ICU and five people are on ventilators. The Northern Territory health authorities have announced lockdowns in Galuwin’ku (Elcho Island) for a week, and the community of Yirrkala for 72 hours. Both of these will begin at 2pm local time. From deputy chief minister Nicole Manison’s press conference just now: There are now a total of 19 cases in Galuwin’ku. Six of the 19 cases are staying in isolation in a motel on the islands, 13 others who are known close contacts are isolating as well on the island. Our vaccine rates on the islands are OK but slightly lower than other East Arnhem communities. This is a very isolated part of the Northern Territory so we have many people there with complex needs. For this reason we will be moving to a seven-day lockdown of Galiwin’ku from today at 2pm. What we want to do is limit the movement of people in and out of Galiwin’ku, the main community there, there are a lot of people who move amongst each other on the island. We want to make sure we slow the spread of Covid there. That is really important. We think it will be very difficult to eliminate Covid-19 from Elcho islands and Galiwin’ku. That is why we are putting in this lockdown for seven days to make sure we can do this important work around testing and tracking the virus where we can, and making sure we slow that spread. And importantly, help as many people stay on the islands as possible because we know people want to stay close to their home. NT health authorities have reported 284 cases of Covid-19 to 8pm last night, 149 of these came from rapid antigen tests. There are currently 39 patients in NT hospitals with Covid-19 and 25 of these are considered to be acute cases. We’re all fairly familiar by now with arts events being scuttled by Covid, and here’s another one – this time in WA, where the state’s major annual arts festival, Perth Festival, has cancelled its mainstage opening event, Escape. Escape was described as “a large-scale free community event across multiple sites at Fremantle’s Bathers Beach and Victoria Quay involving hundreds of artists, staff and volunteers. It was projected to attract tens of thousands of people across two nights to open Perth Festival on 11-12 February”. In a statement, the festival said: Perth Festival is set to return for 2022 but we are sorry to say that we won’t be proceeding with the large-scale opening event Escape due to uncertainty around the Omicron COVID-19 variant. We understand the cancellation of Escape will be immensely disappointing for our audiences and all the artists, staff, volunteers, partners and contractors who have worked on this event for many months. Perth Festival had been working the WA government in planning the event for nearly a year, but said they decided they could not proceed with it because of the constantly changing risks around the spread of Covid. Other parts of the festival will continue as planned. Here’s a summary of all the Covid numbers from the day so far: Victoria reported 22,429 new Covid cases and six deaths Roughly half the positive cases were reported from PCR test results, and half from rapid antigen tests. There are 1,229 people being treated in hospital with Covid in Victoria, including 129 in intensive care. Intensive care numbers are relatively stable, while hospitalisations have jumped by 115. NSW reported 29,504 new Covid cases and 17 deaths The 11,858 positive cases reported from rapid antigen tests were from the previous seven-day reporting period, and were not necessarily detected in the past 24 hours. There are 2,776 people being treated in hospital with Covid-19 in NSW, including 203 requiring intensive care. ICU numbers have jumped by 12 overnight, while hospitalisations have jumped by 126. Tasmania reported 1037 new Covid cases and no deaths 727 of these cases were reported from rapid antigen tests. There are 21 people in hospital and one person in ICU. Those numbers are staying relatively stable and actually decreased by one overnight. Queensland reported 15,122 new Covid cases and seven deaths 30,963 tests had been conducted. There are 702 people being treated in hospital in Queensland, and 47 in ICU, including 15 people requiring ventilation. None of the people who died in Queensland had had their booster shot. ACT reported 1,601 new Covid cases, one death 878 cases were recorded by PCR test and 723 from rapid antigen tests. There are 52 people in hospital in the ACT, 4 people in intensive care and two on ventilators. South Australia reported 3,829 new Covid cases PCR tests account for 2,860 of those and 969 were from rapid antigen test reports. 227 people are in hospital, 26 in ICU and 5 people are on ventilators. Northern Territory records 284 Covid-19 cases 149 of these were from rapid antigen test reports. There are currently 39 patients in NT hospitals with Covid-19 and 25 of these are considered to be acute cases. WA records 12 new Covid cases WA have recorded three local Covid-19 cases and nine travel-related cases to 8pm last night, which makes 12 new cases in total. The three local cases are the same cases announced yesterday afternoon. The other nine cases relate to returned interstate travellers and are in self-quarantine. Today’s total of 12 new cases brings means WA currently has 1309 active cases in total. Thanks so much Caitlin Cassidy for all your efforts today! Nice to be back on deck and here on this blog with you this afternoon. With that, I will hand you to the capable hands of Stephanie Convery, fresh from leave! Enjoy your afternoon. The TGA has today recognised the Gamaleya Institute vaccine (Sputnik V, Russian Federation) for the purpose of establishing a traveller’s vaccination status when entering Australia. The TGA determined “that an additional Covid-19 vaccine, the two dose course of the Gamaleya Institute vaccine (Sputnik V, Russian Federation) would be recognised for the purpose of international travel: Last week the TGA obtained additional information demonstrating this vaccine provides protection and potentially reduces the likelihood that an incoming traveller would transmit Covid-19 infection to others while in Australia or become acutely unwell due to Covid-19. The supporting information was based on published studies provided to the TGA by the Russian government with the assistance of the Australian embassy in Moscow. The data indicated that two doses of the Sputnik V (Gamaleya Institute) showed an average efficacy against symptomatic infection of 89% and against hospitalisation or death of 98-100%. As for most studies on the efficacy of the TGA approved or recognised Covid-19 vaccines, these studies were conducted prior to the emergence of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Real-world studies assessing the effectiveness of a range of vaccines against Omicron are currently underway in many countries. The single dose course of the Gamaleya vaccine (“Sputnik Light”) is not currently recognised by the TGA. Hazardous weather is continuing in Queensland, with several beaches still closed for swimming. In NSW, shadow minister for health Ryan Park is calling on the state government to implement a hospital surge support allowance like the one available in Victoria to keep up with increasing pressure from the Omicron spread. The Victorian government currently pays health staff an allowance of between $15 and $60 to encourage non-Covid impacted staff to take on extra hours to counteract ongoing staff shortages. The allowance is available based on the duration of increased hospital demand. Park said of last week, almost 4,000 health staff were furloughed due to exposure to Covid in NSW. A small update on Tonga. New Zealand’s Defence Force will be sending a second plane to Tonga: a Hercules C130 aircraft carrying supplies. The flight is expected to leave on Monday afternoon. A few days late, but the NSW government has released its latest weekly report on Covid cases. While only for the week up to January 1, this report has a few interesting stats that help us to understand how the Omicron wave is spreading. For instance, “approximately half of all confirmed and probable Omicron cases are in the 20-29 year age group.” That’s up from about 20% of confirmed cases in this age group during the first and Delta waves of Covid from the start of 2020 up to 26 November 2021. That proportion is also up from the weekly tallies of 36% in the week to Christmas and 29% in the week to New Year’s Day, according to the report. A reminder that we should be hearing from the ACTU later this afternoon after an emergency meeting with more than 30 unions over Covid. They are calling for, among other things, free and accessible rapid antigen tests. Here is a full breakdown of the Victorian government’s $1.2m program to support vaccination for culturally and linguistically diverse communities, announced late last year. Community organisation The Huddle – established by the North Melbourne Football Club to improve inclusion for young people from diverse backgrounds – will receive $150,000 to support the vaccination of people from culturally and linguistically diverse communities. Alongside The Huddle, other recipients include: Brimbank/Melton Community Support Group Dandenong/Casey/Cardinia Community Support Group Junubi Wyndham Community Support Group Himilo Community Connect Community Support Group Le Mana Pasifika Project Northern Community Support Group Komak Community Support Group Still in Victoria, and James Merlino is asked who in the federal government granted a visa for Novak Djokovic to come to Australia in the first place. Merlino says it’s a “fair question”. Over at the Victorian presser, there are a few questions about rapid antigen tests availability and distribution. The state-ordered rapid tests will first go to a Monash Health warehouse, from which they will be distributed, Merlino says. Three million of the 44m tests have already arrived. However, it’s a “global challenge” to acquire and distribute them, Merlino says: We’re trying to get as many as we possibly can and as quickly as we can. It would have been better if there had been a national approach [to procuring RATs]. That did not happen. Queensland education minister Grace Grace said the number of state school teachers who were vaccinated was “very, very high” but if they didn’t meet vaccination requirements by a certain date they would be stood down without pay. Good news for the Australian Open! Meanwhile, the Queensland press conference is continuing, and if you ever needed convincing to get a booster shot, just one of the state’s 29 Covid deaths had been boosted. We’re now hearing from Victoria’s chief health officer Brett Sutton. He says he believes the state’s case numbers are close to peaking, but a lot of people will still not know whether they have Covid-19 or not. The first deliveries of rapid antigen tests will be delivered shortly to “priority workforces”, says Sutton. For most people in the community, the rapid tests will be the first port of call, and he says he expects use of them will increase as they become more available. “We’re reshaping our Covid-19 response around this technology,” he says. People who return a positive rapid tests can be confident that it is a positive Covid diagnosis, Sutton reiterates. The government is also working with more than 60 multicultural organisations to distribute the tests to and educate different cohorts in the community about how to use them. Everyone should have a plan for how to isolate, Sutton says, including “knowing your symptoms and when to escalate appropriately”. He says you can call your GP or Nurse on Call to get more information and advice about your symptoms. People should only call triple zero for serious symptoms. Hospital numbers are going to increase, Sutton says, so anyone who is eligible needs to make a plan to get their third dose of the vaccine as soon as possible, in order to have the best chance of avoiding hospitalisation. Back to Sims, and, asked specifically about the reports the federal government is taking rapid antigen test supply, he says the ACCC is “going to look into those instances and see what the truth” is. First point I can go on what is in minister [Greg] Hunt’s letter, which says that is not happening, but secondly, when we find individual instances, we can see exactly what has been said and traced that down and see whether that is true or not, so I understand there are reports of that, sometimes it depends on what exactly is being said, but we’re going to look into those instances when we come across them and see what the truth the situation is. Concerning news coming out of Tonga: Over in Victoria, acting health minister James Merlino is reiterating the Covid numbers from this morning, which include an increase of people in hospital, and, unfortunately, six more deaths. About 24.4% of Victorians aged 18 and over have had three doses of a vaccine now. Merlino urged Victorians to increase the pace of booster acquisition, reiterating that there are a lot of appointments available. Last year there was $1.2m made available to organisations to reach out to multicultural community groups to encourage and assist people in those communities to get vaccinated. The Huddle, a community outreach group established by North Melbourne Football Club, is one of the groups that have received funding, and we’re also hearing from its CEO Cameron McLeod, who is talking about the various projects they are setting up including translated vaccination information, transport and youth outreach. Merlino has said there are more grants available for community organisations in Victoria to do this kind of work – up to $20k per organisation – to do things like combat vaccine misinformation and help facilitate people to get vaccinated. Sims says next week the ACCC will be in a better position to see what companies are saying, but if court action is required, it will be undertaken. Obviously ... we cannot be acting without hearing their side of the story, but certainly I would anticipate that we will be mentioning some companies that are doing what we see to be the wrong thing very soon. Obviously when you talk about taking a company to court, that takes a lot longer, so that’s why I have always said here, naming and shaming, getting messages out is the fastest way to get those prices down. But if we have to take court action we will. By taking someone to court, there is a lot of work that goes into that, so that takes a lot longer, and we want action now. We want prices down now because Australian consumers should not be paying ridiculous prices for a product they desperately need in the middle of a pandemic. Sims says he received a letter pointing out reports supplies were being requisitioned by the government – and is “sure the government has said that is not true and that would amount to misleading conduct”. He says specific instances of misleading contact are being referred to the TGA or the federal police in “appropriate circumstances”. I am really hoping the company hear this message and adjust their behaviour very quickly so that we get sensible pricing for all Australians as fast as possible. Sims says pharmacies are among businesses that have been price gouging, while there have also been reports of businesses demanding payments be made in cash or resold at a 20% profit. He says some reports of price gouging are being referred to the Australian federal police. Often some of these high prices are from stores you would not expect, petrol retailers, tobacconists, some convenience stores, so we are very much looking at those as well as pharmacies. We have had reports of some outlets not issuing receipts or demanding that payment be made in cash. There is only one reason why I would think outlets are doing that. And we need to remind people that it is actually illegal not to provide a receipt if asked for purchases of $75 and above so we are looking very closely at that also. We have also had reports of companies or outlets selling packs designed for wholesale and retail level. Some packs are designed, for example, to be only used at medical facilities with trained operators, but they are being broken down and sold at retail. Tot only are we looking at that but we are setting those complaints after the TGA. We have also had reports that look as if people have bought the goods at retail and then on sold them at more than 20% mark up and that is illegal under the government’s recent announcement, and we are referring anything that looks of that nature to the Australian Federal Police. ACCC president Rod Sims is up in the wake of a report released today showing “concerning” price gouging of rapid antigen tests. The ACCC is writing to a “range of chains” and individual stores to have them explain their pricing. Many of the reports are between $20 and $30, which is concerning, and then we have had reports a number of reports well above $30, which is beyond outrageous. The wholesale prices we are hearing about our anywhere between $3.95, and seven sometimes those prices go up to $11.45, but you can see when the bulk of the wholesale pricing is ... between 20 and $30 is extremely concerning, and as I say, above $30, just beyond outrageous. Queensland education minister Grace Grace is up. She confirms remote learning is resuming for year 11 and 12s from 31 January, while the rest of the state’s students will return a week later on 7 February. But instead of the school year finishing a week later, the full curriculum will be delivered in the condensed semester, meaning the year will finish as planned on 9 December. This ... is to avoid opening schools during the predicted peak of the Queensland Omicron variant and wave and allow more time for children to receive their Covid-19 vaccinations. It is important that students education is not impacted. I wish to advise that after some very constructive, helpful and productive meetings with the Queensland teachers union, unions and key stakeholders, I am satisfied that the full curriculum can now be delivered in the condensed semester. That is over the next two terms. This means that the proposed extra week at the end of the school year will not be required. Can I repeat, it will now not be required, and the year will finish as planned on December 9, 2022. If you are unvaccinated in Queensland, you are 19 times more likely to end up in hospital than someone who was triple vaccinated, Gerrard says. If you are unvaccinated, in Queensland, you are 24 times more likely to end up in an intensive care unit than someone who was triple vaccinated. Gerrard: I am very pleased to see that almost one million Queenslanders have received the third dose of vaccine, that is fantastic. I am still very concerned that there are vulnerable people, elderly people who have not received their third dose of vaccine. They may have received their second dose of the initial course, some many months ago. Often for the people ending up in intensive care, so they receive their second dose many months ago, the beginning of last year, and we know that immunity wanes particularly in their elderly and immunosuppressed. So I am particularly keen that the elderly and immunosuppressed get that third dose to prevent ending up in hospital in intensive care. Gerrard says the Gold Coast, where there has been a significant number of cases and hospitalisations, is expected to see a peak sometimes in the next week, which will be followed shortly by Brisbane. In terms of the hospital situation, we now have 702 people in a hospital, which is up from 670 for the preceding 24 hours, a significant rise in the 24 hours leading up to 7pm last night. Particularly centred on the Gold Coast, and to a slightly lesser extent Brisbane south of the river. We are expecting the Gold Coast peak sometime in the next week or so, in Brisbane will follow shortly thereafter. So looking at what happened in the Gold Coast, we will be able to predict some extent what will happen in Brisbane in just a few days. Queensland’s chief health officer Dr John Gerrard is up. He says of the seven Covid deaths reported today, two people were in their 80s and five were in their 90s. Two had not been vaccinated, five were double vaccinated and none had received a booster. Gerrard: Our thoughts are with their families today. Queensland has now reached 91.59% first dose vaccination and 88.71% second dose. Some 12.82% of five- to 11-year-olds have received a Covid-19 vaccination. D’Ath: This is extraordinary. It is one week to the day since we started the vaccination for 5- 11 -year-olds, and it is almost 13% of all of those children who are already vaccinated. Thank you to the mothers and fathers and carers, grandparents out there who have brought the little ones forward to get vaccinated. Turning to hospitalisations, and there are 702 people being treated in hospital in Queensland, and 47 in ICU, including 15 people requiring ventilation. D’Ath: So quite a jump, 50 additional people in hospitals, in our public hospitals, in the past 24 hours. Thankfully, we don’t see the corresponding increase in ICU, but we want the least amount of people needing to be hospitalised, and it comes down to getting your vaccination and your booster shot. Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath is up. Queensland has reported 15,122 new Covid cases overnight from 30,963 tests, and, sadly, seven deaths. None of today’s deaths had their booster shot. There has been no request for Australian Medical Assistance Teams (Ausmat) members in Tonga at this stage, Payne says. She says the situation is also complicated by the quarantine requirements in Tonga – the nation is currently Covid-free. Tonga also has extremely strict incoming quarantine requirements relating to Covid. It is a Covid-free country as far as I’m aware and that does complicate the movement of people as well. But we would also always consider any requests of that nature. Frankly, our Ausmat teams have done an extraordinary job through the pandemic – in Papua New Guinea, in Fiji, particularly, in addressing what have been significant Covid infection increases, and also vaccination challenges. And if we do need to send an Ausmat team to Tonga for any reason, then I have no doubt that there would be the same level of positive volunteering that I have seen right throughout Covid as well. Returning to Payne, who was asked under what circumstances she saw Djokovic returning to Australia. Payne: I’m not going to speculate on that. The prime minister has addressed that this morning. It’s official – former NSW MP Andrew Constance, who gained popularity during the 2019-2020 bushfires, has been launched as the Liberal candidate for Gilmore. Tasmania has recorded 1,037 new Covid cases - 727 of them from rapid antigen tests. There are 21 people being treated in hospital and one person in ICU. Those numbers are staying relatively stable and actually decreased by one overnight. Foreign minister Marise Payne appeared in Nowra while the NSW press conference was going on, providing an update on Tonga. She said communications were still “very restricted” and the government was seeking further information about the extent of the damage outside of Nuku’alofa. The Royal Australian Air Force are currently undertaking surveillance activity over the affected area. Payne: We will be working closely with the government of Tonga, with her royal highness, the high commissioner in Canberra of Tonga, to ensure that we can deliver the sort of support that we can provide to our Pacific family and friends. This is a very challenging time. Communications are deeply, deeply affected by the events of the volcanic eruption. It has been felt in other parts of the region. We know ourselves here in Australia, we have seen the effects on our own coastline, but in Fiji in particular as well. So we’ll continue to work through the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, myself and the minister for international development and the Pacific, Senator Zed Seselja, to ensure that we are providing all of the support that Australia possibly can, working closely with our Pacific partners to ensure that we support the people of Tonga. NSW treasurer Matt Kean says a $43m fund will be rolled out as a buffer to support the events and festivals sector impacted by public health orders. This fund is a $43 million fund that will ensure that we will under write sunk costs for the festivals that could be impacted to changes to public health orders. In the coming days, we will talk of other measures to support other sections of the economy. What we want to do is preserve the economic fabric of the economy or the fabric of the economy. So my message to the community is very clear – we will stand with businesses, with families and with workers in New South Wales to make sure that we come through this safely but also make sure that we come out the other side stronger. Victoria will provide a Covid update at 11am – the same time as Queensland. NSW treasurer Matt Kean says there is “light at the end of the tunnel” and that Covid-19 cases are expected to decrease over the next month. We’ve seen from international experience and based on the modelling that NSW Health have provided us that over the next four to six weeks, there will be a significant decrease in cases across the community. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard is up, and not mincing his words. It is almost two years since we had our first four cases. One week and one day away from the first day that we had Covid arrive on our shores. And in that time, our doctors, nurses and all of the other health staff right across our community have reached the stage of exhaustion. I just want to say to the community – it is time for all of us, if we haven’t been vaccinated, to go and get vaccinated. The latest data from NSW Health shows that in this Omicron wave, if you are not fully vaccinated, you are six times more likely to end up in hospital and 13 times more likely to end up in ICU. Six times more likely to end up in hospital, and 13 times more likely to end up in ICU. That means you are requiring the assistance of the health staff who are already exhausted. Can I just say to those people who have chosen not to get vaccinated – it’s time to give a damn about someone other than yourself. Give a damn about your community, your family and most particularly the health staff across New South Wales who you expect to be looking after you if and when you end up in our hospital system. So why are hospitalisations so high if Omicron isn’t as severe as Delta? For one, vaccination rates, Morgan says. There’s four key things I’d like to mention to you. One is that there are still people who are incompletely vaccinated. Some of whom have not had any vaccinations at all ... Some of whom are yet to get through their three doses as Dr Chant mentioned – the two doses and then the booster. And there are a small group of patients who despite having all their jabs, they do not have an immune response that’s completely ... able to render them able to fight the virus. If we think about eight million people in the state, even if there’s 1% unvaccinated, that’s 80,000 people who are still at significant risk of catching Covid and developing severe disease. Many of these are our community’s most vulnerable. Our homeless, our patients with very severe or uncontrolled poor mental health. Those living in disability support facilities, even aged care facilities, our frail and elderly ... There are some people whose immunity has waned over the last two years, and this is a particularly important point about getting boosters. Those who were vaccinated in the first wave, the vaccination, which includes our healthcare workers and our elderly patients, are now coming to the time where they need boosters and their immunity is waning. Morgan says the last time she spoke at a press conference was in the midst of the Delta wave, before vaccination rates ramped up, the curve was flattened and the wave briefly passed. “And then came Omicron”. She says though Omicron is not as severe as Delta, it still has the potential to cause a serious illness and require hospitalisation. Omicron ... so similar in so many ways to Delta – a flu-like illness, with some minor, subtle differences in the way that it causes symptoms for patients. So lots of aches and pains. Lots of headache. Lots of very sore throat. And for some people, still, severe illness. So, having Omicron does not mean that you’re just going to have a cold. Omicron, as a variant of the Covid-19 virus, has the potential to cause very severe illness, just like Delta. And those at particular risk of getting very sick from Omicron are the same group who were at risk from Delta. Those who are incompletely vaccinated, those with underlying health complaints or conditions and those who are frail – and that includes our elderly community. It is true that most people who catch Omicron do not get so sick as to need my care or the care of my colleagues in the intensive care unit. Most people – proportionally, most people do not get as sick. But it is so much more contagious than the Delta variant, the sheer number of people who get Covid is enormous in comparison. Dr Lucy Morgan, a lung specialist, is speaking in NSW. She is justifiably tired. I was in the hospital about 1am this morning. And about every hour between 1am and 6am, I got another call about another patient sick enough to be admitted to my hospital with Covid illness. So I am a bit tired ... I’ve been working in this pandemic for two years. We’ve got really remarkably sophisticated treatments for Covid-19 now. We’ve got extraordinary vaccine programs and we’ve got one of the most vaccinated populations in the world. But we are exhausted. And in responding to the unprecedented demands, the thousands of patients presenting to our hospitals every day, our capacity to manage everything else has also really changed. In the short-term, that’s OK. But in the long-term, and it’s two years now, this is bad. It’s really hard on us and it’s really hard on the people of New South Wales because this is leading to some delayed diagnosis, some longer waiting times for everything and a huge burden on our community as we try to keep everything ticking over. This is why every little thing that we can do to reduce the incident of severe disease from Covid makes just such a difference. Turning to the breakdown of Delta cases v Omicron cases, more than 95% of samples taken in the past two days from a private pathology provider were of the Omicron variant, Chant says. I thought that I might give an update on Omicron versus Delta and what we think that the transmission of the relative strain variants is in the community. So data from January 16, and I just want to acknowledge the private pathology provider who has been sharing sequential data as I’ve indicated before. This is based on the fact that the machines that that provider uses detects the S-gene dropout, which is characteristic of Omicron. It shows that over 95% of samples taken over the recent two days are of the Omicron variant. I would also say that I’m aware of the social media rumours and misinformation on the website, particularly targeting parents of children, but also pregnant women and also our Aboriginal communities. Can I just urge everyone to go to a trusted source of information. Don’t read or engage in those social media posts. Talk to your GP, your pharmacist, or go online and look at the Government websites. Chant passes her condolences on to the families of 17 people who passed away – 12 men and five women. One person was aged in their 60s, four were in their 70s, nine were in their 80s and three were in their 90s. Chant: Can I just re-emphasise that you’re particularly at risk of severe disease from Covid if you’re over 65 or have underlying chronic conditions impacting the lung, heart, kidneys, liver. If you have diabetes. Or if you have conditions that impact your immune system – what we call immunocompromised. You are at risk of severe disease. And I can’t urge you more strongly – please come forward and get your booster. Only one of the 17 people that died had been boosted. We know that for the Omicron variant, having that booster is critical to upping your level of protection. Chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant is up, breaking down vaccination rates. She says 13.1% of five to 11-year-olds have already received a first dose: Across New South Wales, we continue to see that vaccination coverage rate increase. We’ve got 95.2% of people aged 16 and over have received their first dose of the Covid vaccine. 93.8% have received two doses. The 12-to 15-year-olds are 82.1%. So we’ve seen that first dose come up and the second dose is now at 78.3% have received the two doses. And of the 5-11-year-olds, we have 13.1% have received their first dose of the Covid vaccine, and that’s really quite amazing given we’ve just opened that program. An “event saver program” for NSW events and festivals that haven’t been able to go ahead due to public health orders will be announced today, Perrottet says. The support that we’ve provided in the past over the last two years will continue to be provided during this next wave. We’ve also said that we put people before the budget. That has been the success of our approach here in New South Wales. We want to make sure ... that we keep people safe. We keep society open and we keep people in work so that they can provide for their families. That’s been a success in the past. We’ve got through those challenges. And we’ll get through the next challenge that comes our way as well. Perrottet says of 200 people in ICU with Covid in NSW, 50% are unvaccinated. Some 47% of people eligible for a booster shot have now received their jab. It’s clear from those figures in ICU ... that boosters and vaccinations are key to keeping you and your family safe. And that’s what sets New South Wales apart from anywhere in the world and Australia apart from anywhere in the world, and is why our response has been so strong in the face of this ongoing pandemic. Having one of the highest vaccination rates in the world has meant that we’ve been able to have one of the lowest death rates, whilst at the same time keeping society and the economy open. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is speaking now, thanking “everybody across the state” for sacrifices and efforts made during this “testing two years”. He says endless lockdowns are not an option: It is two years that has tested our resilience as a people. But we have continued to make the efforts and sacrifices that have kept our state strong. That have kept people safe and have, in the main, kept society open. It is a difficult time, not just here in New South Wales and around the country, but around the world. But the efforts that people have made have ensured that we’ve been able to move through this pandemic in a very strong way. And whilst I accept and appreciate that people across New South Wales and across our country are anxious and nervous at this difficult time, if we look at the past and if we look at the efforts that we’ve made and the strength that we’ve had coming through this pandemic, I know that we will be able to push through this next wave as well. The best way through ... it to push ... What we can’t have are never-ending lockdowns because that will result in a pandemic that becomes a never-ending story. “Shadow lockdown”, “defacto lockdown”, “Clayton’s lockdown” – take your pick. The economy is struggling in many parts of the country, we know, but the challenge is getting the proof, apart from the obvious empty or closed shops in any shopping centre. ABS data from last year hasn’t caught up with Omicron. Enter Business NSW, a lobby group at ground zero in the “let it rip” state. A survey of 2,000 businesses in three days earlier this month found that 40% said “they don’t have enough cashflow for the next three months”, according to Business NSW chief executive Daniel Hunter. “Short-term targeted support for those businesses and staff that are highly impacted is a must,” Hunter said, touching on the key difference from the lockdowns of 2020-21 – the lack of government help this time around: Unlike previous surveys throughout 2021, where business owners felt the next quarter would get better, that isn’t the case this time as there are no government support packages in place. The start of the year is an obvious time to review plans or make new ones, and that’s being hampered, at least among many of those surveyed. Hunter: [C]rucial decisions around staffing and capital expenditure have been put on the backburner, at a time when business owners normally make those important decisions. On a positive note, Hunter said that if businesses were able to stay open the revenue impacts from Omicron “are far less than for midway through last year, showing that business owners have pivoted their operations and are in a stronger position than the same time last year”. Novak Djokovic has been officially deported from the Australian Open Twitter page: The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has released a statement citing “significant concerns” about the price of rapid antigen tests, with reports of some smaller retailers charging more than $70 a test. Wholesale costs range between $3.95 and $11.45 a test. Initial analysis from the ACCC including more than 1,800 reports from members of the public since Christmas reflects the continued “significant community interest” in the pricing of rapid antigen tests. Currently, the prices reported are higher than in the initial days of reporting. Pharmacies make up almost half of total complaints. ACCC chair Rod Sims: At the extreme end, we have received reports or seen media coverage of tests costing up to $500 for two tests through online marketplaces, and over $70 per test through convenience stores, service stations and independent supermarkets, which is clearly outrageous. There are several businesses that have repeatedly come to our notice thanks to the information provided by the public. We are asking those businesses to urgently explain the prices they are charging. The ACCC has written to suppliers and retailers about their costs and retail sales prices and is “considering the responses” received so far. The ACCC has received over 1,800 reports from consumers about rapid antigen tests since 25 December 2021, rising after our media statement earlier this month, and now averaging close to 150 reports a day. In Queensland, health minister Yvette D’Ath, education minister Grace Grace and chief health officer Dr John Gerrard will hold a press conference at 10am local time. It’s likely they will be discussing the delayed return to school for students. A New Zealand Defence Force aircraft has left Auckland on a reconnaissance flight to assess damage in Tonga, around 36 hours after a mammoth volcanic blast caused a tsunami, AAP reports. Communication to the remote Pacific nation remains limited following Saturday night’s eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano, though power is being restored. In the absence of confirmed reports of death or harm, New Zealand officials report coastal damage from storm surges in the wake of the blast. Prime minister Jacinda Ardern said boulders and boats had been washed ashore on Tongatapu, the largest island and home to the capital, Nuku’alofa, around 65 kilometres south of the volcano: Seeing some of those waves come in and peeling back fencelines and structures, you can see the force of those surges. Everyone just wants to establish how wide scale that impact has been. We want to be in Tonga and on the ground as soon as we are possible able to be. The blast also caused a tsunami across the Pacific Ocean, sending large waves to Japan, the US and Peru, while a sonic boom could be heard in nearby Pacific nations. Pacific Peoples minister Aupito William Sio said key members of Tonga’s royal family were safe and well. Volcanic ash in the air and on the runway in Tonga prevented an aerial mission in the immediate aftermath of the blast. Just prior to 9am NZDT on Monday morning, a Defence Force Orion aircraft took off from Auckland’s Whenuapai base on a mission to investigate further. The aircraft will also carry water, food and medical supplies. Foreign Minister Nanaia Mahuta said 80% of power had been restored however internet connection and communications remained an issue. University of Auckland volcanologist Shane Cronin said the eruption was likely to be the world’s biggest for three decades. He wrote in the Conversation: Our research into these earlier eruptions suggests this is one of the massive explosions the volcano is capable of producing roughly every thousand years. We found evidence of two huge past eruptions ... and then used radiocarbon dates to show that big caldera eruptions occur about ever 1000 years, with the last one at AD1100. There have been some 259 Covid deaths in Victoria and NSW in the past week. New South Wales case numbers are in, and there have been 29,504 new Covid-19 cases recorded from rapid antigen tests and PCR tests. It is important to note, though, that the 11,858 positive rapid antigen tests were from the previous seven-day reporting period, and were not necessarily detected in the past 24 hours. NSW Health says: Of the 13,682 positive RAT results, 11,204 of these positive tests were from the previous seven days. Please note there may be some cases included in these numbers where people have reported positive RATs on multiple days and/or where people have also had a positive PCR test during the same reporting period. Sadly, there have been 17 more lives lost. There are 2,776 people being treated in hospital with Covid-19 including 203 requiring intensive care. ICU numbers have jumped by 12 overnight, while hospitalisations have jumped by 126. Victoria’s numbers are in, and there have been 22,429 new Covid cases detected, roughly half from PCR tests and half from rapid antigen tests. Sadly, there have been six more deaths. There are 1,229 people being treated in hospital with Covid, including 129 in intensive care. Intensive care numbers are relatively stable, while hospitalisations have jumped by 115. Lockdown is worse than Omicron, Frydenberg says. If you survive it. Labor MP Andrew Leigh appeared on 2SM Radio this morning, talking, among other things, Djokovic and anti-vaxxers. The fact that it’s led to his being kicked out of the country is a huge embarrassment for Tennis Australia. It’s rift in our relationship with Serbia, and it’s utterly unnecessary. Of course, Labor supports the decision to not allow him into Australia, but that should have been done by not granting him the visa in the first place. You say that one anti-vaxxer can’t enter the country because he’s going to be spreading misinformation, but then Scott Morrison just isn’t willing to crack down on the anti-vaxxers in his own ranks who are causing immense problems, particularly in Indigenous communities ... talking to people about the extent of vaccine misinformation flying through Indigenous communities – this stuff isn’t just a parlour game, it literally costs lives. So taking a strong stance on anti-vaxxers is to be welcomed, but Scott Morrison needs to do it consistently. 10am in NSW. ACTU president Michele O’Neil joined ABC News Breakfast earlier in anticipation of the unions meeting to be held today. She told the program there was a “monumental work crisis” hitting the nation, with a large number of essential workers sick and unable to go to work. The issues that need to be resolved to keep workers safe at work include the free and accessibility of RATs ... we wrote to the prime minister more than a week ago now saying that urgently what was needed was those free and accessible RATs, improved access to better masks, to make sure people were safe ... access to paid pandemic leave which means looking at the definition of “close contact” because we all know that many people spend more time at work in close contact with people than they do in their home, but they’re excluded at the moment from getting assistance, income support, because the definition is so ridiculously narrow and we have also called for extra support for workers and business so get through what is an unofficial lockdown. All that fell on deaf ears. Meanwhile, dozens of unions will hold an emergency meeting today in response to a “workforce crisis” and concerned over increased transmission in a range of sectors. ACTU president Sally McManus says a “record level” of essential workers are sick and unable to work: This has led to an overwhelming of our health systems and a crippling of our supply chains. Some employers are responding by pressuring Covid-positive people to work, others have not changed safety measures despite the more infectious nature of Omicron, workers are sick, many now without income and there is a serious lack of national leadership. Too many people are being put in harm’s way and the failure of the federal government to secure RATs means we do not have the tools to keep ourselves and the community safe. We have offered to work with the Morrison government as we did in 2020, but this offer has gone unanswered. We have called on the government to provide the immediate support working people need, such as free RATs, better masks, proper definitions of close contact and support for businesses and workers in the unofficial lockdown. These requests have also fallen on deaf ears, just like our requests to the federal government to secure a supply of RATs six months ago. Keneally was asked about the light that has been shone on the 33 refugees held at the Park Hotel for more than nine years, where Djokovic was briefly detained. There is a wafer-thin difference between Labor and the federal government at the moment on border protection when it comes to refugees. Will Labor change their position on what should happen to those men? Keneally: Labor has been saying for months now that if these refugees are able to live in the community, they should do so. In fact, we agreed with Peter Dutton when he said that it was more cost-effective to have these people living in the community while the outcome of their cases are determined. It is really now up to Karen Andrews to why that’s not happening. Labor’s home affairs spokeswoman Kristina Keneally appeared on ABC News Breakfast earlier this morning discussing the fallout of the Djokovic decision. She said Labor “welcomed” the decision but prime minister Scott Morrison oughtn’t “pat himself on the back”. What we have here is another example of mismanagement during this pandemic. Mr Morrison never should have granted Novak Djokovic that visa in the first place. This is a series of unforced errors on Mr Morrison’s part and it’s a mess on our borders. We are now an international embarrassment thanks to Mr Morrison’s bungles. There are so many points at which the Morrison government stuffed this up. They gave him a visa back on 18 November without working out whether or not he met the medical exemption. They didn’t do anything in Dubai. In Dubai, we have Australian Border Force officers who are supposed to prevent things like this from happening. This has been a monumental bungle at our borders by the Morrison government. They want to run around and pat themselves on the back about it, they deserve a kick up the backside. The deputy head of mission for the high commission of Tonga in Canberra, Curtis Tuihalangingie, has appeared on ABC News Breakfast, warning the situation in Tonga “is not stable yet” but there had been no deaths reported so far. We have limited access to information and we don’t have a direct communication to Tonga at the moment, but we receive information through the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and according to what we have, it’s minimal damages and no deaths yet. So no deaths that has been reported and we hope that it will continue on to be that direction. We spoke to some of our families and relatives and also to our Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Tonga just before the communication was down and I tell you – it was unbelievable and they were not able to explain to us the noise and the sound and what happened at the time ... it’s something that they were not able to explain, the sound it’s huge and they never heard such sound and this is the first time for, I think, most of people in Tonga to experience such a disaster. In New Zealand, a Royal New Zealand Air Force Orion plane has left Auckland this morning for Tonga to assist initial damage in the area and low-lying islands. On 2GB, Morrison said he had spoken to prime minister Jacinda Ardern and was working alongside New Zealand to get support in to the area. He said Tonga was “part of our Pacific family” but an ash cloud had made it very challenging to enter the area. Morrison says he’s made it “very clear the rules are rules”. For our government, ensuring the integrity of our borders has always been an extremely high priority ... and it’s not our first rodeo ... we’ve got experienced ministers and a government that is very experienced in dealing with these issues ... the government is able to ensure we can put protections at the border and they can’t be overturned by someone seeking to run it. Asked whether there is a double standard over concerns Djokovic’s anti-vax stance would whip up anti-vax sentiment in Australia, despite Coalition MPs spreading anti-vax messages at their leisure, Morrison says two different issues are being conflated. In Australia, you’re an Australian, you’re a citizen, you’re a resident, you can be here and you can express your views. If you’re someone coming from overseas and there are conditions for you to enter this country, well, you have to comply with them. So if you’re an Australian and you’re anti-vax it’s no threat to the nation’s morals, but if you’re anti-vax and foreign you’re a threat to public health. Prime minister Scott Morrison has appeared on 2GB this morning, confirming Djokovic didn’t comply with entry requirements ... but that is not why his visa was cancelled. Australia has very clear rules and Australians have been following those rules ... we apply our rules equally in this country and there was a very clear message sent – he wanted to come, he wasn’t vaccinated, well you’ve got to have a valid medical exemption and neither of those were in place. People make their own choices, and those choices meant you couldn’t come here and play tennis. Asked whether he should have been granted an exemption in the first place, Morrison said “no”. The idea someone could come and not follow those rules just was not on ... he was wrong, simple as that ... we didn’t give him an exemption, the federal government gave him no such exemption. To be clear, Djokovic did enter with an exemption from Tennis Australia and the Victorian government. Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce has appeared on Sunrise this morning alongside member for Hunter Joel Fitzgibbon, chatting, you guessed it, Novak Djokovic. Joyce says he’s “happy we came to a conclusion”. And that is that Mr Djokovic would be asked to leave, it is in the remit of the minister to do that, the judges reviewed the process and found the process the minister followed was legal. But to be quite frank, I am on the same page as Mr Djokovic. We’ll move on. And the things I will move on to are making sure to keep food on the shelves of supermarkets as ... people have been interested in the story, it’s been a ... soap opera. But now people are going to focus on the tennis, watch the tennis and also focus on looking after them and one of the big issues right now is making sure we keep food on the shelves at the grocery store. Friendly reminder of a jubilant Joyce in 2015: Asked how soon rapid antigen tests will become more widely available, Hunt says 5.6 million rapid antigen tests have been delivered to aged care, and 70 million will come in over the “coming weeks and months”. Hunt says “you always keep adapting” to new variants, and hopes NSW and the ACT’s peaks are plateauing: The frequent but not inevitable course of a virus is they become more infectious but less severe, and that’s clearly what’s happened with the Omicron variant ... but it’s not a given, it’s a general course with many major viruses and this is how pandemics burn themselves out over time ... but we’ll move on all the advice we have on having a pandemic to an endemic, where it becomes less severe ... like the flu has. Health minister Greg Hunt has told ABC Radio National on “multiple occasions” the government has said they disagree with anybody anywhere with an anti-vaxxer sentiment – including, one would presume, members of cabinet. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews has appeared on Sunrise this morning, discussing all things Djokovic. She said “at all times, the government has acted in the best interests of Australians”. I understand that there is a level of confusion out there in relation to issues that go towards visa application processes, but let me be clear, applying for a visa and being granted a visa does not automatically give you the right to enter Australia. You also have to meet the entry requirements that apply at that time, so I don’t have any concerns with the process that was undertaken in terms of assessing the application for a visa, but we also have in place a number of entry requirements, so anyone who is coming into Australia firstly has to have a valid visa but they also have to meet the entry requirements and that was the issue in the first instance. Asked whether Djokovic may be let back in within three years (currently, a ban is in place preventing him from returning to Australia within that timeframe), Andrews said: The three-year band does apply and will be in place but it can be dealt with at some stage in the future but that is very hypothetical and a long way off. In Tonga, it is hoped there haven’t been mass casualties as a result of the volcano and tsunami, with a surveillance flight from Australia due to leave ASAP. On to economics, and Frydenberg is asked about a Business NSW survey that says 40% of 2,000 businesses don’t have enough cash flow to get through the next three months. He says the Omicron variant is “another challenge”. It’s a new phase of the virus and it’s a reminder that the pandemic is far from over. So it is affecting consumer spending. It is affecting consumer and business confidence. And we’ve seen a large number of workers who are absent from the workforce and that’s put real pressure on our supply chains. Now, the government has in place a number of measures at both federal and state level to assist businesses and to ensure that the supply chains keep going. On the emergency unions meeting to be held today, Frydenberg says the government has been working with health professionals, the AHPPC and the chief health officer on the changed rules to isolation requirements for close contacts in a range of sectors. We need to keep food on the shelves. We need the trucks to continue to ensure the deliveries. We need the abattoirs to keep working. Indeed, we need water and energy and telecommunications and other essential services to keep going. We need our schools to open at term one and to stay open ... so the economy is a complex ecosystem and every bit is connected to the other. And we’re trying to balance here a series of objectives – not just the health objective, but also the economic objective. And what is absolutely clear from the health advice is that while Omicron is highly transmissible, it is less severe and people such as myself can have the virus but not be hospitalised and can get through it after those days required in isolation. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg is back in action after being diagnosed with Covid-19. He is appearing on ABC News Breakfast now, “on the mend” though acknowledging it “wasn’t a walk in the park”: It’s no teddy bear picnic. I had the common symptoms, cold sweats and headaches and various aches and pains. But it did pass and you know, it lingers a little bit – the fatigue. But fortunately, Omicron is 75% less severe compared to Delta. And fortunately, you know, I had the vaccinations and the booster shot as well. Asked about the Serbian president’s accusations of “torture” of Novak Djokovic, Frydenberg says it was a “legal process” and “rules are rules”: It doesn’t matter whether you’re Novak Djokovic and the number one tennis player in the world or Betty from Utah. If you’re unvaccinated and you come to Australia, you need to adhere to what are the Atagi guidelines, and the other conditions that are set. Now, Greg Hunt in a very clear letter explicitly set out what the conditions were to Tennis Australia back in late November for tennis players to come to Australia who were unvaccinated. Now, Novak Djokovic did not meet those conditions. The ultimate decision was left to the immigration minister, Alex Hawke. He made that decision and that was upheld unanimously by a full court of the federal court. And that’s where it stands. But no one is bigger than the Australian Open. Certainly no one is bigger than the pandemic or no one is above the rules that we have in place at our borders that are helped to keep us safe through this pandemic. Good morning, After 11 tumultuous days, world tennis No 1 Novak Djokovic has been deported after the full bench of the federal court upheld the Morrison government’s decision to cancel his visa on the grounds of health and good order. Djokovic was due to play his first match this evening but instead he flew out of the country late last night, bound for Dubai. Caitlin Cassidy here to take you through today’s news, and while Djokovic may no longer be with us, the fallout continues. Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić has lashed out at Australia, arguing the tennis star was treated like a “mass murderer” while in the country and was “tortured and tormented” for his refusal to be vaccinated. Djokovic said he was “extremely disappointed” by the decision and felt “uncomfortable” the focus had been on him in the past few weeks instead of tennis. Meanwhile, more than 30 union groups have called an emergency meeting today to discuss ongoing workforce and supply chain shortages hitting the nation. They are calling on the government to make rapid antigen tests free and accessible in the wake of eased close contact definitions for a range of sectors. ACTU president Sally McManus says the current system has forced businesses to compete for the tests. And mask mandates have been reintroduced in Perth and Peel from today as Western Australian authorities warn they may not be able to contain an Omicron cluster in the state. Five new Covid-19 cases were announced yesterday, with a number of exposure sites listed throughout the city. There’s much to get through, so let’s dive in.I met this woman in Machina, in Yobe state, when I was on assignment in northern Nigeria 2020. It had taken us seven hours to get there – it’s right on the border with Niger – and it was already late afternoon, early evening. We were waiting for people to come and collect water from a solar-powered water pump when I saw her: this extremely beautiful Fulani woman. I was particularly drawn to the marks on her face. I knew Fulani women always like to look good, but it was really beautiful to see up close. There was a bit of a language barrier as I don’t speak Fula and she didn’t speak English or Hausa, but she agreed to have her photo taken. Because it was 5.30–6pm, the light was soft and although it was a very hot region close to the desert – I remember at the end of the trip a lot of dust had got into my camera – it wasn’t too hot. I just needed to find the best spot, where the light wasn’t too harsh but was just enough to highlight her skin and bring out the features of her face. We were surrounded by people, lots of children: they were looking and smiling. Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly: One of the things that occurred to me recently was that, as a photojournalist, I am a timekeeper. Because every time that I click, I’m recording a moment that can never come back. I’m freezing a particular time that can never recur. When I saw this woman I felt: she is too beautiful not to be photographed! But it’s not just about the aesthetics. It’s also about capturing her in that moment, and preserving it; saying that this particular tribe, or these people, used to live in Machina, and even if that might change in years to come at least I have this document, this visual proof, to show that this person was there, that these people existed. That’s the part of me that wants to document my country, to build an archive of images. It’s not always straightforward: Nigeria is a big place and I do a lot of travelling. Sometimes people cannot understand it. One of the things I get told is: “You mean to say that as a woman you just travelled to come and take pictures? How is that possible?” Sometimes people genuinely think I must have an ulterior motive. Most are very welcoming, but there will be one or two people who continue to question. But I make sure that I’m as transparent as possible. I say, look on my website. This is my homepage. This is how the images are used. I’m not a spy! Etinosa Yvonne was speaking to Lizzy Davies. Yvonne, 32, is a self-taught Nigerian documentary photographer and visual artist based in Abuja. The primary focus of her work is the exploration of themes related to the human condition and social injusticeSmall, bluish-grey and speckled, it would be easy to overlook the marbled crayfish. Except for the fact it is likely to be coming to a pond or river near you soon – if it is not already there. The all-female freshwater crustacean has become a focus of fascination for scientists in recent years, due to its unique ability among decapods – the family that includes shrimps, crabs and lobsters – to clone itself and quickly adapt to new environments, as well as the fact that it has spread exponentially. The marbled crayfish was first recognised in 1995, when a biology student bought a bag of crayfish – sold to him as “Texas crayfish” – from American traders at a pet fair in Frankfurt. After becoming a burden to their new owner due to their inexplicably rapid rate of reproduction, he distributed them to friends who, in turn, dumped them in rivers, lakes and toilets, from where they spread rapidly, throughout Germany, much of mainland Europe and most profusely, the island of Madagascar, home to unique but extremely delicate freshwater ecosystems. When Frank Lyko, a professor of epigenetics at the German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), first came across the creatures, referred to as marmorkrebs, he was astonished by their ability to reproduce clonally from a single cell, like cancer tumours, and saw them as an ideal model for research. “All marbled crayfish share the same genome,” he says on a video call from his office in Heidelberg. “But they also adapt to various different environments, and do that in a hurry, which makes them scientifically remarkable and similar to a tumour, which also adapts to its environment.” Lyko led the ambitious genome study that established the extraordinary fact that all marbled crayfish originate from a single foundational female. They reproduce without sex through parthenogenesis. In 2015, he gave the all-female crustaceans their species name of Procambarus virginalis. In the course of his research, Lyko recalls driving to a lake about 15 minutes from his lab with his students. Donning head torches and waders and standing ankle deep in the water, “we waited until it got dark, then suddenly they emerged in their hundreds and thousands”, he says. “With a hand net, we caught them from behind and put them in buckets. It was so exciting. Soon after that, we started experimenting with eating them and found they were quite tasty.” ‘The more we eat, the better’ In Germany, where the marbled crayfish have invaded lakes and rivers, authorities have adopted a strict approach to them. Klaus Hidde, a retired bank clerk turned hobby fisher, was tasked by the Berlin senate’s environment department last year with setting traps for the crayfish, which have been found in two lakes on Berlin’s western fringes. Not only are the crayfish in danger of killing off native species, “but they can also carry the so-called crayfish plague”, he says, referring to a fungal disease that more or less wiped out what had been a hugely successful European crayfish market 150 years ago. Hidde was first contracted by the department four years ago to catch armies of red swamp crayfish that had broken out of ponds in parks, including the central Tiergarten, after heavy rain, and were found scuttling through the Brandenburg Gate. “In one year alone, I caught 42,000 of them. I was seen as a bit of a saviour, even if I say it myself,” he says. He could get €13 per kg of swamp crayfish, and received a €7 top-up from the senate. Berlin restaurants snapped up the crustaceans, serving them up to diners as the novel “Berlin lobster”. Hidde is earning less for the marbled crayfish because, he believes, officials are “wary of creating demand” for the cloned animals, which could promote their breeding and exacerbate the problem. “I may give up, unless they’re prepared to make it worth my while,” he says, admitting he had personally yet to develop a taste for the meat. “I prefer to eat gambas [pawns] when I go on holiday to Spain.” Lukas Bosch, the co-founder of Holycrab!, a biodiversity startup, hopes the marbled crayfish’s nutritional value will tempt Germans looking for sustainable alternatives to intensively farmed meat. The company is turning invasive species – from raccoons, Egyptian geese and wild boar to other crayfish, such as Chinese mitten crabs – into culinary delicacies, teaming up with top Berlin chefs to appeal to the ecological sensibilities of German diners. They have already sold the meaty tails of marbled crayfish on bread rolls and are experimenting with turning the animal’s high-value protein into rich fish stews and stocks. “As these crayfish have no natural predators, our thinking is, why can’t Berliners take on that role?” he says. “Rather than giving up meat, in this case, the more of it we eat the better.” ‘We need to learn to live alongside it’ Ranja Adriantsoa, a conservation biologist, first came across the marbled crayfish in Madagascar as a freshwater ecology student, around 2010. She delicately lifts one out of a tank in her laboratory, around 12cm long from the tip of its head to its tail. As it wildly waves its antennae and clawed legs, she points at its marbled carapace and small appendages on the underside of its tail where the highly fecund animal “can store between about 200 and 700 eggs”. As it reproduces around four times a year – without needing to mate – one female has the potential to create a population of several million genetically identical females. When Adriantsoa first went to work for the department of invasive species control at the University of Antananarivo in the Madagascan capital, the emphasis was on stopping the spread of the marbled crayfish, which are highly destructive, eating fish larvae, displacing native crayfish and destroying the nation’s staple food crop, rice. “But over time that perception has changed,” Adriantsoa says. “Let’s be clear, you would not want to deliberately import these but the fact that they’re here and established, the attitude is now how to live with them.” In collaboration with conservation scientist Julia Jones, a professor at Bangor University in Wales, Adriantsoa and an international female-driven team of scientists launched the Perfect Invader to look at the impact of the marbled crayfish on human health. They found the crayfish can be an important source of cheap, high-quality protein for Malagasy, one of the poorest populations in the world where about 42% of children are affected by stunted growth. The research also looks at the potential for the marbled crayfish to help tackle the transmission of schistosomiasis, which affects an estimated 290 million people worldwide, including millions in Madagascar. The hypothesis is that the crayfish prey on the freshwater snails that host the parasitic flatworms that cause the acute and chronic disease. Back in Germany, working with the country’s largest research institute, the Helmholtz Association, Lyko is engaged in a pilot project to turn the marbled crayfish’s shells, which are high in chitin, a biopolymer, into biodegradable plastics. “You will see the first ever crayfish drinking straws this month,” he says. Jones says that the marbled crayfish have taught her and other scientists to see “the big picture”. “While we need to understand the negative ecological impact of the marbled crayfish in Madagascar, we also need to recognise and understand people having to learn to live intelligently alongside this crayfish – it’s there, there’s no getting rid of it,” she says. She was at pains to stress that all measures should be taken to stop marbled crayfish from arriving anywhere else. The animals are banned in the EU and UK, though experts say some are likely held illegally in aquariums. “They are spreading fast – they were in Poland the last time I looked, and will be in the UK eventually,” says Jones. “I think the marbled crayfish is likely to go down in history with other famous invasive species like the zebra mussel, the cane toad or the grey squirrel. “If you’re reading about this for the first time, you can be sure you’ll be hearing a lot more about the marbled crayfish.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and features • This article was amended on 18 January 2022 to refer to people from Madagascar as Malagasy, not Madagascans. We also mistakenly quoted Julia Jones as saying, “I think the marbled crab is likely to go down in history … ”. We, of course, meant marbled crayfish.At 8.06pm on Sunday, the Australian Open issued a statement. “Tennis Australia respects the decision of the federal court,” it read. “As per grand slam rules the No 1 position in the draw has been filled by a lucky loser. The updated schedule for Monday 17 January can be viewed at ausopen.com. We look forward to a competitive and exciting Australian Open 2022 and wish all players the best of luck.” It took tournament organisers 134 minutes to tweet these 58 words of nothingness – the antithesis of the past week’s drama. Novak Djokovic’s bid to have his visa restored was officially dismissed at 5.52pm and the world No 1 would already have been at Melbourne airport before the governing body publicly acknowledged he was indeed leaving the country. The communication might as well have come by carrier pigeon. Perhaps that was the objective? Ignore it and it will go away. Pretend that the federal court had not just taken the extraordinary step of sitting on a Sunday in January – and broadcasting itself on YouTube – to solve a scarcely conceivable scandal it had helped create, then quietly sign off. Wave a perfunctory goodbye, moonwalk out of the room and stroll down to Melbourne Park as if the first grand slam of 2022 has not been completely overshadowed by an ethical, legal and diplomatic hot mess. Djokovic has left, but the hangover of his temporary presence is being keenly felt on day one of the tournament, and the wider ramifications will endure for some time yet, in an Australian election year and amid concerns from migration law experts that his expulsion sets a dangerous precedent for more deportations on political grounds. Djokovic himself has become not only the unwitting personification of anti-vaccination sentiment, but also of Australia’s appalling mistreatment of asylum seekers and refugees, and its confusing and sometimes contradictory pandemic response. When it comes specifically to the standing of the country’s highest-profile international sporting event, Tennis Australia still has questions to answer beyond its brief statement. Chief among them is the role of its chief executive, Craig Tiley, who, by seeking to find a loophole to cater for an unvaccinated player chasing a record 21st grand slam title, has made Djokovic bigger than the tournament Tiley directs. Even now, the political finger-pointing from the parties involved means some of the facts associated with the case remain in dispute. What we do know is that the medical exemption which was granted to Djokovic and approved by separate Tennis Australia and Victorian government expert panels was not endorsed by the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi). Tiley had been informed by the federal government in writing more than once that a recent Covid infection – conveniently contracted by Djokovic in mid-December – was not an acceptable reason not to be fully vaccinated when attempting to gain quarantine-free entry into Australia. In late November, the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, stated in a letter that “people who contracted Covid within six months and seek to enter Australia from overseas, and have not received two doses of a TGA approved or recognised vaccine … are not considered fully vaccinated”. Granted, Tennis Australia pushed for more clarity on the sometimes abstruse Atagi guidelines and also sought the help of home affairs to avoid players being turned around at the airport if they had the wrong documentation. It spent months attempting to negotiate the complexities of Australia’s federal and state bureaucracies and their differing policies. Ultimately, in the end, it took a gamble. “Primarily because there is much contradictory information the whole time, every single week we were talking to home affairs, we were talking to all parts of government to ensure that one, we were doing the right thing, and the right process with these exemptions,” Tiley told Nine three days after Djokovic was detained at the airport. “The conflicting information, and the contradictory information we received, was because of the changing environment. We are in a challenging environment.” These are the known facts, but facts do not always measure mood, and on this point, Tiley misread the room. By setting up the exemption process in the first place, Tennis Australia co-opted an issue that is bigger than sport. The move invalidated both the Victorian government’s vaccine mandate for all professional athletes and the Victorian people’s challenging experiences with the pandemic. The incensed public reaction to Djokovic’s ill-fated Instagram post demonstrates how much this was the case. These personal hardships also raised questions one year ago about the virtues of holding the 2021 tournament, which welcomed international players and their entourages despite Australia’s hard border closures. This latest blow comes with a Djokovic-flavoured kick. Blame could be directed at a number of parties with varying degrees of severity depending on which side of this polarising affair you sit. Tiley does not escape such scrutiny – and his role is now threatened. In recent months he spoke regularly with Djokovic and has been open about this dialogue. By doing so he has, at the very least, constructed the external perception – whether true or not – that the medical exemption process was effectively a “Djokovic process” that would not have been established for lower-profile players alone. For many tennis fans, this is offensive. For tennis players, it must feel worse. The result is a long-lasting blemish on the year’s opening major, eroding a glowing reputation Tiley himself has spent decades building. He painstakingly earned a great deal of trust and respect over the years but accusations of favouritism have now spoiled that good faith.Shannan Gilbert’s grave in Amityville cemetery lies eight miles from where she went missing in May 2010 after visiting a client at Oak Beach, a spit of sand dotted with holiday homes on New York’s Long Island, three miles short of Gilgo Beach, where her remains were found eight months later. Gilbert’s final resting place, with a simple headstone at the back of the cemetery inscribed with her dates – 24 October 1986 – 13 December 2011 – speaks to an enduring mystery of how she, along with 10 or more other women, mostly sex workers who advertised on Craigslist, ended up dead along the same stretch of scrubby barrier marshes more than a decade ago. 13 December is not the date Gilbert went missing. A year and seven months earlier – 1 May 2010 – she’d made a frantic 22-minute call to 911 from the area and reportedly said: “They are trying to kill me.” She knocked on two neighbor’s doors, before disappearing back into the night. Three other 911 calls were made that night. One call was from Gilbert’s client Joseph Brewer and two were from the neighbors. During the search for Gilbert, police found four more sets of remains later identified as Melissa Barthelemy, Maureen Brainard-Barnes, Megan Waterman, and Amber Lynn Costello. The Gilgo Four, as they became known, had been discarded in a similar fashion, 500ft apart, each swathed or covered in burlap sack cloth. Six more bodies were found in the same area at about the same time. Their dates of death, too, speak to the uncertainty that pervades the case of the Long Island serial killer. Police initially said they believed Gilbert drowned by accident, which few believed, and a medical examiner’s autopsy proved inconclusive. In the 11 years since, Gilgo Beach has become synonymous with violent death and law enforcement failures rooted in incompetence or, worse, institutional disregard. But now, it seems, concrete steps are finally being taken to try to solve the mystery once more. Last week Rodney Harrison, the new police commissioner of Suffolk county, inherited the case – which has become one of the most notorious unsolved crimes in the US. It goes back to 1996, when body parts of the earliest-known victims were found on the shores of Fire Island, a holiday destination. It was Harrison who said he would release Gilbert’s 911 call “as long as it doesn’t impede the investigation”. Last week, Harrison went further, saying a ring of people could be possibly connected to the murders. “I’m feeling confident that we’re getting closer to making an arrest,” he told a local news outlet. If that’s correct, it will have taken Harrison about two weeks to move a case forwards that hadn’t advanced much in 11 years. And that raises several questions, not least why would it require a police commissioner from New York City to get things going. Among the theories that have circulated was that police did not call in the FBI because they had elements of their own to hide. But Harrison said that linking the Gilgo murder investigation to local police misconduct was a disservice to the investigation. “I can reassure everybody that there’s no coverup in this case,” he said. According to the Suffolk district attorney, Ray Tierney, who worked with Harrison in Brooklyn, the case is now a firm priority. Tierney has called in FBI investigators as well as running a team of detectives of his own. “I go into it with no expectations, but there is a voluminous amount of evidence that’s been collected. We’re going to review and go where it leads us,” Tierney told the Guardian. “It matters to the victims’ families and the people of Suffolk county. They want to see it solved.” But Gilgo Beach residents last week professed a striking level of indifference. “Bad things happen all over, but some make the headlines. Other than gosh, who’d have thought that would happen here, all the talk seems to be coming from people who don’t come from here,” noted one man parked in a pick-up. The sense that the case has gone cold, and of official indifference over the last 11 years, vexes John Ray, the Gilbert family’s lawyer. Ray has been a consistent advocate for the family’s efforts to find justice for Gilbert, along with the other women who were found along the coastline. “Police incompetence, along with certain willful conduct by members of the police department, was a bad mix that destroyed the ability to solve this case,” Ray told the Guardian. Ray has pursued, through civil litigation and by applying pressure to investigators, a local resident of Oak Beach whom he believes is a prime suspect in Gilbert’s murder and those of the other women found along the beach. The man, a former senior official in the local emergency medical services, made several calls to Gilbert’s mother in the days following Gilbert’s disappearance as well as calls to regional police, her boyfriend, her driver and the client “to learn what he could about Shannan”, Ray has alleged in a civil suit. Police said initially said Gilbert had probably died accidentally in the marsh behind the man’s house, but that was before they had a body. Later they said she was calm on the 911 call. While Ray is bound by the court to not discuss what he heard on the call, he allows that what police reported “appears to be a deliberate misrepresentation of what happened”. “It starts to give you pause about what the police’s view of all this was,” he added. The man later denied his involvement in Gilbert’s disappearance and denied he’d made the calls. “So he did all of these things to try to get serious information. He had no reason to do that if he wasn’t involved,” Ray said. But other suspects are also in the frame, according to Ray. In essence, murder on this scale takes place in a context of local corruption, Ray said, and that context is what police have been unwilling or unable to expose. “All of that adds to the problem of defining the circle of guilt. The corruption involved sex and drugs, and these people are involved in either or both of those behaviors. That’s what unites them, but it’s also what makes it so difficult to pin the culprit down because there are so many people with different liabilities.” Phil Boyle, state senator for Long Island’s fourth district, has asked the New York state attorney general, Letitia James, for an outside investigation of the investigation, believing that figures in the local police force hampered the inquiry and prevented investigators, including the FBI, from looking at cellphone records. “Nobody in their right mind would remove the FBI from a serial killer investigation.” Where this may lead it is too soon to know. Melissa Cann, sister of Maureen Brainard-Barnes, told the New York Post on Monday she felt hopeful. Lorraine Ela, mother of Megan Waterman, said she had been “kind of skeptical” prior to Harrison’s press conference, but that she now felt the police chief would “work this case with dignity”. “I am tired of hearing the same crap come out of everyone’s mouth,” she told the outlet via email. “[But] I was very pleased with the words from Mr Harrison. He seems to care for the victims.” Many people involved, on a deep personal level or on a professional level that has become deeply personal, anticipate that a new police chief and district attorney from outside the region, together with FBI, can bring some hope for a resolution to a series of profoundly bleak crimes. John Ray believes that ultimately the police will identity a suspect and bring charges. But, he cautions, regardless of a conviction, “nobody will believe they are the only killer. The police bungled this case so badly and for so many years, we’ve got a Jack the Ripper situation. It will never be solved even if it is.”If you could wave a magic wand and fix one modern ill, what would it be? Inequality? Pollution? Intergenerational unfairness? The decline of the high street? Suburban ennui? What if you didn’t have to pick, because there was one social problem that lay at the root of all of them? It’s not exactly news that Britain has a shortage of housing. We’re not building enough, and the homes we do build are often too small and in the wrong places. That means houses are expensive, with the obvious result that we have to spend more on rent and mortgages. But the real costs go far beyond that. Where we live affects our jobs, our families, even our impact on the environment. And just as smoking damages every part of your body, a housing shortage makes all those aspects of our lives worse than they should be, too. You can see how severe the current shortage is by looking at prices. In London, the cost of a property has risen from an average of £24,000 in 1980 to nearly £500,000 this year. During the same period, average annual wages in the UK rose from £4,370 to £30,200 – so prices in the capital have risen about 1,400 percentage points above nationwide wages. Across the country the picture isn’t much better: prices have risen 900 percentage points above wages. Rents have risen almost in lock-step with wages, so a big share of renters’ collective wage rises over the years has just gone to landlords. It’s not as though bricks and mortar have suddenly become too expensive. A three-bedroom home can be built for as little as £120,000, a fraction of what it could sell for. We’re not out of space, either. Buildings only cover 1.4% of the UK, and 2% of England – less land than we gain every day when the tide goes out. No: the real scarcity is of permission to build. A hectare of farmland in Barnet, north London – yes, there is farmland in Barnet – might be worth £20,000, but planning permission is so hard to come by, it would be worth £15-18m overnight if granted, a 900-fold rise. Outside somewhere like Cambridge, the rise might be by “just” 200 times, to £4m or so. Getting permission to build within cities is difficult, too, because existing residents become Nimbys – those who cry, “Not in my back yard!” The effect of this is that housing gets built in more remote areas where opposition is weaker, instead of on well-connected sites where the need is greatest. That makes housing sprawl the norm across much of Britain, as people are forced to rely on cars, and miss out on the benefits of urban density, such as busier high streets, a wider range of public services, better public transport and greater walkability – with knock-on effects on health and wellbeing. Every region in England devotes more land space to road transport than to housing. Many devote two or three times as much. More driving means more CO2. City cores are islands of lower CO2 emissions per head, because people can walk and rely on public transport in ways not possible elsewhere. Each person in London, on average, produces roughly a ton of CO2 less every year than the rest of the country – just because they don’t drive as much. Cities have always drawn those in search of a better life, because they act as cultural and economic melting pots where people can make the most of their talents. This isn’t just a romantic idea. In the US, each doubling of a city’s size is associated with a rise in productivity per person of between 2% and 11%. In Britain, during the 19th and early 20th centuries, this meant that people of all backgrounds moved from poorer areas to then-booming cities like Manchester, Birmingham, and Glasgow. Rapid influxes of people could sometimes make for grim conditions – but these improved with the prosperity and innovation that larger populations brought. Today it is mainly only highly educated people who can find jobs that pay well enough to afford to live in city centres. Many who could have entered prosperous job markets and improved their skills never get the chance, and the rest of us miss out on the benefits of what they might have achieved. A large chunk of the additional value created by those who do move goes towards securing more expensive housing, with landowners capturing much of the productivity gain that would otherwise have fed through into higher living standards. Matthew Rognlie, an economist at Northwestern University, has shown that rising wealth inequality has been almost entirely driven by property wealth. Innovation suffers, too. The most innovative places in history, such as Renaissance Florence or the Low Countries in the 16th and 17th century, thrived because of the mixing of creative people who combined knowledge in unusual ways, such as the master craftsmen and mathematicians who made globes and other navigational equipment in 16th-century Leuven. Technological advances like those are far more common in dense, diverse cities than in sprawling ones. And ideas-focused businesses succeed when they’re located in clusters near each other. For software companies, the benefits kick in for companies located within ten-miles of each other. In businesses like advertising, it’s just half a mile — hence the importance of Madison Avenue, which gave its name to the TV programme Mad Men, to America’s advertising industry. The UK is not alone in suffering from a housing shortage. The US has the same problem in places such as New York City and the San Francisco Bay area. One study suggested that, if it tackled these shortages, the country could be 8.9% richer; in another the boost to incomes was calculated at 25%. Applied to the UK, these estimates imply that fixing our housing shortage could add somewhere between £3,000 and £8,500 to the UK’s annual output per person. That would be a huge improvement to living standards. Even the lower estimate would amount to more than the last 10 years of economic growth (pre‑Covid) put together. With such a large reward on the table, overcoming opposition to new housing should be a high priority. The solution may lie in changing the rules of the game so that Nimbys become Yimbys and say: “Yes in my back yard!” instead. One proposal would let residents vote directly to allow more housing on their street, so they could share in the increase in value that comes with the ability to build more densely. Others include letting local councils capture more of the gains that come once planning permission is granted, or allowing more dense housing to be built on the urban wasteland that often sits behind residential streets. Whatever the solution, the damage done by Britain’s housing shortage cannot be overstated. It disrupts our lives in countless ways. As long as it continues, we are poorer, less equal, more polluting and more unhappy as a result. But, in a way, that’s a reason to be optimistic. It means that the gains from fixing this one problem could be huge – bigger than anyone imagined. Further reading The Death and Life of Great American Cities by Jane Jacobs (Bodley Head, £20) Triumph of the City by Edward Glaeser (Pan, £9.99) Seeing Like a State by James C Scott (Yale, £14.99)Novak Djokovic fought the Australian government in the same way he fights his rivals on the tennis court: with defiance and stone-willed refusal, with every tool at his disposal and every last fibre of his being, with an unshakeable and messianic belief in his own supremacy. He contested his deportation as if it were a crucial break point, as if it were his last stand against total oblivion. This time, however, something startling happened. He lost. Djokovic is unused to losing. When he does, he tends to explain it away as the product of his own failings. He courteously congratulates his opponents, but ultimately leaves you with the impression that he decides who wins and loses. His collection of trophies and records – 20 grand slam titles, the most weeks at world No 1 in the history of men’s tennis – suggests he is probably right. But implicit in that too is an assertion of control and individual impregnability: this is my business, and I will deal with it myself. The problems arise when you begin to conflate the hard, white lines of the tennis court with the messy compromises of the world at large. Djokovic would hardly be the first professional athlete to labour under the delusion that his superior sporting ability confers some kind of elite virtue, a firewall against judgment and scrutiny. Nor would he be the first to confuse his athletic gifts with expertise in other fields: lifestyle, health and medicine, even politics. “I can show you how to change not just your body but your whole experience of living,” he promises in his 2013 book Serve to Win: part-autobiography, part-nutrition guide and a presage of the Instagram influencer culture that bundles up diet, mental health, body-narcissism and alternative medicine into a shiny, sellable package. No athlete is obliged to stay in their lane. But anybody who leverages their fame, power and privilege in this way has a responsibility to do so with care, to reckon with the consequences of their choices, to recognise when they have become counter-productive. And perhaps the most disquieting aspect of the last fortnight, as the Djokovic circus rolled out of Melbourne airport and on to our smartphones and television screens, is the way Djokovic’s choices have unleashed forces and currents far larger than him, or indeed tennis: a toxic chain reaction of mistrust and resentment that could lead us into some extremely dark places. You could see it in the seething throngs who gathered outside Djokovic’s hotel to rail against Australia’s vaccine laws. You could see it in the Serbian politicians attempting to redefine this visa paperwork dispute as a parable of liberty versus tyranny. “A symbol of the free world, a beacon of free men,” declared the former prime minister Nebojsa Covic. You could see it, too, in the bowels of the internet, where one conspiracy movement has anointed Djokovic as its “unvaxxed sperm hero”. Which, if nothing else, is one way of settling the GOAT debate. Doubtless Djokovic would repudiate many of the causes now attempting to trade on his name. And of course this stuff has always been there in various forms. But thanks to Djokovic and his belligerence, it now has a bigger platform, attention and momentum, lenses and microphones. There is a time to fan the flames and a time to rein things in, and when Nigel Farage is travelling to Serbia to meet your parents and pose for photos in your trophy room, that time has probably passed. There is a natural temptation to see Djokovic himself as something of a hapless innocent in all this, a credulous idiot with his healing water and kooky science playing with toys he knows nothing about. And yes, there is an opportunism on both sides here. Djokovic’s treatment by the Australian government and its ribbiting cane toad of a prime minister has been a nauseating sight. The Australian Open as a tournament has been weakened and overshadowed. But let’s not pretend we’re dealing with two opposing arguments of equal merit here. Djokovic is not simply some new-age ingenue who ticked the wrong box on a form. We should recall that last month, he tested positive for Covid and then marched straight out of the house to do a photoshoot. This is a man who has done more than any leading player to attack the principle of equal pay in tennis, with his insistence that “women should fight for what they think they deserve and we should fight for what we think we deserve”. Djokovic himself has explained how his political outlook intersects with his beliefs on health and medicine. “Growing up under communism, you are not taught to be open-minded,” he writes in Serve to Win. “People at the top are invested in making sure we do not question what we are told to believe. Whether it is a communist ruler or the rulers of the food and pharmaceutical industries, people at the top understand that most of us are led by fear.” At the heart of the Djokovic worldview, then, is an unswerving belief in the power of self-realisation, of the freedom of an individual to alter their own world, irrespective of the consequences of others. It is the same libertarian streak that runs through the anti-vax movement, the American right and a significant part of English national identity, which is why it is hardly surprising we elect leaders who believe the rules are for little people. This, perhaps, is why Djokovic’s case has incited such strong feelings. It is in many ways a microcosm of the debates tearing societies apart all over the world. What are our responsibilities to each other? How open should our borders be? Where does the right to personal freedom end and the duty to others begin? Who even gets to make these decisions? As Djokovic’s plane took off on Sunday night, it was tempting to see this as an end. In fact, the broader struggle is only just beginning.In the infant artform of online theatre, Thaddeus Phillips is already shaping up to be its most imaginative exponent. In 2020’s Zoo Motel, the Colombia-based writer and performer turned inwards to transform a tiny motel room into a palace of possibility. Now, in Zoo Mundo, he faces outwards. From the same small studio in his family home, he tells an epic tale of three globe-straddling journeys that follow the route of mankind’s 3.4 million-year trek from Ethiopia across the continents. There’s an explorer doing the whole thing on foot, an artist touring his exhibition about human bones and a man discovering the fate of his mother who never returned from a trip home to the USSR. Phillips does this by means that are both ingenious and endearingly handmade. With the Zoom audience looking on – and occasionally joining in – he takes us rapidly from the swanky Caffè Florian in Venice’s St Mark’s Square and onwards, via overnight train, to an electrical factory in Siberia, the jungles of South America and, eventually, the Coffee House at McMurdo Station in Antarctica, the last cafe on Earth. Working with designer Steven Dufala and co-director Tatiana Mallarino, he inserts himself into his cardboard cut-out landscapes, sometimes an eye peering in, sometimes his whole body in view, playfully warping our sense of scale and perspective. With a blend of magician’s tricks and object-theatre techniques, he builds the story before us in a way that feels theatrical, despite its dependence on the camera. Although the journey is more important than the destination, he neatly brings its three strands together to conclude a delightful show about our big place on the planet and small place in the universe. Zoo Mundo is available online until 13 FebruaryLast year the Environment Agency received more than 100,000 reports of water, air and land pollution in England. The public told of rivers flowing with human faeces, chemicals dumped, fish killed, factories emitting dangerous fumes, nature reserves and the countryside trashed, as well as unbearable noise and dirty air. Nearly all these reports were ignored and now we know why. According to shocking leaked documents, the agency, which is the statutory protector of England’s natural environment and therefore of much of its health and safety, had ordered its staff to ignore all but the most obvious, high-profile incidents. Its staff were sent to observe only 8,000 of the 116,000 potential pollution incidents and only a handful of companies were taken to court. In effect, there is now no one in authority even questioning the pollution that blights much of Britain, causes disease, destroys the natural world and costs billions of pounds every year to clean up. That toxic waste dumped at the bottom of your street? Forget it. Your local nature reserve or park despoiled? Don’t worry. That factory illegally belching formaldehyde? Look the other way. Fighting pollution is no government’s strong point, but protection against the destruction of nature has been bitterly fought for. Now it is being wilfully trashed. At least in the 1980s, when environment secretary Nicholas Ridley was dubbed the “minister against the environment” and Britain was the “dirty man of Europe”, the EA was more or less independent of government, science-based, and quick to jump on polluters and to prosecute. Anyone fouling a river was likely to be investigated and at least admonished. The problem then was that the fines imposed by the courts were so minimal that the law was flouted at will. To understand what is happening now, go back to 2011, shortly after David Cameron was elected. In his autumn statement the chancellor, George Osborne, said that he wanted to remove the “ridiculous” social and environmental costs of business. A list emerged of 174 regulations he wanted scrapped, watered down, merged, liberalised or simplified, and the prevailing governing coalition – shame on you, Nick Clegg – knowingly set about trying to abolish controls on asbestos, invasive species and industrial air pollution, as well as protections for wildlife and restrictions on noise pollution. It was war on the environment and public safety. The forests were to be sold off, badgers exterminated and the land fracked. The climate crisis was not to be addressed at the expense of business, and profit was not to be subservient to nature. Even as the crisis was building, and nature everywhere was known to be in steep decline, government was ideologically obsessed with deregulation and actively making a grim situation even worse. Thanks to fierce opposition, not least from some of his own backbenchers and EA staff, not all of Osborne’s anti-red tape measures could be shovelled through. But faced with opposition, the government simply strangled, muzzled or frightened the major regulatory bodies that together have been charged with protecting people. The leaked document shows the extent of the damage done. Over the past 10 years, the EA has had its budget slashed, its staff massively reduced and its powers weakened. Polluting businesses are now expected to self-regulate and report their own transgressions, prosecutions are rare, and the agency admits that it has neither the staff nor the money to do anything other than scratch the surface of control. In words destined to become as notorious as when disgraced environment minister Owen Paterson said “the badgers have moved the goalposts”, the agency now warns, “you get the environment you pay for”. Last week, too, the environmental audit committee reported that a “chemical cocktail” of raw sewage and slurry was polluting many of England’s rivers. According to watchdog group Unchecked UK, between 2011 and 2016, the agency’s protection budget fell by 62% and staff numbers were cut by nearly a quarter. Prosecutions fell by 80%, the number of pollution incidents logged dropped 29% and water samples taken by the EA fell by 28%. Meanwhile, nearly half of England’s sites of special scientific interest – the jewels in the crown of nature – haven’t been checked for many years. Nor is it only the EA, or England. Taking cues from Donald Trump in the US, all other protection agencies have been neutered, including Natural England, the Forestry Commission, Natural Resources Wales and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. Funding for the Food Standards Agency was slashed by half between 2009 and 2019, , and that of the Health and Safety Executive, which oversees workplace safety, by 53%. Proactive inspections by local authorities have been almost abandoned and prosecutions have plummeted. The obsession with cutting “red tape” has been ruinous. Deregulation of the construction industry contributed to Grenfell and the cladding scandal, and allowing water companies to use rivers as sewage dumps – even as they were allowed to cut investment and reward shareholders – will cost tens of billions. Public outrage and the courts may have forced small improvements in air pollution, but tens of thousands of people still die needlessly every year because ministers refuse to bring standards up to the minimum World Health Organization levels. It is now just a matter of time before another major chemical incident like that at Camelford, in Cornwall, in 1988 – when water was contaminated and up to 20,000 people poisoned – takes place. Proposed new rules buried on a government website suggest that the new post-Brexit British chemicals regulator will have only limited powers and that Britain may become a dumping ground and a laboratory for toxic chemicals. The proposals will not be subject to public consultation and will not require a vote in parliament. Supposedly overseeing the almighty regulatory failure of the past decade will be the new Office for Environmental Protection. This new public body is to report to parliament and be theoretically independent from government. But the secretary of state will appoint the chair and other board members, there is no guarantee it will be adequately funded, and it will not take on all functions of the EU institutions that previously protected the public. Britain is already one of the least safe places to live in Europe. From now on, the government can introduce damaging policies with little fear of official comeback and companies are more or less free to abuse the environment. With cash-strapped, politically cowed regulators muzzled, few inspections likely and little danger of prosecution, we can look forward to a pandemic of pollution. John Vidal was the Guardian’s environment editorOn 2 January 1972, the Sunday Times ran a short preview for a new documentary. “If you are in the least interested in art,” it began, “have your set tuned and be ready to have your eyes opened by John Berger in the first of a stunning new series.” Ways of Seeing was broadcast on BBC Two at the unpromising hour of 10.05pm on a Saturday night, the same time as Match of the Day. It had a modest audience and few reviews, and yet the anonymous critic was right. This idiosyncratic documentary, made on a shoestring budget, has been snapping eyes open for half a century. Ways of Seeing has inspired generations of writers, artists and curators, spawning academic conferences and tribute programmes. According to the novelist Ali Smith, who watched it as a child, “even its title set me on a road where I knew there wasn’t just seeing, there were … ways of it”. It reached a new tranche of readers last year by way of the American model Emily Ratajkowski, who opened her memoir My Body with Berger’s quote: “You painted a naked woman because you enjoyed looking at her, you put a mirror in her hand and you called the painting Vanity, thus morally condemning the woman whose nakedness you had depicted for your own pleasure.” From the very first scene, in which Berger takes a knife to a Botticelli, it was clear that Ways of Seeing was an assault on thoughtless reverence. He used the European tradition of oil painting as a way of investigating political ideology, unearthing damning evidence of an entrenched and exploitative system in the lovely works of Caravaggio and Leonardo da Vinci. One of the reasons the series is so lastingly influential is that Berger empowers the viewer, transforming them from passive consumer of high culture to detective, stalking venerated artefacts in search of the master key to patriarchal capitalism. These paintings, he told his audience, might look beautiful or eternal, but they were actually produced for the wealthy and well born, to celebrate and solemnise their status. A landscape was not innocent, and nor was a lobster, let alone a nude of Venus. All were commodities. It was their ownership that was being exalted, and not their intrinsic existence. As for the dry-as-dust interpretations in museums, these were designed to mystify the ordinary viewer, lest they grasp the sleight of hand that had been performed. Berger wanted to break those chains, and to do so he performed an enchantment of his own. By 1972, Berger was a well-known, often controversial art critic, novelist and broadcaster, then in his mid-40s. For minutes at a time, he stands alone against a blue screen, talking urgently and persuasively into the camera. With his curly hair and chainmail shirt, he looks like a cross between Patrick Swayze and Jim Henson’s StoryTeller, the charisma of his preaching style sitting a little uneasily with the trenchant message of demystification. The counterpoint is a parade of images constructed by the director Mike Dibb, which build a perhaps more subtle argument. The camera ticks between famous paintings (filmed after hours in the National Gallery) and images of real life, discovering often startling parallels. In the episode on the nude, it jumps from pinups and street footage of actual women to classical beauties by Titian, Ingres and Cranach, demonstrating how women are trained to become the passive object of the male gaze. It was this argument that Ratajkowski found so compelling, although not everyone at the time appreciated the politicised argument. Clive James wrote to the Listener, complaining about “Mr Berger’s attempt to redeem the western artistic tradition for Women’s Liberation”. Berger himself later explained that he was drawing on the pre-existing work of feminists, although he could certainly have made this clearer. In the second half of the nudes episode a group of five women politely discuss their reactions to his film. None are formally introduced, although their names are given in the credits. Most were deeply involved in the nascent second-wave feminist movement. One was Eva Figes, whose 1970 book Patriarchal Attitudes is an undoubted precedent, while the articulate woman in glasses is Jane Kenrick, one of five who had just been on trial for protesting against the 1970 Miss World contest. An academic and activist for workers’ rights, she died in 1988 at the age of 42. Her work should not be forgotten. Other inspirations are more carefully attributed. The first episode is a reworking of Walter Benjamin’s The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction, which had only recently been translated into English. What Ways of Seeing really did was act as a vessel for carrying these electrifying new ideas into the mainstream. It is inevitably described as influential, but perhaps it’s more accurate to say that it arrived right on time, conveying a new attitude or approach to culture that would soon be dispersed globally, in post-colonial, queer and feminist studies, in Marxist readings of Jane Eyre, in media studies classes, and art school reading lists. The same cannot be said for how it was made. Ways of Seeing represents a zenith of creative freedom at the BBC, only glimpsed now in the work of Adam Curtis, which likewise combines a seemingly radical message with an oddly didactic narrator. Berger might have been the face of the series, as well as the better-known partner, but the process of making the series was unusually collaborative. It was one of Dibb’s early outings as a director, and interference from above was nonexistent. Berger had already abandoned England for a farm in the Alps, and draft scripts were posted back and forth for months. The subject for the final episode was not decided until well into the shoot, when Berger became fascinated with adverts during a journey by tube. This risky, on-the-hoof way of working, with its sense of experiment and fresh discovery, is what gives each episode its fizzing energy. The BBC’s electronic music pioneer Delia Derbyshire provided the ambiguous, open-ended soundtrack, enchanting Dibb with her habit of taking snuff as they worked. But how did Ways of Seeing actually get seen? Broadcast in the pre-VCR, pre-digital age, the programme itself was swiftly inaccessible. It was repeated once in 1973, after winning a Bafta, but was not screened again until 30 July 1994. Unless you had resorted to that new technology the video recorder, as some prescient teachers did, it was the companion book that gave Ways of Seeing its longevity. Lifetime sales in the UK alone currently stand at 1.5m, making it one of the most widely read books on art ever published. The first edition cost 60p. “We wanted it to be the cheapest art book ever made,” Dibb says. “We tried to do everything an art book didn’t do.” Although it’s often treated as a purely Berger production, it was also a collaboration, this time with a team of five. The graphic designer Richard Hollis was responsible for the book’s distinctive appearance, including putting the first six and a half sentences on the cover, alongside a painting by Magritte. The text itself, printed in eye-bending bold type, was a smoothed and tightened version of the film’s script. Both versions represent the echt Berger style: at once poetic and didactic, fluid and rigid. Sternly, he points out the wicked ideologies locked into paint, the grotesque display of capitalism, profit, property in Gainsborough’s Mr and Mrs Andrews and Holbein’s The Ambassadors. Swooningly, he shows how the light falls in a Vermeer. Sometimes it is as if two people are talking, and in fact Berger was at a crossroads in his own work. As Ways of Seeing carried theory into the world, he moved away from it, consecrating himself to an artist’s take on politics and not a political take on art. Part of what makes watching it so compelling now is Berger’s fascinated immersion in the culture of images itself. Take a single shot from episode two. Against a closeup of dresses in shining pink and sea-foam green, we hear his dreaming voice say: “The faces of the women in so many European paintings are like the faces of swimmers in seas of silk and satin.” No other critic had that kind of loving, estranging vision, the capacity to see the grid of forces in which we are entrapped while still conveying the ravishing, time-stopping power of paint. If its style of analysis has become commonplace, Ways of Seeing retains a capacity to stun new viewers with its revelations, although these days the wealthy are more likely to invest their money in NFTs than Rembrandts. The most relevant episode for our own digital era is the last, on the imagery of advertising. Berger reveals a dreamworld that we all move through continuously, a visual bombardment designed to conjure deep feelings of inadequacy and desire, the long seduction by capitalism upon its hapless subjects. This spell has only grown more powerful in the intervening decades. These days we inhabit a universe of disembodied images, constructed by mysterious forces we can’t quite glimpse or understand. Berger identified that process of mystification and knew it as the pickpocket’s device. To break it begins with understanding what you see, and realising that seeing is an active choice. Art is not separate. It is part of how reality is built – or for that matter made anew. Olivia Laing’s latest book is Everybody: A Book About Freedom.Since winning the TS Eliot award for poetry last week, Joelle Taylor has been referred to on more than one occasion as a “slam poet”. Which, she says, is fascinating: “Because there’s no such thing as a slam poet.” A poetry slam is an event, a spoken-word competition, she adds, not a type of poetry. Taylor, who was named UK performance poetry slam champion in 2000 and founded the national youth slam championships SLAMbassadors, is forgiving, though: “It’s just a way of people trying to understand a different kind of poetry.” But it’s clear that this need to distinguish spoken word from other forms of poetry has a whiff of snobbery about it. “You can’t talk about published poetry without talking about class, or gender, or race, or sexuality,” she says. “Because these are all the doors that are shut – we’re still in a publishing situation where the majority of those published are white men.” Of course, the fact that Taylor’s C+nto and Othered Poems, which started as a spoken-word poem about butch lesbian counterculture, has won one of the UK’s most prestigious poetry prizes is a sign that some of those doors are opening. When we meet for coffee three days after the ceremony, Taylor tells me that her inbox is still being flooded by members of both the LGBTQ+ and spoken-word communities who feel like they’re finally being seen. “The judges choosing someone like me says something really profound about the way that literature and poetry are changing,” she says (though, despite the overwhelming support, she insists that she is not going to cry). Tears or not, this is clearly an emotional moment for the 54-year-old poet, who has spent decades on the fringes. Growing up in a working-class family in Lancashire where “you wouldn’t even say the word lesbian,” Taylor faced abuse from her classmates at school. Out of “sheer bloody-mindedness” she became the first member of her family to get O-levels, and eventually moved to London, hitchhiking her way there. “The phrase ‘coming out’ seems so celebratory now,” she says. “But when we came out, more often than not, it was a direction: we must get out.” In London, Taylor became part of the city’s underground butch scene, recently documented in the film Rebel Dykes – in fact, Taylor knows most of the women in it. Those years of partying and protesting are the inspiration for C+nto and it’s a time that Taylor is clearly nostalgic for, despite the fact that she would regularly get shoved or slapped on the street. “While it was a very oppressive time, it galvanised us and brought us all together,” she explains. She describes the 1988 protest against Section 28 as one of the best days of her life: “It was the first time I’d ever held a woman’s hand on the street.” Part of the reason Taylor wanted to honour that community through C+nto is because she feels like something has been lost. The collection mentions dozens of lesbian bars – the fictional Maryville that the characters in the poems frequent, but also real ones like the Bell and the Y Bar. Today, there is just one lesbian bar left in London, She Soho. “One of the reasons there’s been all this shrieking on social media is because we’ve lost these places,” says Taylor. “It’s very hard to disagree with someone sitting in front of you in a bar who’s very nice.” Ah yes, the social-media shrieking. It was inevitable, of course, that Taylor’s collection would spark conversation around gender identity, given its emphasis on the female body and how it is politicised. Before she went on tour to perform C+nto, she was “terrified” about the reaction she might get from her own community. But she has been pleasantly surprised by its positive reception. She’s spoken to trans-rights activists, trans men and gender-critical feminists who have all seen themselves in the poems. “Isn’t that wonderful?” she says. In fact, Taylor sees her book as a “bridge” that can hopefully bring a fractured community back together. “I don’t want to add any more drama – it’s dry as fuck. People have just got to get a grip.” Instead of fighting each other online, the LGBTQ+ community “needs to focus,” she says. “Five hours away from London they are pulling lesbians on to motorways and beating their skulls open. It’s happening in Chechnya, in Hungary, in Russia. It’s happening in Uganda and Ghana. Three-quarters of Poland now is an LGBT-free zone. “All these little things are very important on an individual level” – a reference to the internet infighting – “but they are literally murdering us. So could we just get together?” Togetherness is what Taylor returns to again and again – it’s the only way, in her mind, to combat the rise of LGBTQ+ hate crimes in both this country and others. Is there a chance that could happen? Are things like Rebel Dykes and C+nto signs of a changing attitude? “Yes,” says Taylor, immediately. “We’re alive. There’s hope.”1) Pulisic pulls off a disappearing act Expectations were high when Chelsea’s executives shook hands on the £58m deal that brought the much sought-after signature of Christian Pulisic, the man who the club’s director, Marina Granovskaia, hoped would “become an important player for many years to come”. Three years and 95 Chelsea appearances later, the American is yet to match that description and has too rarely given the impression that he might ever do so. At Manchester City he was a non-presence, seeing little of the ball and doing nothing with it when he did. City are about as tough as opponents come but big money demands to be repaid on big occasions. Pulisic has the talent and temperament to deliver in such fixtures – his elegant goal against Liverpool this month was proof of that – but too often he seems content to exist on the periphery of matches rather than bend them to his will. At 23, time is on his side – though the Chelsea hierarchy are not exactly known for their patience. Alex Hess Match report: Manchester City 1-0 Chelsea 2) Martial flare-up the mark of a club without a plan The dispute between Ralf Rangnick and Anthony Martial is the latest unwanted vignette in a Manchester United season heading for the annus horribilis file. After Saturday’s 2-2 draw at Aston Villa the interim manager claimed the forward refused to be part of the squad for the trip. Martial’s response was to vehemently deny this on Instagram. If United’s position on Sunday – offering no clarification – was a clear backing of Rangnick’s words, the real issue here is how the contretemps shines more light on an institution seemingly on a one-way ticket to the wilderness unless someone sorts it, soon. As a mid-season Mr Fixit this is not Rangnick’s concern. It is Richard Arnold, Ed Woodward’s replacement as United’s highest-ranked executive from 1 February, who must have a forensic and wide-ranging plan. For a blueprint, the 50-year-old should study Manchester City, who under Khaldoon al-Mubarak’s intelligent chairmanship, are the industry leaders. United are coming up to a decade since their last title, and the question is starting to become: when will the next one ever arrive? Jamie Jackson News report: Martial denies refusing to be included in squad 3) Watford’s new signings hit the ground running If there’s one thing guaranteed to fill fans of a relegation-threatened club with dread, it’s a frenzied splurge of unheard-of January signings. From the outside looking in, then, Watford’s activity over the last fortnight – which has seen the recruitment of Maduka Okoye from Sparta Rotterdam, Hassane Kamara from Nice, Samir from Udinese and Edo Kayembe from KAS Eupen in Belgium – seemed to have all the hallmarks of a doomed trolley-dash. Yet any such notions were quickly shown up as parochial nonsense during a battling draw featuring three standout debutants. The dynamic Kamara slotted in smartly at left-back, while at centre-half the Brazilian Samir showed his nationality was no barrier to him enjoying a good old-fashioned tussle with Chris Wood, who he kept quiet. But the visitors’ best performer was Edo Kayembe, who patrolled the area in front of the back four with poise and authority, and showed a nice eye for a defence-splitting pass. João Pedro’s equaliser kept Newcastle in the bottom three, and Watford out of it. Will the same be said for Watford’s January arrivals come the season’s end? Alex Hess 4) Norwich triumph in old-school tactical battle There were a few memorable details from Norwich’s victory over Everton at Carrow Road, including the pitch invader who furiously flicked the ‘Vs’ at Rafael Benítez, and the 20-year-old Adam Idah beginning to confirm some of his promise with a first Premier League goal for the Canaries. But the match was also a curiosity in that it saw two teams pair up against each other in 4-4-2 formations. Once a shape so quintessentially English it was assumed players could not adapt to any other, 4-4-2 is now largely adjudged to be antiquated. Watching Salomón Rondón alongside Dominic Calvert-Lewin for the Toffees, that verdict seemed fair; two big men standing around waiting for crosses like a pair of forlorn hitchhikers. For Norwich, however, it was more fluid and seemed a considered solution from Dean Smith to both a lack of cutting edge and the need to protect his full-backs. By the time the match reached 55 minutes with the Canaries 2-0 up, Benítez abandoned his experiment, going 4-2-3-1 in a desperate search for salvation. Despite Richarlison’s excellent overhead kick, however, it never arrived. Paul MacInnes Match report: Norwich 2-1 Everton 5) Uninspired Toon give Howe little to work with Newcastle have played 10 games under Eddie Howe, winning one, drawing four and losing five. The latest, a damaging home draw with Watford, emphasised the manager’s need for not only at least one new centre-half but a defensive midfielder able to shape and control matches. With the £25m striker Chris Wood virtually anonymous on his debut, Newcastle needed a wonderful solo goal from Allan Saint-Maximin to go 1-0 up but their longstanding inability to retain a lead soon resurfaced, permitting João Pedro to register an 88th-minute equaliser. It was a gut-punch for the St James’s Park crowd, though Howe may draw some consolation from the returning Paul Dummett’s intelligent marking of Emmanuel Dennis. Louise Taylor • Match report: Newcastle 1-1 Watford 6) Gallagher’s star continues to rise Conor Gallagher may have laughed off the comparisons to Frank Lampard but the loanee’s performances for Crystal Palace this season have been reminiscent of his parent club’s record goalscorer. Gallagher’s excellent strike against Brighton to cap off a brilliant team move means that he now has seven goals and three assists since moving to Selhurst Park on loan, but he insists his focus remains on this season. “Let’s be serious, I can’t be compared to someone like that,” he said. “Chelsea is one of the best teams in the world right now, it is a tough team to get into. I’m not really thinking about that at the moment, I’ll try and do my best for Crystal Palace. The way football is goals and assists gets you praise like I have been getting. I need to continue to perform, not just goals and assists. But I am happy with the way it is going so far.” Ed Aarons Match report: Brighton 1-1 Crystal Palace 7) A new home-grown hero at Villa Park The glamorous debutant who struck a late equaliser understandably took all the headlines at Villa Park, but there’s a fair argument that Philippe Coutinho was only his side’s third most impressive midfielder on Saturday. Emi Buendía, whose place looks most obviously threatened by the Brazilian’s arrival, put in a probingly creative display and showed enough flashes of link-up play with Coutinho to suggest that the two playmakers needn’t be competing for one position. But Villa’s star performer was Jacob Ramsey, who scored one and set up the other in a riveting all-action central midfield performance that would have had the manager furrowing his brow in approval. Ramsey has already started more games since Steven Gerrard took charge in November than he did over the whole of last season, and the early signs are that the new boss’s judgment is spot on. After losing the beloved Jack Grealish last summer, have Villa found a new local hero? If so, then he’s already got the perfect mentor. Alex Hess Match report: Aston Villa 2-2 Manchester United 8) Ward-Prowse hot of the tail of his idol The ball zoomed into the top corner like a tungsten dart but, as Ralph Hasenhüttl said, James Ward-Prowse’s preposterous free-kick from 30 yards out deserved to finish as more than a footnote to a frustrating defeat at Wolves. Last week the Brentford head coach, Thomas Frank, suggested Ward-Prowse could be the best free-kick taker on the planet and only David Beckham can better Ward-Prowse’s tally of 12 free-kick goals in the Premier League. His latest strike was surely his best yet, not that he basked in it for too long: the second the ball cannoned into the net, Ward-Prowse headed back towards the Southampton half, ready for the restart with six minutes left to play. “If there’s a stipulation that I have to beat his record in order to meet him [Beckham] then I’ll be looking to do that as soon as I can,” Ward-Prowse said last year. “He’s an absolute legend, a great of the game, a huge role model and inspiration for me even now, and I’m 27.” Ben Fisher • Match report: Wolves 3-1 Southampton 9) Relentless Raphinha is the jewel in Bielsa’s crown The London Stadium offered the latest proof that in Raphinha, Leeds have one of the best in the Premier League. Jack Harrison scored a hat-trick but it was the Brazilian’s passing and verve that cut West Ham’s defence to ribbons. Leeds had a fourth goal ruled out when an offside Rodrigo failed to get out of the way of Mateusz Klich’s shot, the ball having been laid on a plate by Raphinha after he had left Issa Diop with twisted blood. “We still have half a season left,” shrugged Marcelo Bielsa when asked where Raphinha’s future lies. A bidding war in the summer is certain for a player whose class is matched with a work ethic equal to any of Bielsa’s squad. Leeds, riven by injuries, were reduced to bringing on two Premier League debutants, Lewis Bate lasting just 43 minutes, but their star man inspired them to thrilling victory. John Brewin Match report: West Ham 2-3 Leeds 10) Liverpool clear first hurdle of Afcon month January has been long marked out as a danger-month for Liverpool because of the loss of two of the team’s much-lauded front three to the Africa Cup of Nations. To an extent, rightly so: Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané have averaged 52 goals between them in their four full seasons together. But it is also true that this campaign has probably been Mané’s patchiest in a red shirt, and a return of one goal in his last 10 outings means that his absence may not warrant the gloomy prognosis many have offered. It may even be a good thing: Sunday’s win featured goals from two of his ostensible competitors for a place in the team, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and Takumi Minamino, while Mané himself has already found the net on international duty. Win-win? Perhaps – although a quick glance at Jürgen Klopp’s substitutes on Sunday (average squad number: 37) suggests that Liverpool might not want their big guns missing for too long. Alex Hess Match report: Liverpool 3-0 BrentfordSick of sweatpants? A new fashion trend that swaps elasticated waistbands for harder, more utilitarian clothing could be right up your street. Taking inspiration from dark cinematic fantasies such as The Matrix Resurrections and Dune, “dystopia-core” comes as we approach the third year of pandemic living. Dystopia-core, which is in direct opposition to “dopamine dressing” – wearing overtly fun clothes to help lift your mood – can be seen as the next step of the grunge and goth revivals. “Fashion statements often have an element of defiance. In this particular case the defiance is the darkness and dystopian aspect,” says the trend forecaster Geraldine Wharry. “The idea that optimism is not cool and doesn’t reflect our current times, similar to what punks stood for during the 70s.” The items that have come to define the trend – long leather jackets and cargo trousers – have both had bumps in popularity. Online searches for the former have risen by 117% between the third and fourth quarter of last year while searches for cargo pants have increased, year on year, by 45%, according to Jewellerybox.co.uk. Dystopia-core can also be seen on TikTok, where the DIY trend of draping thinly textured clothes over one another to create an angular, futuristic look has been gaining popularity. Nicknamed “avant apocalypse”, the hashtag has more than 265,000 views on the social media app. “People have stopped the rather passive onesie/pyjama stay-at-home, work-from-home-in-your-comfort-clothes trend and realise that they need to be more active and get out – and to do that, you need to be wearing something more functional, more resilient – and more classy,” says Nick Groom, the author of The Vampire: A New History. It is, says the fashion professor Zara Anishanslin, a reaction to the current post-apocalyptic atmosphere. “The experience of living through a pandemic is somewhat like that of living through a war: both are traumatising collective experiences, both have people battling on the ‘frontlines’, both result in a distressingly large number of deaths,” she says. “Given these similarities it makes sense that fashion originally popularised by military use would see a resurgence.” Francesca Granata from Parsons School of Design sees these clothes as a kind of armour against the hostile outside world. “In the last two years we have been constantly thinking about protecting ourselves from outside pathogens so it is not hard to see how clothes can function, at least symbolically, as an extension of this shield that we have been creating around us,” she says. “One response to [the pandemic] is to try to develop a durable, self-contained, sustainable image,” says Groom, “not blur it with fringes and scarfs and tassels, but by making the human form sleek and sharply defined.” The largely black and ominous clothes worn by the new couple Kanye West and Julia Fox – all made by Balenciaga – speak to this look. As well as Balenciaga, fashion labels such as Khaite and A-Cold-Wall* are articulating these emotional states. “The idea of protection is a bit more universal across luxury, contemporary and streetwear now, for sure,” says A-Cold-Wall*’s Samuel Ross, who tackles dystopia-core in his autumn/winter 2022 collection in Milan this week. “We’ve played with that a bit more in terms of length I’d say and overall volume,” he says. “We’ve always had a utilitarian angle but this season we wanted to bring in a more ‘on the nose aspect’ so we used mottled, hand-painted and fired canvases and twills to convey a sensitivity [to that].”Following the dismissal of Rafa Benítez from Everton in the wake of their defeat at the hands of Norwich City on Saturday, his compatriot Roberto Martínez is being tipped for a return to Goodison Park, despite being unceremoniously shown the door by Everton majority shareholder Farhad Moshiri in 2016. Currently in charge of Belgium and with a World Cup looming on the horizon, it remains unclear why Martinez would be willing to swap the job of managing genuine contenders for sifting through the pile of smouldering rubble Rafa has left behind him at Goodison Park but the Mirror reports that Everton have already opened talks with the Belgiam FA in a bid to buy their target out of his contract. Derby County boss and one-time Everton hero Wayne Rooney is also being considered for the vacancy, while Moshiri is also known to be a huge admirer of José Mourinho, whose days at Roma look numbered. While Everton fans are likely to be underwhelmed by the prospect of either Martínez or Mourinho rocking up at Goodison Park, the arrival of Rooney, who is doing a terrific job at Derby County under extremely difficult circumstances, might meet with their approval. In the interim, a Big Dunc and Leighton Baines dream team seems likely to take the reins until a permanent appointment is made. Another week, another raft of speculation linking Newcastle with players of sufficient quality to make a decent fist of keeping the world’s most monied club in the Premier League. They want Donny van de Beek but Manchester United’s lesser spotted midfielder is reported to be unenthused by the prospect of signing for a club in their lowly position. Paris Saint-Germain goalkeeper Keylor Navas is the latest big name star to inch his way across the Mags’ radar but his particular Middle Eastern employers have no desire to let him go. Progress has been reported in Eddie Howe’s bid to lure Sevilla central defender Diego Carlos to St James’ Park, but Newcastle have had a £33m bid for Monaco’s 20-year-old defender Benoît Badiashile rejected by the Ligue 1 club. In need of a left-back now that Ben Chilwell has been ruled out for the rest of the season, Chelsea are reported to be “in talks” to sign PSG’s Layvin Kurzawa on loan and have also been linked with Ivan Perisic, the Croatia veteran who has been playing left wing-back for Internazionale this season and only has six months left on his contract. Manchester United are open to offers of around £15m for Phil Jones, who could find a new home at Burnley or – you’ve guessed it – Newcastle. The injury-prone defender was the best of a bad United bunch on his only appearance of the season against Wolves earlier this month but has long been surplus to requirements at Old Trafford. Having lost Chris Wood to Newcastle last week, Burnley could offer Andy Carroll an unlikely Premier League return after the striker’s short-term deal with Reading ended at the weekend. And finally, Arsenal’s attempts to bring Juventus midfielder Arthur Melo to the Emirates remain a work in progress but have something of a snag. Juve have decided they want Thomas Partey in exchange. That cackling sound you can hear is Mikel Arteta laughing at their impertinence.The thing about completing a successful Hail Mary pass is that it involves throwing an actual Hail Mary. Down six points with 14 seconds left on the clock in his team’s wildcard playoff against the San Francisco 49ers, Dallas Cowboys quarterback Dak Prescott took the ball and ran instead of heaving it into the endzone. It was a disastrous decision that ensured the once-mighty Cowboys suffered yet another early postseason exit. The already infamous final play started on the San Francisco 41-yard line. On 2nd and 1, Prescott rushed for 17 yards before he was taken down by the San Francisco 49ers’ defense. In theory, the QB had just enough time to spike the ball and then attempt a game-winning touchdown on fourth down. Instead, after getting up, Prescott collided with the umpire as the official attempted to place the ball down, a crucial error that allowed the clock to run down. The 49ers held on for a 23-17 victory. “That was the best option … It’s the right decision,” Dallas head coach Mike McCarthy said after the game, regarding the final play of the game (offensive coordinator Kellen Moore called Prescott’s run play with McCarthy giving it the OK). McCarthy postgame analysis will be disputed by many, particularly Cowboys fans. It was a fitting end to a game in which the Cowboys were dinged for a whopping 14 penalties. In a game they eventually lost by six points, the Cowboys’ playoff death was primarily due to a series of self-inflicted wounds – some would say hiring a coach as unimpressive as McCarthy in the first place was the first one – with Prescott’s inexplicable run merely the last of them. The most painful thing about that Cowboys’ loss is that they had a chance to win the game after at one point trailing the Niners 23-7. Once upon a time, back when the Cowboys were firmly America’s Team and synonymous with football, they would have pulled it off. This is a franchise that has made it to the Super Bowl eight times, tied for the second-most out of all NFL franchises. Between 1992 and 1995, they won three championships and established themselves as the team of the decade. They were more than dominant, they were inevitable. That changed. The Cowboys haven’t won a title since the 1995 season. In their last 11 playoff appearances, they have failed to even make the conference championship game, the longest such drought since the AFC and NFC were established in 1970. With Sunday’s loss, they have now gone out in their first game of the postseason seven times in those 11 opportunities. There is, however, one place where the Cowboys still reign supreme. At $5.7bn, the Cowboys are ranked by Forbes as the most valuable sports franchise in the world. That’s not bad for a team that Jerry Jones purchased for $150m back in 1989. That puts them above storied teams like the New York Yankees, Real Madrid and the Los Angeles Lakers. Of course, there’s a major difference between those teams and the Cowboys: the others have won titles this century. The Cowboys, in contrast, keep taking in money without producing any tangible results. Actually, scratch that, maybe in a very real way, they still are America’s Team. MVP of the week Josh Allen, quarterback, Buffalo Bills. On Saturday, Allen rushed for 66 yards, went 21-for-25 passing and threw for 308 yards, plus five touchdowns, in a “stop, stop, they’re already dead” offensive performance, almost single-handedly ensuring that the New England Patriots will retool their defense in the offseason. Allen, who was thrillingly uneven during his first few seasons in the league, now looks more and more like one of the game’s premier quarterbacks and someone that none of the remaining playoff teams will be eager to face. Video of the week Joe Burrow’s second touchdown throw of the Cincinnati Bengals’ 26-19 win over the Las Vegas Raiders was impressive. But it probably should not have counted. Before Tyler Boyd made the catch, an official accidentally blew the whistle, which caused several Raiders defenders to assume that the play had been called dead. Whether Boyd would have made the catch anyway is debatable, but the NFL rules indicate that the play should not have stood. On Sunday, word came out that head referee Jerome Boger’s officiating crew is not expected to return this postseason. That would be the best for everybody involved. Stat of the week 2-for-47. On Sunday, the Philadelphia Eagles were held scoreless in the first half of a playoff game for just the second time in 47 chances. The Buccaneers eventually defeated the Eagles 31-15. BONUS STAT OF THE WEEK: Rob Gronkowski’s touchdown reception on Sunday was the 107th of his career. Of those 107 touchdowns, 105 of them were thrown by the same person: Tom Brady. Quote of the week “I’d say that would be accurate” – New England Patriots head coach Bill Belichick after he was asked if he plans to return next season after his team’s humiliating 47-17 loss to the Buffalo Bills. That quote is notable because Belichick, who turns 70 in a few months, has previously dismissed the idea of coaching into his eighth decade. Has something changed? Well, let’s talk about the elephant in the room: Tom Brady. The quarterback left the Patriots for the Buccaneers in 2020 and duly won a Super Bowl in his first season in Tampa, while New England missed the playoffs. One of the longest ongoing arguments in US sports – up there with LeBron v Jordan in longevity/annoyingness – has been whether Belichick or Brady was more responsible for the Patriots dynasty … and the immediate returns were a solid mark in Brady’s favor. Belichick would never admit it publicly, but you have to believe he’s desperate to win at least one ring as head coach without Brady’s help. Elsewhere around the league -- The Las Vegas Raiders’ season began in disarray when head coach Jon Gruden resigned on 11 October after a number of highly-offensive emails were discovered during an NFL investigation. Then, the team cut Henry Ruggs III after the wide receiver was involved in a fatal car crash. In that void, assistant head coach Rich Bisaccia helped guide the team to a 10-7 regular season and a competitive postseason loss. Following their elimination, quarterback Derek Carr and defensive end Maxx Crosby took the case for retaining Bisaccia. “I think we can all think he’s the right guy,” Carr said after their loss on Saturday. Bisaccia has never been a full-time head coach, he came into the league as a special teams coordinator for the Buccaneers in 2002 and has stayed employed in the NFL in a variety of roles since. The man has paid his dues, in other words. The Raiders should explore all their options before coming to a decision, but Bisaccia has made a strong case that the most logical move would be to lift that “interim” tag from his job title. -- Ben Roethlisberger’s final game as a Steeler went as expected with the Kansas City Chiefs recording a crushing 42-21 win over Pittsburgh on Sunday evening. The Chiefs’ offense is clicking at the right time and was too much even for a defense boasting TJ Watt and Cam Heyward. And the days when Roethlisberger could match a quarterback of Patrick Mahomes’ quality are long gone. -- When the San Francisco 49ers picked Trey Lance in last year’s draft, the assumption was that they would see what they could get from starting quarterback Jimmy Garoppolo on the trade market. Instead, the 49ers made the decision to keep both men, keeping their veteran starter while slowly developing Lance until they thought he was ready. While Garoppolo wasn’t perfect on Sunday, as his brutal late-game interception proved, being patient could end up paying dividends. Lance has a higher ceiling than Garoppolo, whose propensity for making poor throws has made him a lightning rod for criticism. But San Francisco think they have a good chance of winning a championship right now and believe that Garoppolo – who has already led the team to an unexpected Super Bowl appearance – gives them a better chance in the playoffs than a talented, but completely untested rookie. Can Garoppolo mimic the story of Nick Foles, the unassuming journeyman who was supposed to be Carson Wentz’s backup in Philadelphia, but ended up being the MVP of Super Bowl LII? Stay tuned. -- Philadelphia Eagles quarterback Jalen Hurts struggled in his playoff debut, going 22-for-40 while throwing two interceptions. He didn’t record a touchdown pass until late in the fourth quarter when the game was essentially decided. Still, the 2020 second-round draft pick had a solid first year as a starter, replacing the not-entirely-dearly departed Carson Wentz, even being selected as a Pro Bowl alternate. After the game, Eagles head coach Nick Sirianni gave Hurts what sounded like a genuine vote of confidence. “I know we’re all judged on the last game that we played,” he said, “I fully get that, but I felt like Jalen grew throughout the year. And he got better as a passer, he got better reading the defense, getting the ball to the right place.” It sounds like the Eagles are sticking with their young quarterback for the time being.The family of an Indigenous man who died after being sent home from a regional New South Wales hospital has staged a protest demanding accountability and urgent changes in the way Aboriginal people are treated in the NSW health system. Protesters gathered outside Dubbo hospital on Monday to demand a coronial inquest into the death of Kamilaroi/Dunghutti man Ricky “Dougie” Hampson Jr in August 2021. His family claims the 36-year-old was released from the hospital without appropriate treatment partly because he was Indigenous. According to a statement from the National Justice Project on behalf of Hampson’s family, Hampson presented to Dubbo hospital with severe stomach pain and a popping or tearing feeling in his stomach on 15 August. He was sedated, given painkillers and sent home, allegedly without a proper diagnosis. The statement said he died within 18 hours from two perforated duodenal ulcers. His father, Ricky Hampson Sr, said Monday’s protest was intended to give Dougie a voice. Hampson Sr believes his son may not have been given potentially life-saving treatment because he had identified himself to staff as a recreational cannabis user. “An Aboriginal person turns up and admits to smoking marijuana, they presume straight away that because he’s complained of pain in his abdomen, they put it down to cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome.” “We want a coronial inquest into Dougie’s death. We want change within the NSW health system,” Hampson Sr said. Protesters including family and friends gathered at Teresa Maliphant park and marched to Dubbo hospital’s main entrance on Monday carrying photographs of the deceased father of eight and signs bearing messages such as “A simple scan would have saved Dougie’s life”. Talesha Murray, the eldest of Hampson Jr’s children, told the rally: “I feel for my brothers and sisters..” Hampson Jr’s youngest child was seven years old. Murray told Guardian Australia: “Today shouldn’t even be happening but we are here. I want justice for my father and every black person who got put in the same situation.” Hampson Sr said five months after his son’s death, the situation felt “torturous”. “People say time heals all wounds but it doesn’t – this is something we’ll never get over,” he said. “When me and his mother are home by ourselves, we look at his photo and we break down. The only reason we have the strength to get through today is because Douglas’s spirit is here with us. “Unless people are held accountable, Aboriginal people will keep dying like this.” The family wants the health minister “to step in and make sure this never happens again anywhere in NSW”. “The NSW government has been on notice of this systemic issue, at least since the death of Naomi Williams, and Dougie’s death confirms that there is a need for urgent action,” Hampson Sr said. The coroner who investigated the case of Williams, a 27-year-old who was six months pregnant when she died of a treatable infection at Tumut hospital in 2016, found there was implicit bias in the way hospital treated the Wiradjuri woman. Wendy Brookman, a Butchulla woman who attended the protest for Hampson, said: “It’s not the first time and the scariest thought is that we don’t believe it’s going to be the last either.” George Newhouse, a solicitor and the chief executive of the National Justice Project, said: “We need to learn lessons.” Newhouse is acting for Hampson Sr and Dougie’s mother, Lydia Chatfield. “A coronial inquest would provide an opportunity to observe systemic patterns and to prevent deaths in similar circumstances, and most importantly to provide transparency and accountability to a system that too often fails Aboriginal people,” Newhouse said. The lawyer has heard other complaints from First Nations people about their treatment at Dubbo hospital. “Some have told me that they are prepared to drive five hours to attend a hospital in Sydney rather than present themselves at Dubbo hospital.” Newhouse said Aboriginal health liaison workers should be employed across Australia, particularly within emergency departments. He also suggested leaders “acknowledge the existence of implicit bias in healthcare and address it with objective tools, measure it and report on it”. He said a deputy state coroner made “profound” recommendations after the death of Naomi Williams but they were yet to be implemented statewide or nationally. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It’s absolutely essential that hospitals introduce anti-racism, anti-discrimination, anti-bias policies and mandate the provision of culturally safe care to individuals. Until that happens there is always the risk of harm.” A Western NSW local health district spokesperson said: “We offer our sincere condolences to the family of this man." “The death of this man has been referred to the coroner and the Western NSW local health district will assist in the coronial process.”Nasir*, 43, is a British citizen, stuck in Jalalabad with his six-year-old son, also a British citizen, and his wife, who is an Afghan national. I moved to the UK as a refugee in 2000, because I was having a lot of problems with the Taliban, and I had been arrested, so I knew it was time to leave. I claimed asylum in Britain and have lived there for about 21 years. To begin with I worked as a motorcycle mechanic, and then as a pizza delivery driver, and later for Addison Lee and after that as an Uber driver. I’ve been supporting my mum and my sisters in Afghanistan for years, sending money back. I’ve been spending six months in the UK earning money and six months with my family in Afghanistan. I got married in Jalalabad and we had a son in 2015. I’ve been trying to move my wife to London with me since then; I was here with them in the summer as the Taliban advanced. I told the Foreign Office in July that I needed to leave urgently with my wife and son. They issued a visa waiver so my wife could travel, and we were able to book flights to London. Unfortunately the Taliban arrived in Kabul before our departure date, and the flights were cancelled. I was told to travel to Kabul airport to get on a British evacuation flight but we couldn’t get anywhere near the gates. It’s a dangerous time to be here as a British citizen. The Taliban came to my house and asked for me when I wasn’t there; they arrested a close family member and he was imprisoned for a few days. I called the Foreign Office to tell them, but they said there’s nothing we can do for you. I feel scared and I was expecting the British government to help me. I went into hiding for a while. I’ve tried asking Foreign Office staff if my wife’s visa waiver is still valid, but no one seems to know. They just say: you need to wait for the new Afghan resettlement programme to open and there are no clear details on when that will be. My son should be in school, but at the moment we’re not letting him out of the house because he is a kidnap target. People think British citizens are rich, and there’s a real risk he could be kidnapped. I’m getting more and more into debt the longer I’m here because there’s no work. So far I owe friends about $10,000 (£7,300). People are struggling; the only work is in shops or driving taxis. It is very depressing and it’s also very dangerous. Everyday in Jalalabad there are reports of Isis attacking the Taliban. I’ve never seen a situation like this before. It’s breaking my heart that I haven’t been helped by Britain to leave. I’m in touch with over 200 other British passport holders who are stuck like me, and we’re messaging each other most days, trying to find out if there is any news. About 15 have managed to get back to Britain, but they are the ones who didn’t have wives or children here, they were just back visiting parents. I think of Britain as my own country, but I’m being treated like a second-class citizen. I feel very let down. A UK government spokesperson said it could not comment on individual cases, but added: “The UK has supported over 3,000 people to leave Afghanistan since the end of Operation Pitting, including over 1,200 British nationals and eligible dependants. We continue to do all we can to help remaining British nationals and their eligible family members to safety. A fiance, partner, and children under the age of 18 are able to join a British national or settled person in the UK, provided they meet the requirements under the family rules.” *The name has been changed for this article.Janice Hallett topped charts last year with her debut, The Appeal, a thriller about a murder in the sleepy town of Lower Lockwood told entirely in a mix of texts, emails and documents. Hallett’s second novel, The Twyford Code, is innovative in a different way: it is a transcription of 200 audio files that have been found on the iPhone 4 of missing ex-convict Steven Smith. Steven, the reader discovers, has recently been released after more than a decade in prison. Rejected by the son who never knew him, lonely and at a loose end, he becomes increasingly obsessed with how his former teacher Miss Iles vanished while on a class field trip 40 years earlier and decides to investigate. The audio files are his record of the inquiry, as he looks up the former friends who were with him on that long-ago outing to the coast and digs into Miss Iles’s own obsessions. She believed that Edith Twyford, a “twee and much-maligned children’s author” who is a shameless (and brilliant) pastiche of Enid Blyton, put coded secrets in her books during the second world war, and was investigating this when she disappeared. Steven becomes equally fixated, working with a helpful librarian, Lucy, to decipher a code in Twyford’s books, which he comes to believe will lead to hidden treasure. Twyford is despised by modern readers for her “nasty, sadistic, moral little tales full of pompous superiority at best and blatant racism at worst”, and Hallett has a great deal of fun with the snippets of her stories she provides: “Never mind adventure, young Rose. There’s bread to bake, jam to make, the cow to milk, beds to strip and the kitchen garden to rake. You will be too busy to play with your brothers and shouldn’t be so selfish as to think otherwise. Girl children are to follow instructions.” She has even more fun with the codes that Steven – and the reader – set out to crack. And watching Steven, an ex-con, describe what is basically the plot of the Famous Five is a genuine joy: “The kids have I think technically stolen, although it says borrowed, a rowing boat from a fisherman and are camping on an island off the coast of their aunt’s property” – so far, so Kirrin Island. But then, as Steven so aptly puts it: “Turns out some grunts in the local firm are using this island to stash their contra.” The Twyford Code is a tour de force – a genuinely complex puzzle with real clues to be solved, all told in the unreliable voice of a protagonist with a heartbreaking history of his own. “I’m just an old man in an old car talking into his son’s old phone,” says Steven, who has learned to read while incarcerated, discovering that the prison librarian’s trolley is “stacked with treasure waiting to be found”. The transcription tool used on the audio files sometimes gets it wrong, and helpfully blanks out any swear words, so “must have” becomes “mustard”, Bournemouth becomes “bore moth”, and events become “pretty f[EXPLICIT] lairy”. This is pretty f[EXPLICIT] brilliant itself – a mind-bending, heartwarming mystery that is not to be missed. • The Twyford Code by Janice Hallett is published by Profile (£14.99) in the UK and Allen &amp; Unwin in April in Australia. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA campaign group is challenging what it says is an information blackout imposed by the Environment Agency on its investigation into suspected illegal sewage dumping in England. The inquiry began after water companies admitted to the agency they may have been illegally discharging raw sewage from treatment works into rivers and streams. The investigation involves more than 2,000 water treatment works, nearly a third of the total in England, and is likely to involve most, if not all, water companies. Fish Legal has asked the agency in an environmental information request for details of the treatment works being investigated, the time period the inquiry is examining and whether the inquiry would mean that the agency’s already delayed responses to pollution incidents would be delayed further. But the agency has refused to release any details on the grounds that there would be adverse harm to its investigation, despite strong public interest in the case. Penny Gane, the head of legal practice at Fish Legal, said it was trying to ensure a veil of secrecy was not kept over the operation and the impact of storm overflows by water companies. Historically, EA investigations have taken years. Southern Water was fined £90m last year for dumping billions of litres of raw sewage into protected seas, after a seven-year investigation by the agency. Gane said imposing a blackout on information relating to sewage discharges would hamper campaign groups and the public, who had brought to light the systemic abuse of the permit conditions under which sewage treatment works have to operate in the first place. “The concern is that nothing is going to be shared now for years and people who have been looking at the harms caused by sewage discharges will be unable to continue their work because the agency is using a blanket application of the ‘course of justice’ exemptions under the environmental information regulations, which will continue for years,” Gane said. In its response to Fish Legal, the agency said it could not disclose the information because it would have an adverse effect on their ability to investigate under exemption 12(5)(b). The agency acknowledged “the factor of public interest” was strong and said it would seek to provide an update when appropriate that did not undermine the confidentiality of the investigatory process. Fish Legal is challenging the refusal to release information and has requested the agency review their decision. MPs on the environmental audit committee said in a report on Thursday they were alarmed at the extent of sewage discharges, large spills and misreporting by water companies. They also cited evidence from Prof Peter Hammond, who revealed that the scale of illegal sewage dumping from treatment plants could be far greater than the amount reported to the agency by water companies. Hammond’s information came from requests under the environmental information regulations to the EA and water firms. “It is just this kind of information which we fear will now not be released,” Gane said. The Environment Agency declined to comment.Nadhim Zahawi has denied the government is rushing out a series of policy ideas in an attempt to save Boris Johnson, arguing that the prime minister is safe in his job despite a string of Downing Street parties during lockdowns. “I think Boris Johnson has done the right thing to apologise,” the education secretary told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, saying the prime minister should get credit for having correctly called “big, big decisions” in areas such as Brexit and vaccines. Asked three times if Johnson was safe, Zahawi eventually agreed, saying: “Yes, he is, because he’s human and we make mistakes.” He rejected the idea that ministers had been attempting to distract attention from Johnson’s political woes by briefing friendly newspapers on policies such as involving the Royal Navy in an attempt to stop small boat crossings in the Channel, and the likely end to the BBC licence fee. “I’m glad you recognise that all this stuff about the government bringing stuff in the weekend is not true, because we work through policies based on our manifesto commitment,” Zahawi told Today. In an earlier interview with Times Radio, Zahawi rejected the wider idea that No 10 had launched a fightback to save Johnson’s job under titles such as Operation Save Big Dog or Operation Red Meat. “Honestly, I’m the secretary of state for education, I’m a member of the cabinet,” he said. “I don’t recognise that language about red meat or big dogs. All I can say to you is the prime minister’s focused on dealing with the big issues.” Questioned repeatedly on Today about whether the string of revelations about apparent social events in Downing Street during Covid restrictions meant Johnson had to change his approach or be ejected, Zahawi refused to agree, arguing it was not possible to determine if the prime minister had done anything wrong before the publication of a report by the senior civil servant Sue Gray. “It’s right that the prime minister recognises the level of anger and, of course, the feeling of unfairness, which is why he was right to apologise,” Zahawi said. “I would say that, actually, the value of fairness matters to people. Yes of course they’re feeling angry, feeling upset. They can’t turn the clock back. What we do about it is the fairness argument. And I think it’s important that you don’t condemn a man before you’ve had the investigation.” Asked how Johnson could persuade people he was serious about the issue, Zahawi said: “It begins with an apology, it begins with recognising that we need to get the evidence, and the investigation is going to be important. Because how do you change a culture if you don’t have the evidence?” In an echo of Downing Street’s defence of Johnson over one of the most damning allegations, that he spent 25 minutes in the Downing Street garden as staff held a “bring your own booze” party on 20 May 2020, Zahawi said the prime minister “implicitly” believed he had not broken any rules. Asked why he had caveated his argument with “implicitly”, a word he had also used in earlier interviews, Zahawi said: “I’m repeating to you what I heard the prime minister say at the dipatch box in the chamber for his statement [last Wednesday]. He thought he was going outside for 25 minutes to motivate his workforce, and come back in and continue to work, and he apologised for it.” He added: “If somebody thought that they were going outside to motivate their staff – that is what he thought, that he wasn’t actually breaking the rules.”Cameron Norrie certainly never stopped trying. Even as game after game fell away and the match rushed to an increasingly unavoidable outcome, his footwork remained pristine, he continued to land as many returns as he could and he searched diligently for solutions. But unlike for so much of the past 12 months, no solutions came. In just one hour, 42 minutes, Sebastian Korda dismantled Norrie, the 12th seed, 6-3, 6-0, 6-4 in the first round of the Australian Open. After a breakthrough year so memorable that his coach, Facundo Lugones, was named the ATP’s coach of the year, the defeat marked Norrie’s fourth loss of four in the 2022 season and his second consecutive grand slam first-round defeat. While two of Norrie’s losses had been competitive defeats against higher-ranked players, the 26-year-old was confounded by how poor his showing was on Monday. “Right now, I can’t,” he said after being asked if he knows why he was unable to find an acceptable level. “Just feeling good physically, I had a week off to prepare, prepared as well as I could, and I was just slow, I was missing routine backhands, which I never miss. I honestly can’t put a finger on it. I just need to get better and improve.” One of the obvious factors, which Norrie stressed, was the quality of his opponent across the net. Korda is one of the toughest unseeded players in the draw and at 21 years old he has already reached the fourth round of two majors, finishing last year as runner-up at the Next Gen ATP Finals. Korda plays with a distinctive style. He stands at 6ft 5in yet despite his stature his serve, although solid on Monday, is still a work in progress. He has earned his keep in his young career due to his immaculate, well-timed strokes that he can strike early, redirect to all parts of the court, and his skilful returning and net game behind them. He spent the match glued to the baseline and dictating until the end. Having spent his entire professional career as the underdog and challenger against most top-100 players, it was always evident this sophomore season would mark a new challenge for Norrie. He will now, like many before him, have to adjust to the new reality and he is doing so after playing 81 matches in 2021. His year finished on 30 November after he emptied his tank in the midst of leading Great Britain in the Davis Cup and the fleeting time before the start of the season meant he postponed his pre-season until after his trip to Australia. “I don’t know why I played the way I did today. I was feeling good physically, and, yeah, I played a lot of matches, but this is what we are paid to do and [it’s] just not good enough. Just need to raise my standards, practice, matches, and execute a lot better,” he said. Norrie will take a few days off, then he will start to prepare for his next event in Rotterdam, undertaking all of the physical work he had postponed after the end of last season. As Norrie departs Australia, the second day of the Australian Open will see a flurry of British action with Harriet Dart, Andy Murray, Heather Watson, Liam Broady and Emma Raducanu all starting their campaigns. In the evening session, Broady faces Nick Kyrgios in the first round. Kyrgios is now ranked 115th and he hasn’t yet competed in 2022 after withdrawing from his opening two events with asthma and then Covid but, as usual, the Australian is one good serving day away from a great performance. Later on Tuesday night, Raducanu will headline Margaret Court Arena as she continues to find her feet after her own recent bout of Covid. Raducanu will face a fellow grand slam champion, Sloane Stephens, for the first time in her career and she will step on to the court looking to start her Australian Open career correctly.There are still almost 10 months until Florida’s voters elect their next governor, but the campaign of the Republican incumbent, Ron DeSantis, appears well under way. In a red-meat-for-the-base address at the opening of Florida’s legislature last week, themed around the concept of “freedom” but described by critics as a fanfare of authoritarianism, DeSantis gave a clear indication of the issues he believes are on voters’ minds. They include fighting the White House over Covid-19, ballot box fraud, critical race theory in schools and defunding law enforcement. Yet to opponents of the Donald Trump protege, who is tipped for his own presidential run in 2024, DeSantis has chosen to focus on problems that don’t exist in Florida, either to distract from real priorities or to bolster the Trumpist base and improve on his narrow victory over the Democrat Andrew Gillum in 2018. “We have real issues that need to be addressed, and the governor is chasing boogeymen,” said Carlos Guillermo Smith, a Democratic state representative and frequent DeSantis critic. “We have an affordable housing crisis with exorbitant rent hikes of up to 30% that people can’t afford. We have surging property insurance rates. We have a healthcare crisis with 22,000 Floridians with disabilities who are on waitlist to get the services that they deserve. “And Governor DeSantis is focused on fighting ‘wokeness’ in the 2022 legislative session, with the Stop Woke Act. He wants to focus on fighting critical race theories in our schools. That does not exist. It’s not even a thing.” A wave of criticism followed DeSantis’s speech, which came at the start of a 60-day legislative session in Tallahassee during which Republicans will also pursue a Mississippi-style 15-week abortion ban under the guise of “reducing fetal and infant mortality”. DeSantis has said the proposal, which has no exception for rape or incest, is “very reasonable”. But it is his anti-mask approach to Covid-19, and his constant feuding with Joe Biden and Anthony Fauci, of which DeSantis appears most proud, lauding Florida as “the freest state” for his outlawing of “authoritarian, arbitrary and seemingly never-ending mandates”. “While so many around the country have consigned the people’s rights to the graveyard, Florida has stood as freedom’s vanguard,” DeSantis insisted. On Thursday, Florida’s death toll from Covid-19 surpassed 63,000. “Floridians are exhausted by the politicization of Covid-19,” Smith said. “They’re tired of fighting about masks, they’re tired of fighting about vaccines. And they’re tired of the governor continuing to focus on these culture wars that do nothing to promote the prosperity of our state.” It was the Omicron-fuelled surge pushing the state’s coronavirus numbers up by almost 950% that caused more controversy over the recent holidays, when critics accused DeSantis of being missing in action. The governor’s press team inadvertently added to the “Where’s Ron?” confusion by posting on social media two-week-old pictures of him at a bagel store, insisted it was his prerogative to take a few days off if he wanted, then regrouped to attack anybody who suggested he was taking a vacation. DeSantis reappeared after a 13-day absence to say he had been attending chemotherapy sessions with his wife, Casey, who has breast cancer. The first weeks of the new year, in which he will seek his second term, possibly as a springboard to a likely 2024 presidential run, were also bumpy. Nikki Fried, the Democratic Florida agriculture commissioner and potential opponent in November, accused the DeSantis administration of stockpiling about 1m Covid-19 tests in a warehouse as they expired, which state officials later admitted was true after earlier denials. And a planned press briefing in Jacksonville was abruptly postponed after the unseemly spectacle of a peaceful, disabled Black community activist led away in handcuffs and cited for trespass after asking to speak with DeSantis about his coronavirus policies. “No, this isn’t from 1955. This is from an hour ago. At the Governor’s press conference,” Democratic state congresswoman Michele Rayner tweeted, noting that Ben Frazier, founder of Jacksonville’s Northside Coalition, was also denied use of his electric scooter. “A Black man dared to refuse to leave until he met with the governor. From my understanding he wasn’t disrespectful. But you know Ronnie can’t handle criticism of any kind.” Christina Pushaw, DeSantis’s spokesperson, said in a statement that Frazier had a history of “disruptive behavior” and was trespassing “in a secured facility”, even though the meeting took place in a public building. Critics say that while DeSantis has been promoting the rights of citizens to make their own decisions, he has become increasingly authoritarian. He stripped local authorities of powers to instigate coronavirus mitigation efforts and banned school districts from imposing mask mandates. In south Florida in particular, schools say they are “struggling to cope” with staff shortages and student absences. A self-professed law-and-order governor, DeSantis has also offered unvaccinated cops a $5,000 bounty to relocate to Florida, and plans a state paramilitary force outside federal control. The former Florida governor Charlie Crist, another possible opponent in November, accused DeSantis of wanting his own “handpicked secret police”. Democrats, however, concede they face challenges in unseating DeSantis, a strong favorite for re-election in polls taken last year. Florida’s new restrictive voting rights law limits drop boxes and mail-in ballots, and Democrats have recently been overtaken by registered Republican voters for the first time. Analysts say DeSantis also has the advantage of a strong state economy, alongside his pugnacious style of leadership. “DeSantis is, to many Republicans, Florida’s incarnation of Donald Trump, his successor, his alter ego, his clone, whatever you want to call it,” said Darryl Paulson, professor emeritus of government at the University of South Florida. “He’s certainly run very much in the style of Trump, this in-your-face, critical stance he has taken on a lot of issues, which have ingrained him with Republicans. But the GOP in Florida makes up a little less than 40% of the electorate, so to win a statewide race you need to appeal to the no-party-affiliated, independent voters. “How do you appeal to those when you run a campaign trying to bash other people in the face, so to speak? That can play well with your base but not so well especially with independents.” Paulson, however, sees an uphill battle for Democrats. “Every election cycle you’re really appealing to a completely new electorate. When you add in the elderly factor in Florida, people dying off and replaced by newcomers in the state and younger people, it’s hard to project how they’re going to align themselves,” he said. “Right now, the advantage is clearly Republican. But all sorts of things could quickly change. It could be a policy issue that emerges, or a politician that emerges, the two most important things to affect Florida politics.”Film Galaxy Quest Movies can make lifting our spirits feel like mighty hard work. Like a two-hour Haribo binge, feelgood movies often involve a violent sugar rush, a recipe for migraine and hives. So we should treasure any film as purely, perfectly uplifting as Galaxy Quest. The comedy involves the ageing cast of a much-loved TV space opera, abducted by gentle extraterrestrials unwitting of the gulf between fact and fantasy. The meta Hollywood comedy is smart; the gags about fandom beautifully observed. But more than that, no beating heart could fail to be gladdened by a film that suggests our sorry species may just be redeemable. And that aliens may yet avoid Elon Musk being their first encounter with humanity. Danny Leigh *** Music Coloring Book The first streaming-only album to ever win a Grammy, 2016’s Coloring Book remains Chance the Rapper’s most accomplished work, bridging the gap between hip-hop and gospel with a wide grin on its face. Across 14 tracks, the Chicago native toes a perfect line between swaggering braggadocio and gentle, stirring home town nostalgia, with a veritable feast of guests both big and small: Kanye West, Jamila Woods, Anderson .Paak, Jay Electronica. Whether you’re religious or not, the infectious jubilance of redemptive love, self-acceptance and sharp one-liners will shed some light on even the darkest of January days. Jenessa Williams *** TV Reservation Dogs If Sterlin Harjo and Taika Waititi’s Disney+ comedy about a charmingly half-baked criminal gang of Indigenous American kids in small town Oklahoma doesn’t cheer you up, you might need to consider hibernation. Their criminality, such as it is, is at the harmless, amusingly inept end of the scale; as we meet them, they’re stealing a lorry load of crisps and selling them from a roadside stall. Really, what gang status means here is an affirmation of friendship; an expression of mutual support; a desire to have each other’s backs. Much like Waititi’s funny, lovely film The Hunt for the Wilderpeople, it’s about our need to strike out alone but also our need to belong. Full of laughs but overflowing with warmth and wisdom, too. Phil Harrison *** Art The Shrimp Girl This is one of art history’s rare full, toothy smiles, and it belongs to a young working woman, expertly balancing a basket of shellfish on her head. Unlike the staged hauteur of 18th-century aristocratic portraits, her movement and spontaneity suggest a real-life chance encounter on the street, captured in an experimental, impressionist oil sketch of rough, ready strokes. William Hogarth makes you feel her momentary joy; a brief, dazzling wonder of everyday life that hits you like sun breaking through clouds. Skye Sherwin *** Book Wind, Sand and Stars If you are starting to feel like the dark winter skies are bearing down on you, Antoine de Saint‑Exupéry’s Wind, Sand and Stars will open them up again. In poetic, vivid prose, the French hero relates his experiences as a pioneering pilot in the 1920s, helping to develop early air postal routes across the Sahara and Andes. Again and again, Saint-Exupéry climbed into the exposed cockpit of his fragile plane, pointed its nose into the black night, spun the propeller and roared into the future. It’s a book brimming not only with the excitement of discovery, but also the more simple joy of life. Saint-Exupéry may be best known for his beautiful children’s story The Little Prince, but this is even more enchanting. Sam JordisonHere is an intriguing cine-novella from Georgian film-maker Tamar Shavgulidze, which is at first unassumingly contemporary and realist, but which then takes a deadpan left turn into something really strange; it becomes like something from the 1960s counterculture, yet is as coolly paced and controlled as everything that has gone before. Initially, Comets seems like a straightforwardly bittersweet “reunion” tale, full of poignant regret. Nana (Ketevan Gegeshidze) is a middle-aged widow who is pottering about her garden one sunlit afternoon, squabbling mildly with her grownup daughter Irina (Ekaterine Kalatozishvili), when suddenly they have a visitor: a rather stylishly attired woman of Nana’s age, also called Irina (Nino Kasradze). This is the person with whom Nana had a semi-secret love affair when they were teenagers, which caused much local scandal. Irina ran away to begin a glamorous existence in Krakow and Berlin and Nana blandly (or perhaps penitentially) stayed in her home town and had children: Irina is of course named after her lost love and like the older Irina she exasperates Nana by wearing sunglasses to conceal her mood. There is much sadness in Nana’s life, particularly in her relationship with her late husband. The two women’s conversation now is interspersed with flashback scenes of them together in this very same garden, the two being played as teenagers by Mariam Iremashvili and Nina Mazodier. What is there between them now? Reproach? Sadness? Or a flash of something else — maybe that they could still revive their old feelings, because what on earth have they got to lose? Love is a comet that blazes into our lives all too rarely. But could it be that as young people Nana and Irina experienced something else: something even more unearthly and exalting and intergalactic? A visitation of something rich and strange, something that made sense of how alien they felt? An interesting experiment in the alternative reality that is love. • Comets is available on 18 January on MubiThe Garden The issue of great Jove, draw near, you Muses nine! Help us to praise the blissful plot of garden ground so fine. The garden gives good food and aid for leech’s cure; The garden, full of great delight, his master doth allure. Sweet sallet herbs be here, and herbs of every kind; The ruddy grapes, the seemly fruits, be here at hand to find. Here pleasance wanteth not to make a man full fain; Here marvellous the mixture is of solace and of gain. To water sundry seeds, the furrow by the way A running river, trilling down with liquor, can convey. Behold, with lively hue fair flow’rs that shine so bright; With riches, like the orient gems, they paint the mould in sight. Bees, humming with soft sound (their murmur is so small), Of blooms and blossoms suck the tops; on dewed leaves they fall. The creeping vine holds down her own bewedded elms, And, wandering out with branches thick, reeds folded overwhelms. Trees spread their coverts wide with shadows fresh and gay; Full well their branched bows defend the fervent sun away. Birds chatter, and some chirp, and some sweet tunes do yield; All mirthful, with their songs so blithe, they make both air and field. The garden it allures, it feeds, it glads the sprite; From heavy hearts all doleful dumps the garden chaseth quite. Strength it restores to limbs, draws and fulfils the sight; with cheer revives the senses all and maketh labour light. O, what delights to us the garden ground doth bring! Seed, leaf, flow’r, fruit, herb, bee, and tree, and more than I may sing! The Garden was first published among the “Songes and Sonnettes” of Tottel’s Miscellany in 1557. Nicholas Grimald contributed a substantial number of poems to the anthology, and is thought likely to have been one of its editors. More of his work, as well as The Garden, can be read in the reprinted edition here. Grimald – Protestant preacher, scholar, playwright and poet – was born in Huntingdonshire in 1519. He was appointed chaplain to Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of London, in 1552. During the reign of the Catholic Queen Mary, Ridley was executed, and Grimald imprisoned. He recanted and was released, but is said to have reverted later to Protestantism. Little is known about the circumstances of his death, circa 1562. This week’s poem reflects almost none of the turmoil of those years. It preaches the gentlest of sermons, suggesting that what the garden offers contrasts therapeutically with the kinds of pleasure that leave a man “full fain”, ie subject to compulsion. “Here marvellous the mixture is of solace and of gain”. It’s not a profound meditation on gardens, and cannot compete technically with the elegance of Marvell’s poem of the same name, for which it’s likely to have been one of the English models. As a tripping, occasionally tripping-over, pastoral dance, it’s still an engaging introduction to Grimald’s shorter poems. His choice of classical metres here is characteristic. The first line of each couplet is iambic hexameter (six beats, 12 syllables), and it’s necessary to imagine a small pause, even where no comma is indicated, between the first set of three beats and the second, to ensure the rhythmic flow. The second line of each couplet is iambic heptameter – seven beats and 14 syllables. This is how I scan the invocation of the first two lines, a pattern that seems to work throughout the poem. “The issue of great Jove, / draw near, you Muses nine! Help us to praise the blissful plot of garden ground so fine.” There are moments when the attention of Grimald’s Muses seems casually general, and others where you feel they’re getting down to serious business. The details about the bees, murmuring softly and falling drunkenly on to the flowers’ “dewed leaves” is delightful. And the subsequent observation of the “creeping vine” introduces a visually effective, predatory metaphor into the idyll, the “bewedded elms” being lovingly strangled by this ambitious plant (which sounds more like ivy than a grape-vine). Perhaps the hint of a political analogy has invaded the garden after all. Bees, humming with soft sound (their murmur is so small), Of blooms and blossoms suck the tops; on dewed leaves they fall. The creeping vine holds down her own bewedded elms, And, wandering out with branches thick, reeds folded overwhelms. A cure for all kinds of ills, including melancholy’s “doleful dumps”, the garden’s bounty expands magnificently in the final couplet. The monosyllabic list of the last line is a perfect fit with the meter, although it looks cluttered, and enunciation may require practice. O, what delights to us the garden ground doth bring! Seed, leaf, flow’r, fruit, herb, bee, and tree, and more than I may sing! If you can immediately recite “Seed, leaf” as an iamb, you’re a better reciter than I amb.As a mother to three boys, there are many days when I question the decisions I make. Sometimes, the weight of that – the idea your child’s wellbeing and happiness rests with you – can feel crippling. At the same time, we are bombarded by parents publicising their own pride in their offspring’s achievements on Instagram and Facebook and in WhatsApp groups, meaning it’s easy to feel as if everyone else knows what they’re doing. The idea that people sometimes feel like impostors at work is often discussed. Yet the parental impostor syndrome many people have – that they are faking it, and will never cut it as a parent – is seldom acknowledged. The psychologist Linda Blair explains: “In 1996, two psychotherapists came up with the concept of impostor syndrome, loosely defining it as doubting your abilities and not feeling good enough. There is a lot of research around impostor syndrome at work, and this falls under that same umbrella. Now I am hearing about this a lot more in clinic, partly because of social media, and ‘fakebook’ parents.” Ranee, 52, lives in south-west London with her husband and their two adopted children. Ranee is of Sri Lankan heritage and her husband’s family are from Mauritius. Because of this, it took a long time for them to be matched with their children as many councils are keen to match the ethnic backgrounds of potential parents and children. During that time, Ranee and her husband went through a rigorous vetting process, yet when the process was complete and they were a family with children, she felt disoriented by how much she didn’t know. “I remember walking into the playground and thinking, ‘Everyone knows you’re not a real mum,’” she says, upon taking her five-year-old to school for the first time. “It was as if I had a siren above me, or ‘fake’ written on my forehead. Just trying to talk to parents on a playdate, or wondering what other kids would eat was tricky. My children were really picky eaters, and all of this made me think I didn’t know what I was doing.” She says she had done courses and read books to try to prepare, but nothing quite readied her for the experience of becoming a parent. “I didn’t have any mum friends and I’d gone straight from working to being a stay-at-home mum. I kept thinking, ‘Does everyone feel like this? Is this how it is?’” Ranee, a food photographer, says now that the adoption is completed, her impostor syndrome has largely gone. “Occasionally it comes back when we’re dealing with school issues, but I now have a network of friends who have also adopted and that has helped me gain some perspective.” As well as the fact that she and her husband went from a couple to parents of two in one day, Ranee thinks anxiety about whether she was doing things “right” played a big role in feeling like an impostor. “I sometimes felt as if there was a model parent out there, but I learned to lower my expectations, and understood that my children don’t know any different. I now subscribe to ‘good enough’ parenting. I know I will make mistakes and I have to forgive myself and not get het up. “I used to want to run out of the playground and hide under the bed. But I’ve learned that you just have to set your own standard. Trust that you will be a great parent, and fight your children’s corner. One day you’ll fail, the next day you’ll feel less of a failure, and so on, until it normalises.” Years later, she says, things look very different. “I have two amazing kids who are teenagers, and I know they will forge their own lives, and I just want them to be happy.” Lucille lives in Suffolk and has five children. It’s hard to imagine someone with so much parenting experience could feel as if she were a “fake” who could be found out – but, she says, social media often leaves her feeling that she is not good enough. “I’m my own worst enemy because my impostor syndrome is self-imposed,” she says. “It’s so easy to scroll through perfect Facebook photos and Instagrammable moments and forget that a lot of it is smoke and mirrors. And nobody has everything that sorted. “Growing up, I wanted children more than I wanted to breathe, so five children – and nine miscarriages later – in a lot of ways this is everything I dreamed of, but I don’t know if I’m ever going to feel like I’ve achieved enough.” Blair says this is something she has heard before. “It is the job of social media to present your best face, so we get a skewed version of parenting,” she says. “One of the things I advise is to try to limit social media, or complement it with face-to-face conversation with other parents. This way you will get a real picture of what is going on, and people are more likely to be honest.” Lucille is a jewellery designer and lives with chronic pain owing to a medical condition. Her husband works long hours, meaning much of the parenting falls to her. She is also home schooling her youngest because he is at risk of anaphylaxis. “For most of our waking hours, it’s me, myself and five. People look at me in horror when I tell them this, but it works for us.” What has put everything into context, she says, is not just time, but the tough situations they have weathered. “Over the past 18 months, we nearly lost Elijah to his anaphylaxis, we all caught Covid twice – and my eldest, Alex, found an unexplained lump in his arm, which gave us an awful scare. The fear at times has been unreal, but, as a parent, all these challenges have helped me realise that I can hold it together through just about anything. “With five children, I’ve had a chance to learn from my mistakes. I know that I can deal with just about anything thrown at me – but that doesn’t mean I feel like I’m nailing it. I just try my best.” Blair points out that being a parent doesn’t necessarily get easier, even with several children: “Many techniques you learn are only temporary. They may work at first, but then children grow, circumstances change, and they stop being effective. You have to learn to forgive yourself because they change.” My husband, Adnan, is 56. He wanted to make it clear that it’s not just mothers who can feel like impostors in their home life. “I had the fairytale illusion of what I’d be like as a dad,” he says. “When our first child was born, I had images of all this stuff we’d do together. It didn’t include pictures of sleepless nights, or every item of clothing being covered in snot and yoghurt.” He also says it doesn’t get any easier with more children, because each child will have a different personality requiring different methods of parenting. “There’s a fine line between child management, focusing on health and safety, and being a present dad, trying to listen to all their voices,” he says. “No one explains that you’re their protector as well as the person meeting their hygiene factors, feeding them, listening to playground politics and building their confidence. You’re the person who is the narrative in their head about how great they are.” Adnan says that though he doesn’t compare himself with other parents, he still finds it hard to shake the fairytale that is firmly in his head, and compared with which he always comes up short. “The continuous refereeing, and the delegate decision-making goes beyond anything I’ve done in the workplace. “I keep asking myself ‘Am I equipped to deal with this?’ I’m a father, a counsellor, a coach, autocratic and democratic. There’s also something about being a parent in your 50s: you don’t have the physicality of your 30s.” Blair, who raised three children herself, says her advice in these circumstances is to spend time with each child on their own. “Find a way, every month, or week, to have an hour with just one child, one on one. Go to a cafe after school or something like that. They will remember that beyond everything else. I used to do this with my children, and it was just magic.” Adam, 61, moved to the UK from Zambia eight years ago with his wife and their three children. Adam’s wife is an architect and spends much of her time in Zambia, while he stays at their home in Carterton in Oxfordshire to look after the children. “I had my first child at 46, and I have a 20-year-old daughter who was five when I married her mum, and who I adopted when she was eight,” he says. “Coming to the UK, I quickly started to feel inferior to other, usually much younger parents who seemed to be effortlessly successful in everything – careers, family, etc, and this continues. “On a practical level there was plenty of help in the early years in Zambia, nannies were easily available, and there was lots of open space.” In his calmer moments, Adam can be realistic about his own skills. “I do believe that I have done a reasonable job. The kids are all, thankfully, well adjusted, reasonably hard working, very sociable.” Yet he says he is haunted at other times by thoughts that he could be doing so much better for his children.“Because I came to fatherhood later on and because we were mostly so far away I never really had the chance to share my experiences of parenting with my contemporaries here, so when we came to the UK most of them had moved on, with kids at university, and I felt quite alone. I have been suffering with depression on and off for 25 years and it often manifests itself through crippling lack of self-esteem. “My children are truly wonderful. I like to think they would tell you that I am ‘the best dad ever’ – it’s just that often I seem unable to accept that myself.” Blair agrees. “We need to figure out our unique identity. When we grasp this, everything becomes easier. We think we have to live to other people’s rules but then we feel inadequate when we don’t meet the mark. All the parenting books are templates. You have to invent your own way of parenting, because every child is unique. “‘Good enough parenting’ theory is a great way of looking at things,” she says. “Perfect parents don’t actually produce the best children. The mistakes we make give our children space to grow into better adults, things to rebel against, and it helps them forge their personality.” The psychotherapist Philippa Perry says that as a society we have become a lot more self-obsessed, putting ourselves at the centre of the relationship instead of our children, which is unhelpful. “We all love our children but what we need to do is respect them. We kid ourselves if we think that we have control. We haven’t got control, but what we do have is control over how we behave, and we need to behave in an authentic and respectful manner with our children. We need to be partners in our endeavours. Respect your children’s time and respect each other.” Exhaustion can make us forget that we are no longer the most important people in our world. For those of us privileged to be parents, maybe we just need to simplify things as we navigate life alongside the little people entrusted to us, and see ourselves through their eyes. The London-based therapist Michelle Qureshi has some words of wisdom, too. “Accept yourself as a human, ditch the comparing with other parents, say to yourself: ‘Overall I do a good job, and they do, too.’ Don’t let your self-doubt define you, let yourself enjoy your own parenting style, whatever that may be.”A team of prosecutors and investigators leading the investigation into the Flint water crisis from 2016 through 2018 were assembling a racketeering case against the architects of a bond deal that residents and experts say sparked the health disaster, sources familiar with the criminal investigation have told the Guardian. The case – which would have come under the Rico (racketeer-influenced and corrupt organizations) laws often used to charge organized crime groups – was widespread and set to implicate additional state officials who played a role in the poisoning of Flint, according to these sources. But when the team was suddenly broken up and the investigation restarted with a new set of investigators, the Rico case never materialized. What happened? Critics point to the Michigan attorney general, Dana Nessel. Running to replace the term-limited Republican attorney general Bill Schuette in 2018, Nessel, a Democrat, criticized the Flint criminal investigation under Schuette as “politically charged show trials” and campaigned on revamping the investigation. Shortly after Nessel won the attorney general race and took office, her administration fired the top prosecutors and investigators working on the Schuette-launched investigation and restarted the prosecution with a new team. At that point, the prosecution team assembled by Schuette had been working for nearly three years – and filed criminal charges against 15 Michigan state and Flint city officials, including four officials charged with financial fraud that prosecutors said triggered the water crisis. But when Nessel relaunched the investigation, her office dropped charges against top state and city officials, citing flaws in the Schuette-era investigation. In 2021, Nessel’s office recharged several of those defendants – with a new round of indictments that included involuntary manslaughter, misconduct in office, obstruction of justice, extortion and perjury. But gone were the financial fraud charges. “Nessel let it go,” said Eric Mays, chairman of the Flint city council, who closely followed the criminal prosecution both before and after Nessel. “Was it a lack of political or legal will? I cannot say. But it bothers me to this day her team hasn’t addressed it.” When reached for comment, a spokesperson for Nessel’s office said: “The prosecution team reviewed all the evidence and pursued all viable charges.” When she was an attorney-general hopeful, Nessel’s criticism of the Flint investigation worried local activists. Days before the 2018 general election, Melissa Mays – a Flint water activist and the lead plaintiff in a major civil lawsuit against former Michigan governor Rick Snyder, among others – reached out to Gretchen Whitmer, the Democratic candidate then running for governor. In an email obtained by the Guardian, Mays expressed concern over growing speculation that Nessel planned to overhaul the Flint investigation. Mays, a mother of three whose children were sickened by drinking Flint’s contaminated water as was she, was especially worried that, if elected, Nessel would fire Todd Flood, the special prosecutor appointed by Schuette. It was Flood who brought financial fraud charges against the two emergency managers appointed by Snyder to run Flint in place of its elected mayor and city council – Darnell Earley and Gerald Ambrose – as well as two Flint city officials. Whitmer wrote back: “While Schuette is an opportunist he is also a skilled politician whose [sic] begun something that the people of Flint can appreciate some value in,” she said. Whitmer also offered Mays her assurances: “I see it though and will talk to [Nessel].” It is unclear if Whitmer ever did speak with Nessel. (Whitmer did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment before publication.) Shortly after Nessel took office, Fadwa Hammoud, appointed by Nessel as the state’s solicitor general, fired Flood. The disappearance of the financial fraud charges is significant because the bond deal that allowed the city of Flint to switch its water supply had been heavily investigated by the Schuette-era prosecution. In 2014, Flint needed to borrow nearly $100m to join the proposed Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA), a new regional system that Flint would join as both a customer and part owner. But at the time, the city was broke and at its borrowing limit. A state-issued environmental order allowed the city to get around its debt limit and access $85m in funding, money earmarked for an “environmental calamity” – in this case, the cleanup of a local lime sludge pit. But the prosecution under Schuette alleged that the money supplied by this order for the cleanup was redirected for other purposes instead allowing Flint to issue tens of millions of dollars in bonds to join the KWA. The allegedly fraudulent environmental order also mandated that the city of Flint use the Flint River as its water source while the KWA pipeline was under construction. It outlined tens of millions of dollars in upgrades needed for the city’s water plant so that the plant could safely treat Flint River water for residents to drink. The problem: updates were nowhere near completed when the city switched its water supply to the Flint River in April 2014. In addition, a failure to add proper corrosion control chemicals into the Flint River water supply resulted in lead leaching off Flint’s older pipes and poisoning residents’ drinking water. Speaking before a state government committee in 2018, Andy Arena, former director of the FBI’s office in Detroit, said: “We believe there was significant financial fraud that drove this.” Arena was the chief Flint water investigator under the Schuette-era investigation but was dismissed after Nessel took office. After his firing, Arena revealed that his team was within six months of filing significant financial charges, which he described as “dropping a heavy rock”. Sources familiar with the Flint criminal investigation told the Guardian that those impending indictments were to be filed as Rico charges. In modern history, Rico charges have been most commonly – but not always – used against members of the mafia and organized crime syndicates. Documents obtained by the Guardian further confirm Flood’s investigation was looking into potential bribery and racketeering, crucial cogs of Rico cases. In one petition to subpoena an outside contractor who worked as a KWA project manager, obtained by the Guardian, prosecutors said they had “reasonable cause to believe that corrupt transactions involving certain contractors, the Genesee county drain commissioner’s office, other entities and persons of interest” had occurred. The header of the petition specified that prosecutors were investigating bribery, racketeering and false pretenses. Despite the original investigation’s momentum, the racketeering investigation vanished after Nessel cleaned house and relaunched the inquiry. “My position is that Flood was heading in the right direction,” said Mays, who in addition to cooperating with the former prosecution team became a member of the KWA board after the original 2014 bond deal was struck. “I followed the proceedings on the fraudulent bond sale. I know there were Rico charges in the works.” Multiple sources familiar with the investigation noted that if the financial fraud or Rico charges had been filed, the state of Michigan might have faced hundreds of millions in liability over the KWA bond deal - since the attorney general’s office under Schuette ultimately signed off on the allegedly fraudulent administrative order that greenlit Flint to borrow tens of millions to join the KWA. (The order was signed by an assistant attorney general in Schuette’s office.) “All too prevalent in this Flint water investigation was a priority on balance sheets and finances rather than health and safety of the citizens of Flint,” Schuette said in a statement in 2016. At that time, his office had charged four officials with false pretenses and conspiracy to commit false pretenses for their role in the Flint water crisis. Asked for comment for this piece, Schuette told the Guardian: “We had a strong team,” going on to refer to Arena and Flood. Schuette added: “We had a very aggressive approach in terms of the charges you’re talking about. I hope there is still a commitment to the people of Flint, and getting them the full justice they deserve.” After publication of this story, a spokesperson for the current criminal investigation told the Guardian, “When our team assumed responsibility over the Flint water prosecutions, we pursued all viable charges based on an exhaustive review of the entire body of evidence, including the evidence that had not been obtained by the Schuette administration.” The spokesperson went on to say that the evidence reviewed led to the indictments of nine individuals, who are currently in court. “Let me be clear,” the spokesperson added. “There was no charge that was not evaluated. There was no lead that was not pursued.” Solicitor Hammoud – in a response received after publication of this story – denied that Rico charges were “impending” at the time Nessel took office: “There were not.” JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo, who along with a third financial firm underwrote the KWA bond deal, could have also faced similar financial penalties for failing to do their due diligence, as outlined in the administrative order that preceded the bond deal, to ensure that necessary upgrades to Flint’s water plant were completed, such that the plant could safely treat Flint River water. In 2020, the banks were sued on behalf of 2,600 Flint children for their “conscience shocking behavior” in financing the deal that led to “dire health consequences to the children of Flint”. JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo declined to comment. Why Nessel, who stressed justice for Flint as an attorney general hopeful, and the prosecution team she selected, dropped already-filed financial fraud charges against state and city officials is an open question. For many who have extensively followed and studied the Flint water crisis, Nessel’s moves don’t make sense. “I never understood why the attorney general disrupted the initial investigation, dropped the initial charges, or set a different direction in her new charges that chart a course away from the issues of financing the KWA pipeline,” Peter Hammer, a Wayne State law professor who wrote an extensive civil rights report on the Flint water crisis, said. “Her decisions mean that some of the most important questions relating to the crisis – the political and economic forces driving the KWA pipeline – are not being addressed. This adds a new tragedy for the people of Flint, who deserve to know the root causes of their suffering and to hold any financial wrongdoing accountable,” added Hammer. The Flint water crisis now enters year eight. Both Nessel and Whitmer are standing for re-election. Meanwhile, the population of Flint has fallen to fewer than 95,000 residents, the lowest in more than a century. Not all of the city’s lead service lines have been replaced and residents’ deteriorating home plumbing, also damaged from the toxic Flint River water, have not been addressed. Residents still complain of rashes, hair loss and other ailments from the city’s drinking water. The Flint criminal investigation under Nessel did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment before publication. Jordan Chariton is an investigative reporter and the CEO of Status Coup News, an independent news outlet that covers political corruption, protest movements, working-class exploitation and overlooked communities. Charlie LeDuff is a Pulitzer prize-winning reporter based in MichiganLast year for Martin Luther King Jr Day, I interviewed a group of WNBA players along with Eric Garner’s daughter, Emerald. We spoke about their campaign to unseat Republican Kelly Loeffler, who had been part of the leadership group of the Atlanta Dream, from the US Senate. With the players’ help, the outside candidate Raphael Warnock beat Loeffler giving Democrats control of the Senate. That election in Georgia was an excellent example of how athletes can cause real change. But, as we mark MLK Day on Monday, there are plenty of signs the struggle is far from over. We’ve just passed the first anniversary of the 6 January riots, when a pro-Trump mob stormed the Capitol. The subsequent investigation into the riots was a chance to address the extremism that is poisoning US society. But Republicans have attempted to block the inquiry, while politicians and the rightwing media who fanned the flames have not been held accountable. We have also just watched the sentencing of the three white men who murdered a young Black man, Ahmaud Arbery, in cold blood while he was out jogging. And while justice was eventually served, we should remember that prosecutors failed to act until two months after the killing, when video of the murder was leaked, touching off international outcry. It’s fair to say that America still has a long way to go until it is a safe and just place for all. WNBA players caused real change last year in Georgia and their NBA peers made an impact after the murder of George Floyd in the summer of 2020. John Wall, Bradley Beal, Russell Westbrook, Jaylen Brown, Enes Kanter and the Ball brothers were among the dozens of NBA players who attended and spoke at Black Lives Matter marches. Carmelo Anthony, Dwayne Wade and Chris Paul founded the NBA Social Change Fund, which aims to support critical issues in the Black community. But now it’s time to take it a step further. And the NBA could and should use the WNBA as a blueprint to follow. I have even identified a place where they could make an important impact: Texas. Lee Merritt, who served as one of the lawyers for the Arbery family, is running for attorney general in the second-most populous state in the United States. He would be the most powerful legal figure in a state where battles over racial justice, policing, immigration and voting rights are being fought every day. In my new book, Police Brutality And White Supremacy: The Fight Against American Traditions, I interviewed politicians, athletes, activists and educators as well as victims (and their family members) of police brutality. Many of these people said fighting for laws to be changed is a vital part of changing the status quo. And while many have grown understandably tired of the voting process, local elections stand as one of the best methods to take a serious step in the right direction of justice. And there is no doubt Merritt is committed to justice. “The reason I am moving into the political spectrum is … that we still exist in the deadliest police culture in the modern world. Other countries have done it better. Other countries that we compare ourselves with. We’re in last place in terms of policing our communities without resorting to violence,” he told me on my podcast, The Rematch. “We need a better policy, and we’ve talked about it long enough. Now that we know the truth, let’s stop turning a blind eye to it and pursue policies that will actually lead to long term systemic change. And I believe that means having constitutional attorneys like myself assume the role of attorney general. And not only myself but Letitia James in New York, Keith Ellison in Minnesota, Kwame Raoul in Illinois.” He also acknowledged the tremendous role the NBA could play in achieving real change. “Members of the NBA have the opportunity, they have the position to really have an impact on how we pursue policy not only in the state of Texas but throughout the country and the voices of the NBA are critically important to that,” he said. “We’re asking for the NBA, and everyone else with a platform to join us in this movement because we can really change this country for the better.” He has a great point. Last year, WNBA players showed the power of athletes’ voices. Imagine what prominent Texas NBA players, executives and coaches such as Mark Cuban, Jason Kidd, Gregg Popovich, Tim Hardaway Jr and Luka Doncic (or indeed NFL players like Dallas Cowboys stars Ezekiel Elliott and Dak Prescott) could do if they endorsed Merritt? Slogans on jerseys calling for justice are all well and good. But if NBA players could make a difference in the election for a role as important as Texas attorney general, it would be huge a boost in the fight for justice in the United States. Etan Thomas played in the NBA from 2000 through 2011. He is a published poet, activist and motivational speakerThe plight of women’s rights campaigners in Bahrain and Jordan is in the spotlight after new revelations that two prominent female activists were hacked multiple times by countries using NSO Group spyware. An investigation by the human rights group Front Line Defenders (FLD) and the digital rights non-profit group Access Now found that the mobile phones of Ebtisam al-Saegh, a Bahraini human rights defender, and Hala Ahed Deeb, who works with human rights and feminist groups in Jordan, had been hacked using NSO’s Pegasus spyware. Both women said the discoveries, which were confirmed by security researchers at the University of Toronto’s Citizen Lab, felt like life-changing violations of their privacy, underscoring how such attacks against women were “particularly grievous” given how sensitive information could be weaponised against them. “Since they discovered their phones were infected, they have each been living in a state of daily anxiety and fear. They are especially afraid of the possibility of exposing other female activists and victims they work with, and concerned that their families and friends are now at risk,” FLD and Access Now said. According to Citizen Lab’s analysis, al-Saegh’s mobile device was found to have been hacked at least eight times between August and November 2019 using NSO spyware. It followed various incidents in which al-Saegh, who works for Salam for Democracy and Human Rights, was harassed by Bahraini authorities, including being summoned to a Muharraq police station, being interrogated, physically and sexually assaulted, and threatened with rape if she did not stop her activism, FLD and Access Now said. Al-Saegh said the knowledge that she had been hacked put her in a state of “daily fear and terror” and had taken away a sense of security she had felt within her own home, because she now felt her phone was “spying” on her at all times. “Home used to be the only safe space for me, a place for personal freedom where I can take off the veil and exercise my religious and social freedoms without limits,” she said in a statement shared by FLD. “The fear has restricted my work. I am constantly anxious and afraid that I have put others at risk because of their contact with me.” When it is successfully deployed against a mobile phone, Pegasus can intercept a mobile user’s messages and photographs, track their location and turn the phone into a remote listening device. NSO has said that its software is licensed to be used by client countries against suspected terrorists and other serious criminals, and that it investigates credible allegations of abuse by its clients. A spokesperson for NSO said: “We cannot directly comment on a report we haven’t seen, nor investigate based on names received in a press inquiry.” The spokesperson added: “NSO’s firm stance on these issues is that the use of cyber tools in order to monitor dissidents, activists and journalists, regardless of their gender, is a severe misuse of any technology and goes against the desired use of such critical tools. The international community should have zero tolerance policy towards such acts, therefore a global regulation is needed. NSO has proven in the past it has zero tolerance for these types of misuse, by terminating multiple contracts.” The discovery of spyware on the two activists’ phones follows multiple reports of other female activists and journalists who have been targeted in the past, including the late Emirati activist Alaa Al-Siddiq, and the Al Jazeera broadcast journalist Ghada Oueiss. Researchers confirmed that Deeb’s mobile device was infected with Pegasus in March 2021. Deeb said the hacking had made her feel “violated, naked, and with no dignity”. “I have often said that I have nothing to hide, but I realised that privacy in itself is my right,” she said in a statement that was shared by FLD. She added: “I do not communicate with my friends and I avoid talking on the phone as much as I can. I practise a kind of self-censorship sometimes when I wonder what behaviours would provoke those who hacked my phone?”The estate of the late pop singer Prince, including his catalogue of songs, has been valued at $156.4m (£114m), nearly twice an earlier appraisal. The estate’s administrator, Comerica Bank, agreed on the figure with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the heirs to Prince’s estate. The singer died in 2016 without a will, and his estate will pass to three of his siblings as well as the publishing company Primary Wave, who in August 2021 bought out rights to the Prince catalogue from another three heirs, two of them deceased. The redistribution of the estate’s value could begin next month. “It has been a long six years,” said L Londell McMillan, lawyer for the three heirs, who have faced a costly legal process to have the estate’s value settled and distributed. The process came to a head earlier this month when the IRS, the US tax agency, asserted that the estate was worth $163.2m, twice the $82.3m figure previously submitted by Comerica. The higher valuation meant the IRS would claim substantially more tax. Comerica had sued the IRS in 2020, arguing that there were errors in its valuation. In the wake of the settlement, Comerica argued that is would have prevailed had the case gone to trial, but the heirs had pushed for a settlement to bring the process to a quicker conclusion. Primary Wave and the remaining heirs will now hope to amass new and ongoing revenue from the estate. Prince’s brilliant and far-reaching song catalogue spans funk, R&amp;B, new wave and beyond, and contains pop masterpieces such as Purple Rain, When Doves Cry and 1999. The estate holders can earn income from streaming and sales royalties, as well as placements of Prince songs in film, TV and advertising. The potentially lucrative returns from song catalogues like this have spurred a wave of high-value acquisitions by major labels and publishing companies such as Primary Wave and Hipgnosis, including bodies of work by Bob Dylan, Neil Young, Fleetwood Mac and Paul Simon.England’s north-south divide continues to deepen despite two years of “levelling-up” rhetoric from the government, according to a landmark new report to be published tomorrow. Entitled State of the North 2021, and produced by IPPR North, the northern branch of the Institute for Public Policy Research thinktank, the report compares levels of public investment in London and the south-east with that in the north. Its authors estimate that, in the five years to 2019/20, London received the equivalent of £12,147 per person, while in the north the figure was only £8,125. Treasury data indicated that if investment in the north had matched that in London over the five years from 2014/15, it would have meant an extra £61bn of spending in areas such as transport, infrastructure and skills. The south-east, the report states, is home to one-third of the UK population but now accounts for 45% of its economy and 42% of its wealth. The stark disparities will fuel concerns among “red wall” Conservative MPs that the government’s flagship policy is underfunded, and do not fulfil Boris Johnson’s promise to rebalance the economy. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has effectively capped the main levelling-up fund at £4.8bn for this parliament. Critics say this is a drop in the ocean after decades of underinvestment and 10 years of austerity cuts. In November, after pressure from the Treasury, the promised eastern leg of HS2 from Birmingham to Leeds was scrapped and a proposed high-speed line between Manchester and Leeds downgraded. At the time of those decisions, the chair of the Northern Research Group of Tory MPs, Jake Berry, challenged Johnson over whether “voters in the north [were] right to take the prime minister at his word”. As well as highlighting the scale of the funding gap between the north and south-east, the IPPR report also points to Germany, where successive governments have spent an average of €70bn a year reducing regional divides since reunification in 1990. Jonathan Webb, one of the report’s authors, said: “However we measure investment in levelling up – whether we compare with Germany’s successful efforts to rebalance its economy, or to London-level investment – it’s clear that central government simply hasn’t put its money where its mouth is when it comes to rebalancing the economy. Levelling up will be consigned to the list of hollow, unmet promises made to people in regions like the north for a long time now, if it isn’t underpinned by investment and, crucially, fiscal devolution.” The levelling-up white paper, detailing the government’s plans, has been repeatedly delayed. It is now due by the end of the month. Responding to the IPPR study, the shadow secretary of state for levelling up, Lisa Nandy, said: “For all the talk of levelling up, the story of this government has been to strip power from communities across Britain. After a decade of empty slogans and broken promises, the levelling-up paper must finally provide the resources and a plan to deliver the radical change we have been promised.” A Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities spokesperson said: “This analysis is misleading as it focuses on just one part of our investment to level up the North of England. “In addition to the £4.8bn Levelling Up Fund, we’re providing record investment in infrastructure worth over £96bn, £12bn in affordable housing and a £2.6bn Shared Prosperity Fund to help rebalance opportunity across the UK. “The government will publish a white paper that will drive forward this central mission in due course.” • This article was amended on 17 January 2022 to include a comment from the department, which was provided after publication.A Jewish notary has been named by a cold case team led by a former FBI agent as the prime suspect for the betrayal of Anne Frank and her family to the Nazis. Arnold van den Bergh, who died in 1950, has been accused on the basis of six years of research and an anonymous note received by Anne’s father, Otto Frank, after his return to Amsterdam at the end of the war. The note claims Van den Bergh, a member of a Jewish council, an administrative body the Germans forced Jews to establish, had given away the Frank family’s hiding place along with other addresses used by those in hiding. He had been motivated by fears for his life and that of his family, it is suggested in a CBS documentary and accompanying book, The Betrayal of Anne Frank, by Rosemary Sullivan, based on research gathered by the retired FBI detective Vince Pankoke and his team. Pankoke learned that Van den Bergh had managed to have himself categorised as a non-Jew initially but was then redesignated as being Jewish after a business dispute. It is suggested that Van den Bergh, who acted as notary in the forced sale of works of art to prominent Nazis such as Hermann Göring, used addresses of hiding places as a form of life insurance for his family. Neither he nor his daughter were deported to the Nazi camps. Anne Frank hid for two years in a concealed annexe above a canalside warehouse in the Jordaan area of Amsterdam before being discovered on 4 August 1944, along with her father, mother, Edith, and sister, Margot. The young diarist was sent to Westerbork transit camp, and on to Auschwitz concentration camp before finally ending up in Bergen-Belsen, where she died in February 1945 at the age of 15, possibly from typhus. Her published diary spans the period in hiding between 1942 and her last entry on 1 August 1944. Despite a series of investigations, the mystery of who led the Nazis to the annex remains unsolved. Otto Frank, who died in 1980, was thought to have a strong suspicion of that person’s identity but he never divulged it in public. Several years after the war, he had told the journalist Friso Endt that the family had been betrayed by someone in the Jewish community. The cold case team discovered that Miep Gies, one of those who helped get the family into the annexe, had also let slip during a lecture in America in 1994 that the person who betrayed them had died by 1960. There were two police investigations, in 1947 and 1963, into the circumstances surrounding the betrayal of the Franks. The son of the detective, Arend van Helden, who led the second inquiry, provided a typewritten copy of the anonymous note to the cold case reviewers. The author of the new book, Sullivan, said: “Vanden Bergh was a well-known notary, one of six Jewish notaries in Amsterdam at the time. A notary in the Netherlands is more like a very high-profile lawyer. As a notary, he was respected. He was working with a committee to help Jewish refugees, and before the war as they were fleeing Germany. “The anonymous note did not identify Otto Frank. It said ‘your address was betrayed’. So, in fact, what had happened was Van den Bergh was able to get a number of addresses of Jews in hiding. And it was those addresses with no names attached and no guarantee that the Jews were still hiding at those addresses. That’s what he gave over to save his skin, if you want, but to save himself and his family. Personally, I think he is a tragic figure.” • This article was amended on 18 January 2022. The photo is of Anne Frank at school, not of her writing in her diary as stated in an earlier agency caption.Jack is a name that pops up in the Genius, the Guardian’s monthly advanced puzzle. Jack is also known as Jason Crampton, who is also known as Skipjack but most often as Serpent – in the Independent, the Inquisitor, Enigmatic Variations and the Listener. Oh, and also in subscription magazine the Magpie, where he is on the editorial team. Let’s meet Serpent. Or Jack. Hello Jack. Has the pandemic generated extra interest for the Magpie magazine, or for tougher puzzles more generally? Absolutely! The number of Magpie subscribers increased last year, as has the number of solutions we receive each month. The number of subscribers to the Cracking the Cryptic YouTube channel – run by Mark Goodliffe and Simon Anthony, who co-founded the Magpie – has grown enormously. Happy to hear it. Do you have a favourite of your own puzzles? Of my blocked puzzles, perhaps my favourite is the one I wrote following the death of my dog, Bo: every across entry contained his name and the unchecked cells in the central row spelt out GOODBYE. Here’s a review of it (and a link, which might work on some devices). When did you get the crossword bug? I started solving cryptic crosswords at university. I got the setting bug when I attended one of Boatman’s masterclasses. Like others we’ve spoken to here. And how did you choose your pseudonyms? Serpent is a cryptographic algorithm, so it was connected to my day job as a professor of information security. I had intended to choose other cryptographic algorithms if I needed further pseudonyms but then decided that words related to Serpent would be better, hence Basilisk. Skipjack is another cryptographic algorithm, but everyone thought it was a reference to tuna! And Jack is a contraction of Skipjack. Professor, eh? Any other setters you know of in the same echelon? At least a couple: Monk is a professor of mathematics at Leeds University and Sabre – setter of brilliantly fiendish barred puzzles – is also a maths professor, at Arizona State University. Ah, Sabre. My old foe. What makes a successful clue? Or an unsuccessful one? I think successful clues contain at least one of the following: humour, misdirection, oblique definitions and inventive wordplay. An unsuccessful clue contains inaccurate cryptic grammar or definitions. A weak clue uses pedestrian definitions and a list of wordplay instructions that simply have to be followed. We’ve talked here before about how the business of crosswords can involve as much maths as it does literacy. What’s the overlap between your old day job and the puzzles? The wordplay can be thought of as expressions in a formal language, in which wordplay elements represent variables and wordplay indicators represent operators on those variables. I find it very helpful to think of clues in this way when I’m analysing whether the cryptic grammar of a clue is correct. Setting a crossword is a bit like setting an exam: there’s no point in making it too hard or too easy, so there have to be a few entry points. Also, the process of preparing puzzles for publication, especially when one is trying to first get published, has similarities with preparing academic papers for submission. There are many reasons a paper or a crossword can be rejected, so it’s important to give an editor as little as possible to find fault with. Quite. Now, you’re unusual in using the same name in your weekday puzzles as your tricky weekend ones. How do you alter the level of intricacy? Many barred puzzles contain quite obscure words, limiting the possibilities for disguising the definition. Clues for these words often end up as a list of instructions for constructing the answer tacked on to a straightforward definition. I think I’m unusual in also trying to avoid obscure vocabulary in my barred puzzles: I try to populate my grids using a rather limited dictionary. This means I can write clues that are similar to those that I write in blocked puzzles. The disguise in the surfaces – plus any thematic clueing gimmicks – suffice to make the clues difficult enough. What are the tools of your trade? Qxw for grid construction. Crossword Compiler for assembling puzzles in a format acceptable to editors. The Chambers dictionary and thesaurus apps for my phone/tablet. Qat for pattern-matching and searching, which is absolutely essential for barred puzzle construction. Qxw and Qat are both available from Quinapalus’s website. Oxford Dictionary of Quotations and Wikipedia for barred puzzle research. Qat is remarkable. What kind of people do you think are attracted to barred tough puzzles? I think there are people who love crosswords but, after years of practice, find the daily cryptics too easy; they relish the additional challenge of solving puzzles with clueing gimmicks. Others aren’t that interested in daily cryptics but love difficult logical puzzles. For them, it is the endgames of the barred thematic puzzles that are particularly interesting. I’m in the former camp, so my barred puzzles tend to have quite difficult clues but relatively straightforward endgames. Other setters write comparatively straightforward clues but the endgames are extremely intricate and things of real beauty. How do people respond when you tell them that you’re a crossword setter? In pretty much the same way as when I used to say I was a professor in a maths department! “You must be really brainy” or “I could never do maths/solve crosswords”. But they’re also fascinated by it and really interested in how I go about setting them. I try to persuade those who don’t solve crosswords to try them. I tell them they only need a reasonable vocabulary, some patience and an interest in how language can be used in imaginative ways. What’s the future for cryptic crosswords? It’s really difficult to say. I think there will always be a niche market for tough barred puzzles. They will survive in specialist magazines like the Magpie, even if they disappear from the newspapers. There are some brilliant young setters of such puzzles and new ones are always emerging. However, crossword puzzles are relatively expensive to produce compared with puzzles such as sudoku and kakuro, so I could see daily cryptics being viewed as a luxury that newspapers can no longer afford with advertising revenues declining. I hope I’m wrong! But it may be that specialist online crossword sites will emerge that charge subscribers for daily puzzles. I hope there would be enough people willing to pay for puzzles of the quality found in the Guardian and the other broadsheets. Many thanks to Serpent/Jack, whose suggestion for our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-22 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to is from his old schoolfriend Richard March, who “has been involved in recording cover versions of classic songs to raise money for musicians unable to earn a living during the pandemic”. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop. • Here is a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs.Surveillance flights have been sent from Australia and New Zealand to assess damage after Tonga was isolated from the rest of the world following a volcanic eruption. Here’s how events have played out over the past few days. 14 January About 4.20am local time (3.10pm GMT on 13 January), the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano erupts, sending plumes of ash, steam and gas up to 20km into the atmosphere. The undersea volcano is located about 65km (40 miles) north of Tonga’s capital, Nuku’alofa, and is part of a vast arc of volcanoes and ocean trenches known as the Pacific “Ring of Fire”. Though it only rises 114 metres above sea level, the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano overall is 1.8km high and 20km wide. A public notice issued by the Tonga Geological Services notes continuous eruption and a 5km-wide plume. The volcano had been active since an earlier eruption on 20 December but was declared dormant by the authority on 11 January. Volcanic activity in 2014 and 2015 had joined the islands of Hunga Tonga and Hunga Ha’apai, which were themselves produced by older volcanic eruptions. A satellite image taken after the eruption shows that the connecting volcanic cone has been largely destroyed. The Tonga Meteorological Services issue a tsunami warning for all islands across the country, with waves of up to 30cm recorded following the eruption. 15 January – 5.10pm (4.10am GMT) The Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano erupts again at 5.10pm local time on Saturday 15 January. The massive eruption, larger than the one on 14 January, generates an enormous amount of energy and creates an umbrella cloud of ash, spreading the plume concentrically outwards instead of being dispersed in one direction by wind. The initial height of the ash plume is an estimated 15.2km in altitude, later rising up to 30km high. The plume spreads to 260km in diameter before being distorted by wind. The strength of the eruption – as measured by the volcanic explosivity index – is still unknown, as it requires exact figures on how high the plume reaches and the volume of ash ejected. Images from weather satellites, such as this animated video using imagery from a Korean weather satellite, show the dramatic explosion, with ash and water vapour covering an area hundreds of kilometres in diameter: 15 January – 5.30pm Twenty minutes later, at 5.30pm local time, a 1.2 metre tsunami wave is observed at Nuku’alofa, Tonga’s capital, according to the Australian Bureau of Meteorology. Photos and videos emerge on social media of large waves flooding coastal areas, with reports of people making their way inland and to higher ground. Footage shows waves causing damage to buildings and infrastructure such as seawalls. 15 January – 6.15pm By evening in the Pacific, the volcano is raining ash and “tiny pebbles” on neighbouring Tongan islands, with reports of “darkness blanketing the sky”. Nuku’alofa is reportedly covered in a thick film of volcanic dust. There are concerns about contamination of food and water supplies, as well as acid rain. In addition to preventing aircraft from flying, ash hampers recovery efforts because it “buries gardens and impacts plants with consequences for food supply, and is likely to contaminate water supplies,” volcanologist Dr Chris Firth says. This video of satellite images from the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research in New Zealand shows the plume of ash from the eruption enveloping the main island of Tonga, Tongatapu. 15 January – 7pm An air pressure surge from the volcano’s eruption is recorded at seismic stations internationally, including in New Zealand, Australia, the US, and the UK, where two shockwaves are observed. Data from the Australian Bureau of Meteorology shows the shockwave travelled faster than 1000 km/h – almost as fast as the speed of sound – and resulted in a noticeable jump in atmospheric pressure. Sonic booms from the eruption were heard across the Pacific, including in Fiji and Vanuatu, and as far as Alaska, more than 9,000km away. 15 January – 8.15pm In the hours that follow, tsunami warnings are issued across the Pacific, including in New Zealand, Australia, the west coast of the US, and Japan, where around 230,000 people across eight prefectures are ordered to evacuate. Experts believe the tsunami activity could have been triggered either by shock waves propagating through water, or by a landslide on the undersea part of the volcano. Only an estimated 5% of tsunamis have historically resulted from volcanoes, including the 1883 eruption of Krakatoa, which caused a devastating tsunami in the Indian Ocean. Krakatoa’s violent eruption was reported to have been heard 4,800km away. 16 January Large waves and strong currents are recorded in many coastal areas globally. Images on social media show destruction of coastal homes on several islands in the South Pacific, while Japan’s Pacific coast sees waves of nearly 1.2 metres. Authorities in New Zealand confirm that an undersea cable linking Tonga to Fiji has been damaged. Two people drown off a beach in the Lambayeque region of Peru, after unusually high waves are recorded there. The country closes 22 ports as a precaution. The Californian city of Santa Cruz is hit by a tidal surge, damaging boats and resulting in flooding. 17 January – 2pm Australia and New Zealand send planes to Tonga to assess the damage to critical infrastructure such as roads, ports and powerlines. Surveillance flights had been delayed as a result of the ash cloud blanketing Tonga. 17 January – 3pm A veil of ash from Saturday’s Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano eruption is seen drifting west towards northern Australia, at an altitude between 12-20km, New Zealand’s meteorological service reports.The upcoming sixth series of blockbuster BBC drama Peaky Blinders will be the last but a new dance-theatre production written by the show’s creator Steven Knight is to retell the Birmingham gangster saga on stage. Peaky Blinders: The Redemption of Thomas Shelby, announced on Monday, will open this autumn at Birmingham Hippodrome then tour in 2023. It is a collaboration with Rambert dance company and will feature a cast of 20 and a live band playing specially commissioned music. The French choreographer Benoit Swan Pouffer, who was announced as Rambert’s new artistic director in 2018, will stage what he describes as an “inspiring and uplifting” production. The stage show picks up the story of the Peaky Blinders at the end of the first world war and opens in the trenches. It will focus on the romance between Tommy Shelby (played in the TV series by Cillian Murphy) and barmaid-cum-undercover-agent Grace Burgess (played by Annabelle Wallis). Knight said that the series “has always had music and movement at its heart and now the beating heart of the show will be transferred to the stage”. The production “is dance for people who don’t usually watch dance,” he continued. “If the concept of a Peaky Blinders dance seems strange, reserve judgment and reserve a ticket.” Helen Shute, CEO and executive producer of Rambert, said: “We’re incredibly honoured to be trusted by Steven Knight with his nationally beloved Peaky Blinders … We look forward to welcoming a new generation of audiences to theatres with a story that speaks to so many people.” The show will have its world premiere at Birmingham Hippodrome, where it runs from 27 September to 2 October. It then moves to London’s Troubadour Wembley Park theatre (12 October- 6 November) before embarking on a 2023 tour. Pouffer, who will direct and choreograph the production, said that the show “is something on a scale we’ve never done before” and that he “couldn’t be more ready for the challenge”. Rambert is Britain’s oldest dance company and had a 14-month hiatus from touring caused by the Covid-19 pandemic – the longest break in its 95-year history. A grant from the government’s Culture Recovery Fund helped the company return to stages last May. In September 2019, Pouffer choreographed a Rambert performance at the first official Peaky Blinders festival, a weekend event also featuring Primal Scream and held in the Digbeth and Small Heath areas of Birmingham, where the original gang who inspired the series were based. This is not the first time that Peaky Blinders creator Steven Knight has written for the stage. His play The President of an Empty Room, set over the course of one day in a Cuban cigar factory, was directed by Howard Davies at the National Theatre in London in 2005. Last year, Knight said that the Peaky Blinders story would continue as a film after the TV series had ended. “My plan from the beginning was to end Peaky with a movie,” he told Deadline. “That is what is going to happen.” Before Rambert’s show opens, a separate stage production hopes to attract the huge fanbase of the TV juggernaut which was first broadcast on BBC2 in 2013 and whose fifth series – taking a primetime Sunday night slot on BBC1 – launched to an audience of 6.2 million in 2019. The immersive theatre show Peaky Blinders: The Rise will be staged at the Vanguard theatre in Camden, north London, this summer. It is directed by Tom Maller and designed by Rebecca Brower whose immersive adventure Doctor Who: Time Fracture opened in the summer of 2021.The outlook for jobs globally this year has worsened markedly since last spring as new variants of the Covid-19 virus have slowed growth and restricted hiring, according to a report from the International Labour Organisation. In its latest assessment of the state of the labour market, the Geneva-based ILO said unemployment would remain above 2019 levels until at least 2023 and the damage caused by the pandemic would take years to repair. The ILO said its latest estimates showed there would be the equivalent of 52m fewer jobs globally in 2022 than in the last quarter of 2019, the period immediately before the pandemic struck. That represents a doubling from the 26m in the organisation’s last labour market update in May 2021. According to the report, global unemployment will be 207m, a smaller drop from the 214m in 2021 than previously expected and well above the 186m reported in 2019. The ILO said the impact of the pandemic on employment was “significantly” greater than the raw figures suggested, because many people had left the labour force entirely. The global labour force participation rate, the number of people in work or seeking employment, was forecast to be 59.3% in 2022 – 1.2 percentage points below that of 2019, it added. The ILO director-general, Guy Ryder, said: “Two years into this crisis, the outlook remains fragile and the path to recovery is slow and uncertain. “We are already seeing potentially lasting damage to labour markets, along with concerning increases in poverty and inequality. Many workers are being required to shift to new types of work – for example in response to the prolonged slump in international travel and tourism. “There can be no real recovery from this pandemic without a broad-based labour market recovery. And to be sustainable, this recovery must be based on the principles of decent work – including health and safety, equity, social protection and social dialogue.” The ILO said the Delta and Omicron variants had been partly responsible for the downgrades to its 2022 forecasts, noting there was significant uncertainty about the future course of the pandemic. Labour market recovery was fastest in high-income countries, where a higher proportion of populations have been vaccinated. The ILO said the most developed nations accounted for about half of the global decline in unemployment between 2020 and 2022 while constituting only about a fifth of the global labour force. Lower-middle-income countries had fared the worst during the pandemic.Novelty comes annually to wine, the release of each new vintage bringing, in effect, the release of a new product every year. It means no winemaker can release the same wine two years in succession, even if they wanted to. No matter how obsessively they might try to control all the other variables (same vines, same tanks, same yeasts, same winemaker, same bottle, same label), the year’s weather will always have its say. Of course, the release of some new vintages is more anticipated than others. Right now, in London, the top end of the Burgundy wine trade is showing off the soon-to-be-released wines of the region’s 2020 vintage, which, by all insider accounts I’ve heard, has brought some beautiful wines into the world, as indeed it seems to have done all over France. The 2020 wines will feel all the more precious given the viticultural disaster that was 2021 not just in France but across Europe, where late spring frosts, hail and, further south, forest fires, among other Biblical factors, combined to bring the smallest European vintage in 30 years. When I visited the Loire back in November, I came across the sorry sight of empty barrels everywhere, inevitable when producers were facing the loss of up to 80% of their annual crop. The cycle of vintages isn’t the only source of the new in wine. The frenzy of planting and site-discovery that was such a feature of the previous half century in wine outside Europe – when countries such as Australia, New Zealand, Argentina, Chile and the USA were establishing themselves as peers to France and Italy – may have calmed. Exciting new vineyards are still emerging all over the so-called New World, whether it’s the tiny but extraordinarily promising Place of Changing Winds in the Macedon Ranges region of Victoria in Australia, or the Domaines Barons de Rothschild’s attempt to make a Chinese answer to Château Lafite in the Qiu Shan valley of Shandong province. In Europe, much of what I think of as new is really a return to the old. Many of the most exciting “new” wines I tasted last year, for example, came from winemakers working rediscovered very old vineyards in places such as the Gredos mountains near Madrid or Mt Etna in Sicily, while others are the result of British merchants’ rediscovery of the joys of eastern European wine culture, from Slovenia and Croatia, to Bulgaria and Romania. In the same spirit, the use of the original, ancient winemaking vessel, the clay amphora, has become increasingly widely – and deftly – used, while one of the styles associated with these clay pots – wines made from white grapes that have spent so long macerating with their skins the colour has turned orange – has made ever deeper progress into the mainstream. Much to the annoyance of the small-scale producers responsible for the style’s development, the mass-produced “orange” wine, often made in somewhat more industrial stainless steel tanks rather than amphorae, is one of the biggest of wine’s new old things. Rigal Vin Orange Vin de France (£10, Morrisons) One of the best of the new supermarket breed of high-production orange wines, this southern French effort is made using the tangy Gascon gros manseng grape. The extra time in contact with the skins brings an intense nutty-herbal twang and touch of chewy texture to the exotic fruit. Kvalitetno Vino Croatica Grasevina Croatia 2020 (£9.95, tanners-wines.co.uk) There’s nothing “new” about Croatian wines, but there has been a change of attitude towards them among British wine importers. That’s good news for fans of juicy, fresh, aromatically vivacious white wines such as this, made from the grasevina grape (AKA welsch riesling). Cave de Lugny Chardonnay Mâcon-Villages Burgundy, France 2020 (£11.95, Waitrose) Burgundy’s smartest domaines are only just revealing the quality of their 2020s. There are already numerous examples of this vintage out in the wild from bigger producers, with this white showing bountiful ripe rounded fruitiness, honey and luminous brightness. COS Pithos Rosso di Vittoria Sicily, Italy 2019 (from £24.10, hedonism.co.uk; lescaves.co.uk; josephbarneswines.com) A blend of Sicilian local varieties frappato and nero d’avola, this wine is from a small biodynamic producer in southeastern Sicily. Its distinctive sweet-savoury-sour-cherry-plum forms a seductive argument for using terracotta amphorae to make red wine. Château le Roc Roc’Ambulle Pet Nat Negrette Fronton, France 2020 (from £15.40, montywines.co.uk; forestwines.com) Another very old winemaking method enjoying a modern renaissance, pet nat sparklers are made by bottling the wine before it’s finished fermenting, with the CO2 remaining in the bottle. This is a lovely, lively example from vineyards near Toulouse, all sweetly easy-drinking cherry-berry fun. BEST BUY 4 Monos GR10, Vinos de Madrid, Spain 2018 (£12.67, justerinis.com) A brilliant entry point for the delicately beautiful infusions of sun-baked hillside herbs, warm earth and red fruit that are the very old vine garnacha-based wines of the Gredos mountains near Madrid. This is filled with fresh wild strawberry succulence.“Language, religion, music and storytelling all form part of the migrant’s cultural toolbox, but perhaps nothing provides more of a sense of identity than food.” This is a line from the introduction of Yasmin Khan’s travelogue-cookbook Ripe Figs, which charts her travels through Greece, Cyprus and Turkey, and is underpinned by the experience of her family’s migration from Kashmir to Punjab, Gilan in Iran to London. Also open on my desk here in the corner of the kitchen is Paola Bacchia’s Istria, which uses recipes to tell the story of her parents’ emigration from Istria and Italy to Melbourne in the 1950s, alongside stories of her own return visits. These were two of my favourite cookbooks last year, both to read and to cook from. They are different, approaching distinct circumstances in different ways. Khan is bold in her retelling of journeys undertaken for protection and safety, to flee political, economic and social turmoil, and also challenges how certain journeys are seen as problematic. Bacchia, meanwhile, keeps her focus closely on her own family and the daily act of cooking, although within that are powerful hints as to the complex history and politics of the Croatian-Slovenian-Italian-Istrian peninsula, and the dramatic exodus and loss. What the two books share is love; and how food accompanies people on journeys, how it provides comfort and a way of maintaining a sense of identity, especially as that evolves in a new place. For both authors, food answers the question: where do we come from and what do we believe? For Bacchia, the answers come in the form of Venetian fish stews with polenta, desserts you might find in a Viennese coffee shop, Hungarian-style goulash, sauerkraut and pasta dishes with both Italian and Croatian names. Today’s recipe, now on regular rotation here, is hers: gulash di funghi e peperoni. Mushrooms and peppers are a compatible couple in terms of flavour and also nature. Despite their different textures, they behave similarly in the pan, first giving off liquid, then reabsorbing the collective liquid and becoming almost velvety in the process. They both benefit from some hot paprika, too, which fires up the sweet pepper and mushroom’s earthy flavour. While the version without cream is lovely, its addition not only brings everything together, it takes the dish into a luxurious dimension. While it is full of flavour and fairly rich, it doesn’t weigh heavy. Bacchia suggests serving it with polenta or mashed potatoes; I imagine boiled potatoes would be good, too, or spätzle or another egg pasta. As you can see from the photograph, and in keeping with the idea, recipes may change as they arrive in new kitchens. We had it with rice. Mushroom and pepper goulash (adapted from a recipe in Paola Bacchia’s Istria) Serves 4 15g dried porcini 1kg field mushrooms 2 red peppers, or 1 large jar roast peppers 1 large onion, peeled and sliced 4 tbsp olive oil 20g butter Salt 2 garlic cloves, peeled and thinly sliced 150ml dry white wine 150g tomato passata, or 1 heaped tbsp tomato concentrate dissolved in 140ml warm water A few sprigs of thyme 2 tsp sweet paprika ½ tsp hot, smoked paprika 1-2 tbsp red-wine vinegar 200ml single cream, to serve (optional) Soak the porcini in 150ml warm water for 15 minutes. Lift out, chop and set aside, along with the soaking liquid. Wipe clean the field mushrooms and cut into 7mm-thick slices, which for an average mushroom means into three. Cut the peppers into four, remove the seeds and pith, then cut each quarter into 3mm-wide strips. (If using jarred peppers, cut them into thick strips.) Set a large, heavy-based pan for which you have a lid over a medium-low heat, add the olive oil and butter, then stir in the onions and a pinch of salt and cook, stirring, for about 10 minutes, until soft and translucent. Stir in the garlic and cook for a minute more. Add the reconstituted and the fresh mushrooms, raise the heat and cook, stirring, for a few minutes, until the mushrooms start shrinking. Add the peppers and cook, stirring for a few minutes more. (If you are using jarred ones, wait.) Add the wine, passata, thyme and the porcini liquid with all the paprika stirred into it first. Bring to a boil, then cover, turn the heat down low and simmer for 15 minutes. Remove the lid and, if you are using jarred peppers, add them now. Continue cooking uncovered for at least 15 minutes, while tasting and watching. If you are adding cream, you want most of the liquid evaporated; if not, you need something more brothy. Either way, once cooked, taste, adjust with salt, more paprika and a tablespoon or two of red-wine vinegar. If you are adding it, stir in 200ml single cream just before serving. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoA potent memory from one of the more unedifying periods of my life: regularly working late enough to find myself too exhausted or disinclined to cook, completing my commute with minutes to spare before the nearest shop within any reasonable distance closed, and traipsing up and down the aisles, attempting to coax out of hiding – or else will into existence – something more appetising than a microwaveable meal. Usually, this performance ended in succumbing to the most yellow-stickered curry. Sometimes, though, I would refuse this miserable end. I would stoically scour the remaining available takeaway options across the delivery apps and drop more than is advisable on a meal. It would invariably arrive lukewarm after midnight; I’d feel too tired to stay awake, but also completely unable to sleep. Then my alarm for the following morning would sound and I would begin this sordid little ritual all over again. I was recently transported back to that time by an advert. An Uber Eats rider stands in a harshly illuminated corridor, holding aloft a bag apparently containing a delivery of Subway sandwiches. A slogan reads “When your day is long, go Footlong”. I stared at it for a while. The clumsy wordplay, the ironic defeatism, the Subway sandwich as the epitome of something only someone completely ground down by their day could believe was a palatable option … Ah, crushing resignation, my old friend. I feel compelled to spend at least £10 on you again. At some point, a significant segment of advertising in the UK and the US started self-consciously aping the sardonic disaffection and dejection that many of us feel about grimly submitting to life under contemporary capitalism. A shoe company predicts a future without retirement and does not offer salvation, but instead footwear suited to perennial toil. An online estate agent mocks the idea of conceiving of a home as anything other than an investment opportunity. A tech company boasts of how its mobile phones facilitate the penetration of work into your every waking hour. A website builder appropriates Dolly Parton’s most famous song to nod to a “5 to 9” culture of working on a myriad of jobs and hustles. What vision of the world is conjured by this kind of advertising? It’s hardly an optimistic one. It’s as though capitalism no longer feels the need to promote itself through advertising – its public face – nor maintain a pretence that it can deliver an appealing or even tolerable way of life for many. Instead, these adverts affect a knowing posture, as if they, too, share our dissatisfactions with the modern world, all the while heavily implying its conditions are as inevitable as drizzle in British summer time. The Uber Eats ads are likely very effective; plastered all over public transport, where dog-tired commuters will be most suggestible to the charms of a sugar-crash-inducing 12-inch meatball marinara. A quick audit of the interiors of the buses, trains and trams that serve Britain’s cities reveals a unifying theme. Alongside Uber Eats’ competitors in the takeaway market (Just Eat, Deliveroo, Getir), a huge amount of the adverts pummelling you on your way into the office seem to be for minimal effort “meal kit” services (Gousto, HelloFresh, Mindful Chef) or else products that replace the need to bother with the faff of a meal entirely (Huel, Soylent). Deprived of the requisite leisure time to cook for pleasure or eat, we must instead find ways of efficiently optimising our sustenance. Perhaps the most miserable thing about the Uber Eats campaign is the way it’s fronted by one of the company’s many employees who aren’t really employees at all. One obvious example of those forced to organise their life around long, late-night hours that are not conducive to eating, are those contractors who make up the gig economy – a realm of the modern labour market in which the widespread use of “self-employment” means workers are deprived of the benefits and stability that everyone deserves. Research published by the TUC estimates that around 4.4 million people (nearly 15% of working adults) perform “platform work” in this insecure sector. That this has more than doubled since 2016 means it’s not particularly difficult to imagine a scenario in which an Uber Eats rider clocks off hungry at a time when their options are limited to relying on another delivery rider to bring them an insubstantial meal. And then that next rider finds themselves in the same position. And so on. There’s something more than a little worrying about an advertising culture that doesn’t even try to delude us into imagining a fantastic future, but instead reflects the grim realities of the present. That said, defeated resignation can be lucrative for the advertisers. It’s in precisely these conditions that the human mind encounters the Subway sandwich at its most desirable – and regards the idea of having one couriered to the front door late at night a prudent financial decision. So, what are we having tonight? Tristan Cross is a Welsh writer based in LondonKen Livingstone, the former mayor of London who was suspended from Labour over comments about Hitler supporting Zionism, has said he will apply to join the Green party. Describing himself as “both green and red”, he told the Guardian: “I genuinely think we’re heading toward extinction before the end of the century because no government anywhere is doing enough to tackle the impact of climate change. “At Cop26 they all said the right things but … you’ve got to get people to completely change the way we live and no government around the world seems to have the courage to do that.” During his time in office, the 76-year-old once known as “Red Ken” launched environmental measures such as the congestion charge. He also founded the C40 group of mayors for cutting emissions, which was backed by figures such as Bill Clinton, Al Gore and the then UN climate chief, Christiana Figueres. But Livingstone was a polarising and controversial figure, leaving the Labour party after he was suspended in May 2016 for telling a journalist that when Hitler was first elected, “he was supporting Zionism before he went mad and ended up killing 6 million Jews”. Livingstone said he was alluding to the contentious 1933 Haavara agreement between Nazi Germany and some Zionist groups. The Haavara deal undermined an attempted Jewish boycott of Nazi Germany, but enabled about 60,000 Jews to migrate to Palestine, if they used their assets to purchase exported German goods. To critics, though, his words trivialised the genocide, confused its agency – which belongs solely to Hitler – unfairly linked Zionism and nazism and even offered Hitler a “diminished responsibility” defence. Zack Polanski, a Green party London assembly member, said: “The rules are very clear that there’s no space in the party for antisemitism, transphobia, racism, sexism or any other form of discrimination and while it wouldn’t be appropriate to comment on any individual application, I’d expect any new member – whoever they are – to follow our code of conduct.” Membership applications from high-profile political defectors first have to go to a Green regional council for an internal consultation process. Asked whether they would accept Livingstone as a member, a party spokesperson said: “We welcome everybody who shares our political aims and values to join the Green party.” Livingstone still denies having misspoken on Zionism but added that “if I’d known it was all going to be distorted like this, I would of course have done a much longer, boring analysis about the history”. He first put out feelers to the Greens in talks with several senior members that covered “how much I wanted to join and what I’d do”, he said, “but they never got back to me”. His initial suspicion had been that they “thought that if they brought me in they’d be accused of being antisemitic”, he said. His message to the party now, though, was straightforward: “Have me in!” he said. “I never met anyone in the Green party I didn’t like. I will apply to join them [the Greens].” Issues such as air pollution controls, bike lanes and green job guarantees for rust-belt workers were ripe for campaigning work, he said. “I would like to see a Green-Labour coalition run the country,” he said. But he advised socialists to stay in the Labour party to help build such an alliance, which has some precedents. In 2008, the Greens called for their supporters to transfer their second votes to Livingstone in the mayoral vote eventually won by Boris Johnson. The Green peer Jenny Jones, Livingstone’s former deputy, was more effusive. Ken was “incredibly green”, she said and “understood the climate emergency”. She added that she had seen no evidence of antisemitism by him in eight years of working together. “As far as I’m concerned, I would welcome him,” she said. “He was a superb mayor and he was followed by Boris Johnson, who doesn’t understand the environment and is obsessed by economic growth.” While maintaining that Keir Starmer “will be the best prime minister since Clement Attlee”, Livingstone did not rule out a run for mayor as a Green candidate. “I will be 78 or 79 by the time of the next mayoral election and I don’t think people will be rushing to vote for someone that old,” he said. “But I would love to do it.” • This article was amended on 17 January 2022. The 1933 Haavara deal enabled Jews to migrate from Nazi Germany to Palestine, not Israel as stated in an earlier version.Good morning. Two teenagers have been arrested in Manchester, north-west England, after the FBI said an armed British man travelled to Texas and took four hostages at a synagogue in what President Joe Biden called “an act of terror”. Last night, UK counter-terrorism police said the pair, whose ages and genders they did not immediately confirm, had been arrested in the south of the city as part of the investigation into the attack and remained in custody for questioning. Earlier, Biden condemned a tense 11-hour hostage standoff at the Congregation Beth Israel synagogue in the Dallas suburb of Colleyville on Saturday evening, as the FBI named the armed assailant as Malik Faisal Akram, a 44-year-old British national. Did any of the hostages die? No. All four hostages survived the siege and were unharmed, according to local police. What about Akram? He was pronounced dead after the FBI stormed the building. Where is he from? UK security sources confirmed to the Guardian that the suspect had been a resident of Blackburn in Lancashire. This was later confirmed in a statement by Greater Manchester police. Novak Djokovic deported for breach of Australia’s border rules The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, says Novak Djokovic was deported because he tried to breach entry rules at the border, even though the immigration minister did not dispute the tennis player’s belief he had a valid medical exemption. The Serbian tennis star boarded an Emirates flight from Melbourne to Dubai last night, hours after the full federal court upheld the minister’s decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa. Morrison said today the world men’s No 1 had failed to comply with “the rules”, that to enter Australia “you either have to be vaccinated or you have to have a valid medical exemption and show evidence of it”. “It’s as simple as that,” the prime minister told 2GB radio. “This is about someone who sought to come to Australia and not comply with the entry rules at our border. That’s what this is about.” What has Djokovic said? In a statement yesterday, he said he was “extremely disappointed” with the ruling but respected it and would “cooperate with the relevant authorities in relation to my departure from the country”. Republicans drive to make Biden the bogeyman It seemed that Biden would be bad for business in “make America great again” world. In theory, the US president, a white man with working-class roots and moderate policy positions, was a more elusive target for Donald Trump’s increasingly extreme support base than other prominent Democrats. But after his first year in office, it transpires that Biden is not too boring to be a rightwing boogeyman after all. “He’s our best salesperson,” said Ronald Solomon, a merchandiser who sells a $21.99 T-shirt depicting the president with an Adolf Hitler-style mustache and the slogan “Not My Dictator”. “Sales for Trump stuff and anti-Biden merchandise is the highest it’s been except for the three months leading up to the 2020 election.” The demonization of Biden as a Hitler, Stalin or anti-white racist bears no relation to reality. But for many Republican voters it appears to stick, the product of relentless conservative media attacks, the president’s own missteps, and seething frustration during a seemingly neverending pandemic. Is the Republican formula working? John Zogby, a pollster and author, said: “They have made significant inroads into demonizing him … But definitely in the second half of this first year, the almost-mantras of the Republican party have gained hold: he’s too old, he’s a socialist, and then this whole ‘Let’s go, Brandon’ thing. In other news … The Duke of Sussex believes the UK is too dangerous for him and his family to visit without state protection, as it emerged he is taking legal action against the government to allow him to pay privately for police security while in Britain. Depicting a rainswept Paris street, the fate of a Nazi-looted painting by the impressionist Camille Pissarro is now in the hands of the highest court in the US, in a case that has long pitted one of Madrid’s top art museums against the heirs of Jewish refugees. Australia’s minister for the Pacific, Zed Seselja, says initial reports suggest no mass casualties in Tonga after the eruption of a volcano that triggered a tsunami, but Australian police have visited beaches with significant damage and “houses thrown around”. Leaders in the US have struck a pessimistic tone about the Covid-19 pandemic in recent weeks amid rapid spread of the Omicron variant. Here experts explain whether getting Covid is inevitable and why, despite claims of “mildness”, the variant is highly dangerous. Stat of the day: More than one in 10 fish oil supplements are rancid More than one in 10 fish oil supplements tested from among 60 large retail brands are rancid, while nearly half are just under the recommended maximum limit, according to independent tests. Conducted over several years by Labdoor, which analyses vitamins and supplements based on criteria such as purity, label accuracy and nutritional value, the tests measured common US-branded fish oils, available globally, against international voluntary standards of rancidity. Don’t miss this: one girl’s life growing up homeless in New York For nine years, the New York Times journalist Andrea Elliott followed the fortunes of one family living in poverty. In this extract from her new book, Invisible Child, we meet Dasani Coates in 2012, aged 11 and living in a shelter. She belongs to an invisible tribe of more than 22,000 homeless children – the highest number ever recorded, in the most unequal metropolis in America. Almost half of New York’s 8.3 million residents are living near or below the poverty line. … Or this: how to clear dangerous pollutants out of your home Perhaps because toxic chemical pollution isn’t that obvious, it is often overlooked. So while public awareness of single-use plastic waste has soared in recent years – all of those bottles, straws and carrier bags are tangible symptoms of our disposable mindset and overconsumption – there’s much more to the story. After tests revealed the levels of harmful chemicals in her blood, Anna Turns, an environmental writer, vowed to discover the best ways to keep her family safe. Climate check: Global heating linked to early birth and damage to babies’ health The climate crisis is damaging the health of foetuses, babies and infants across the world, six studies have found. Scientists discovered increased heat was linked to fast weight gain in babies, which increases the risk of obesity in later life. Higher temperatures were also linked to premature birth, which can have lifelong health effects, and to increased hospital admissions of young children. Other studies found exposure to smoke from wildfires doubled the risk of a severe birth defects. Last Thing: Lego sued over leather jacket worn by toy Antoni in Queer Eye set An artist has accused Lego of recreating a leather jacket he made for Queer Eye cast-member Antoni Porowski without the artist’s permission, claiming that a toy jacket included in a Lego set based on the Netflix show is a “blatant copy” of his design. James Concannon, whose clothes have been regularly worn by Porowski on the popular show, filed a lawsuit against the Danish toy giant in a Connecticut district court last month. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comParents who offer to donate air filters that limit Covid transmission in their children’s classrooms are being turned down by some schools, say parents’ groups. As headteachers report disruption caused by soaring staff absences, parents are buying high efficiency particulate air (Hepa) filters to supplement the 7,000 additional units that will be offered to schools in England by the Department for Education (DfE). While some heads have accepted parents’ donations, others are prioritising cleaning regimes and opening windows, as official guidance does not specify the need for air filters and recommends schools use their own risk assessments. Sarah Saul, the co-founder of parents group SafeEdforAll, said some schools were rejecting the free filters because of insufficient government guidance. She said: “I’ve encountered tens of schools which are forgoing layers of mitigation – including filters and ventilation improvements – because they have been poorly explained and are not mandated by the government. Rejecting free donations just doesn’t make any sense to us. We’re not blaming school leaders, we’re blaming the guidance that they’re trying to follow, wrongly.” Gemma Sewell, the co-founder of Parents United UK, said: “More often, we see schools turning them down. One of the most common excuses is ‘if we accept it for your child’s classroom, that’s inequitable, because we can’t afford to install them in all our classrooms’.” Karen Cudmore, from Kent, said she had offered to buy her children’s secondary schools CO2 monitors and Hepa filters after her 14-year-old daughter contracted long Covid early last year. “Both schools have said this isn’t part of government guidance and my children can continue to just wear masks if that makes them feel safe.” Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “It is very kind of parents to offer to pay for air filters and we understand their concerns. But schools may understandably want to identify where the units are needed and then apply for the equipment that is being provided through the government scheme in the first instance.” To qualify for a government air purifier, schools must show they have consistently poor CO2 levels. But, according to research by NASUWT, the teachers’ union, more than half of UK teachers (56%) do not have access to a CO2 monitor in their classroom. One parent from Suffolk took her daughter out of lessons because of fears of rising infection among other children, after the headteacher rejected her Hepa donation. She said the academy trust had no plans to install filters. Demands are growing for the DfE to fund units for all schools, amid discontent at leaving windows open during winter. Patrick Roach, the NASUWT general secretary, said: “Efforts to ensure good ventilation in the fight against Covid should not be a lottery for schools. They should be guaranteed the necessary equipment, rather than being offered a chance to bid for an air purifier.” The DfE said: “Air cleaning units are not needed in the vast majority of classrooms – only where there is poor ventilation that cannot be easily improved. Based on feedback from schools that there are only a small number of cases where good ventilation is not possible, we are supplying up to 8,000 air cleaning units from this week.”Day four in Hobart was one of potentially beautiful batting conditions, the sun shining down on the Tasmanian state capital as the ferries pootled in and out of Brooke Street Pier on the shimmering harbour and tourists wandered around Salamanca Square with barely a care in the world. Unfortunately for England’s cricketers the Ashes series was already over, with their surrender of 10 for 56 under lights the previous evening at Bellerive Oval for a 4-0 defeat leaving two days of soul-searching before the flight home. There were a couple of escapees, at least. As promised upon answering the SOS, Sam Billings was jetting off to the Caribbean to play for the Twenty20 team, while Dawid Malan was hastily en route to the UK after missing the birth of his first child due to an unexpected but thankfully complication-free early arrival. The rest, however, were left to chew over the past seven weeks while Australia basked in the afterglow of a job clinically done. There was also an appreciation of England travelling over during a pandemic from the home side too, Marnus Labuschagne making this point on Twitter alongside a nice picture of Mark Wood celebrating his demise in Sydney. It goes down as the friendliest men’s Ashes in recent times – two likeable captains in Joe Root and Pat Cummins deserve credit for that – but what recriminations follow from an English perspective remain to be seen. There has been much talk of systemic issues with the sport back home. So, too, the draining effects of bubble life. But while these are undoubtedly true, and few expected England to regain the urn when the squad was announced last October, it was hard not to think that a better-run side might have offered a closer contest, rather than simply a whitewash averted through rain and a final day rearguard in Sydney. The shortcomings were myriad and too often self-inflicted. Preparation was minimal and unfortunately ruined by rain on the Gold Coast, but then why did the tour start in Queensland, one of the few states still demanding hard quarantine upon arrival? England held aces during the negotiations but used them all to ensure families could join the tour, only for a good number of those connected to the multi-format players – ie those facing four months away from home due to T20 World Cup – to stay home anyway. Then came the Gabba, where England were bogged down by the past and future at the expense of the present, shouldering arms to two possible advantages by denying Stuart Broad an early sighter at David Warner and batting first (dreadfully) on a green-top. As Robert Craddock, the longstanding and highly-respected doyen of Brisbane’s Courier Mail put it: “Broad is a fighter. You can never recreate things but if England fielded first, it could have been game on. Broad gets a nick [off Warner], the whole vibe of the Ashes is set”. Come Adelaide they then opted to leave out Mark Wood on a pitch his pace might have transcended despite him bowling just 25.3 overs the week before, citing the need to keep him fresh for “later in the series”, and they also dispensed with Jack Leach on a surface that eventually spun. Despite putting so much stock in the pink ball, an attack of five right-arm fast-mediums that looked remarkably similar to the one picked on the same ground four years ago delivered a not-so remarkably similar outcome. Both selections smacked of overthink by Root and the head coach, Chris Silverwood. James Taylor, the head scout who wasn’t on tour, is strangely said to have had an input, too. “It’s a marathon not a sprint” was the oft-said mantra, ignoring the fact there would be no “later in the series” at 2-0 down. And so it proved, Broad again missing out on another seamer’s paradise in Melbourne that saw Australia select a specialist fast-medium in Scott Boland – and what a series he had – before completing a series win inside 12 days. That Wood and Broad, England’s two leading wicket-takers, bowled more overs than any others yet more than half came after the destiny of the urn was settled said plenty. There was also Silverwood’s promise this would be the fittest England team to ever tour Australia only for Ollie Robinson, so skilled and incisive, to look short of international standard here, aborting three spells in three separate Test matches. To hear that one player also successfully pushed back on having a pre-series skin-fold test citing “fat shaming” backed up a wider sense of a soft environment. Other basics – some would call them non-negotiables – went awry, with at least 17 catches of varying difficulty going down, Jos Buttler failing to justify the investment in him behind the stumps and three wickets falling off no-balls. When Silverwood was asked about the first of these after Brisbane, in light of the one-day team not overstepping for two years, he put it down to a “lack of consequence” in Test cricket, just three days after Warner was dropped halfway through a defining 94. In another contrast with Australia, England’s Test fielders also appeared consistently incapable of hitting when shying at the stumps. Behind the scenes there were enough gripes about clarity of selection and communication to players before matches to suggest an issue. Australia also made more of the scant red-ball cricket available, with Scott Boland, Usman Khawaja and Michael Neser all featuring for Australia A against the Lions in Queensland – two of whom went on to make a significant impact in the series – while the supposed supremo, Silverwood, was somehow unable to persuade his performance director, Mo Bobat, to select any of his reserve batters for the shadow fixture. Dom Bess, a spinner unlikely to feature, was the only inclusion from the main squad. That Jonny Bairstow overcame this for the only century on tour was, frankly, remarkable. Jofra Archer was a huge loss, no question, while Ben Stokes’ disappointing displays should be put in the context of his time off this year. And perhaps none of the above would have changed the destiny of the series when England’s batting against the red ball has been so callow and so collapsible for so long. Australia averaged more runs per innings in every position, and in a series that saw Warner, Labuschagne and Steve Smith all kept relatively quiet, a hungry support cast stepped up. Even in the low-scoring dogfight in Melbourne the hosts had seven batters, not all specialists, with the wherewithal to hang in for 50 minutes or more, while England were Lord Flashheart’s 20-minuters all tour, so regularly were they shot down in flames. This has been largely put down to the system that underpins the Test team (and in the case of Tom Harrison, a chief executive who has been in place for seven years). And Root was right to highlight the gulf that needs to be overcome. Yet improvement once beamed to the supposed elite England coaching environment still rarely occurs. Ollie Pope and Haseeb Hameed went backwards, while Zak Crawley has only just hinted at some green shoots of recovery. All of which begs the question as to whether the exact same set-up should remain in place come the Test series in the Caribbean in March. Plenty has been out of England’s control, Australia were superb and pandemic touring is hard. But it’s hard to make a case for a continuation of the status quo.As a music lover, Emily was excited to join her high school choir on a trip to San Francisco from Riverside, California, in 2011. They attended a competition, which went well, but on the journey back she became fed up of sitting with her friends. “They were talking about boys and being a bit annoying,” she laughs. She spotted Cyril sitting on the coach alone and decided to join him. Although they knew each other through the choir, they had never spoken for very long. “He had taken over playing the piano from me and I’d noticed he was better at it, so there was a bit of rivalry,” she admits. “I did think he was cute, though.” They spent the nine-hour return trip talking and bonding over their similar tastes in music. “I knew who Emily was before that, but she wasn’t much more than an acquaintance,” says Cyril. “The bus ride was really a turning point for us.” Emily agrees. “It sounds cheesy, but it feels like that is where we fell in love.” Although Emily really liked Cyril, she didn’t think there could be a future. While she was from California, he had moved to the area from India when he was 10. His family were in favour of arranged marriages and dating wasn’t culturally acceptable. “I didn’t think we had a chance at building a relationship,” says Emily. Despite her concerns, she knew there was a spark between them. Not long after the bus ride, she found one of Cyril’s favourite pieces of music, Danse Macabre by Camille Saint-Saëns, and printed out the piano arrangement by Franz Liszt to give to him. “We’d been talking about it on the bus,” says Cyril. “But I was still clueless that she liked me at that point.” Towards the end of term, she and Cyril began spending more time together. They were both performing in the school play and rehearsed every afternoon. That was where they shared their first kiss. A few weeks later, Emily asked Cyril to be her boyfriend. “At the time, I thought it was a really huge decision. None of my Indian friends had girlfriends and, from my family’s point of view, it wasn’t really an option,” he says. But he decided he liked her too much to say no. For the first month, they were undercover, only seeing each other at school. “In the end, I told my family, because I didn’t want to keep it a secret,” he says. Initially, they struggled to accept the relationship. “I was introduced as Cyril’s friend for years,” says Emily. The couple went to university in different areas of Riverside – a city of about 320,000 people – but were able to see each other regularly. “I was even able to join his university’s choir, because there were no rules saying I couldn’t,” she says, laughing. In January 2018, Cyril told his family he was going to propose. By that time, they had embraced their relationship and were happy for them. He invited Emily to a nice restaurant and asked the waiter to place the ring in her dessert. “I’d invited friends and family to a restaurant nearby so they could come and celebrate with us afterwards. My grandparents were visiting from India, so it was really nice.” They married in September 2019. Cyril now works in chemical engineering, while Emily studies speech and language pathology. “I love that we’re best friends,” says Emily. “We complete each other’s sentences and we’re on the same wavelength.” As well as their shared passion for music, Cyril enjoys the fact that they both enjoy the same books and restaurants. “We’re always going out to find these little hole-in-the-wall places to eat,” he says. “We’re also both ambitious and passionate and Emily is always kind and understanding.” Although the cultural differences and family opposition was challenging at first, Emily believes it has made them stronger as a couple. “We are still always learning about each other’s cultures,” she says. “We’re proof that it can work really well if you’re open-minded and willing to be patient.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.As the attention in Melbourne Park swiftly shifted from Australia’s legal courts to its tennis courts, the two most successful women’s players over the past few years both took their first steps towards a possible collision in the fourth round of the Australian Open. Naomi Osaka, the defending champion, returned to grand slam competition early in the day by defeating Camila Osorio 6-3, 6-3. The world No 1, Ashleigh Barty, followed her later in the day as she picked apart Lesia Tsurenko 6-0, 6-1 to reach the second round. For Osaka, the opening day marked another step in her return after a turbulent 2021 season that shifted with her announcement she would not be participating in press conferences at the French Open as they affected her mental health. It led to a firestorm of criticism from many who don’t even follow tennis, a disproportionate response from the grand slam tournaments and, at the US Open, she said she would be taking an indefinite break from tennis due to her mental health. Osaka made her return to competition at a smaller WTA event in Melbourne, where she won three matches and played well enough before withdrawing from the semi-final due to an abdominal injury. Monday’s contest against Osorio, a quick and resourceful 20-year-old from Colombia, showcased the rust that is still to come off. Osaka wobbled slightly in the opening set after leading 5-0, but otherwise controlled the match until the end. Throughout the last week Osaka has openly discussed her time away, which she anticipated would be far longer. She had spent her off-season with friends and family and she was unusually candid with them, digesting emotions she never had time to address during the grind of the tour. Her return was unplanned; she was bored at home one day, she reached for her rackets and, after reconnecting with her team, the Australian Open became a possibility. A few days ago, a fan on Instagram suggested Osaka should play with something to prove in Melbourne. Her answer was a reflection of how her mindset has changed in recent months; she listed some of the critical comments she has heard people say about her, most of which she has since proven wrong, and she concluded that she no longer cares about what people think. “I definitely feel like in [this] point of my career, it’s not like long or anything, but I’ve kind of been weighed down too much trying to prove myself,” she said. “You guys have seen me through that entire phase. I just want to have fun, first of all. I can’t expect myself to win every match, but I do expect myself to have fun and challenge myself.” After the stress of last season, Osaka has frequently talked about the need to enjoy herself on and off the court. In her match against Osorio there were moments that could have sparked anger or frustration, like a missed overhead that led to a run of games against, but she responded with a smile each time. She says she is consciously choosing a more lighthearted approach. “I came back when I wanted to come back,” she said. “I just felt like there are situations where I previously would get upset. But at this point in my life, like, I’m here because I want to be here and because I find that it’s fun for me. Might as well enjoy it while I still can.” Hours later, as the sun began to set on Rod Laver Arena, Barty took to the court for the first time in Melbourne this year. While Osaka is in the midst of finding herself, it should not be forgotten Barty already went through a similar process when she was far less prominent, taking a break from tennis between 2014 and 2016. Today she is at the height of her powers, having been ranked No 1 for 105 consecutive weeks and 112 overall, just five weeks shy of Justine Henin’s tally. She is the undisputed best women’s player in the world and, more importantly, she now seems extremely comfortable in her own skin. Barty’s first round opponent, Tsurenko, entered the main draw through qualifying but she has previously beaten Barty and reached the top 25. Tsurenko is an excellent athlete with a sweet backhand, but her serve is one of the weakest in the game and her forehand can break down under minimal pressure. Thus Barty spent her time back on one of her favourite courts in the world ruthlessly picking at every weakness in sight. She led 6-0, 5-0 with two match points, yet she was still ashen-faced when she failed to convert either. She finished Tsurenko off in 54 minutes. “I’m right where I am,” she said after she was asked about being only 25 years old yet a veteran in the game. “Where I am at the moment is a product of all the experiences that I have had, the hard learnings, the incredible moments, and I am where I am. We just accept that, we enjoy the journey as we go, we try and be really present and enjoy the moment.”Looking for dietary advice from a puppet? Watch THE NEW NORM&amp;AL SHOW. Season 1 streaming now. Find out more at oatly.comLooking for dietary advice from a puppet? Watch THE NEW NORM&amp;AL SHOW. Season 1 streaming now. Find out more at oatly.comA world-first pilot of predictive genetic testing aiming to identify those at high risk of cardiovascular disease is under way in GP surgeries in the north of England. The NHS pilot, called Heart, is offering genetic tests to 1,000 healthy volunteers aged between 45 and 64 years old to give more accurate predictions for their risk of heart disease and stroke. The pilot could be the first step towards a wider rollout of predictive genetic testing on the NHS to improve screening for those at risk of a range of common diseases including breast and bowel cancer, diabetes and osteoporosis. Prof Sir Peter Donnelly, the founder and chief executive of Genomics, the company that developed the tests, said: “These are people going about their daily lives who are at high risk of cardiovascular disease who are currently invisible to the NHS. We can find these people who are actually at quite high levels of risk but not aware of it.” Genetics is an important risk factor for many common diseases, including heart disease. However, until recently it has been impossible to quantify the genetic component of risk because it is typically spread thinly over thousands of DNA regions. The advent of vast genetic databases has changed this, allowing scientists to develop algorithms that aggregate the contributions of huge numbers of genes into a “polygenic risk score” (PRS) for a given condition. The participants will be recruited from those undergoing a routine NHS health check that is offered to people over 40. As part of the check, GPs use an algorithm called QRisk that combines non-genetic factors such as age, blood pressure, smoking history and cholesterol to identify those at risk. Those estimated to have a 10% chance of a heart attack or stroke in the next 10 years are advised on lifestyle changes and offered medications such as statins. The pilot will combine the QRisk score with the genetic score to provide a more precise estimate of risk. Research suggests that in 45- to 55-year-old men, the PRS is the single most important risk factor, explaining about the same amount of the risk for heart disease as the combined effect of all the non-genetic risk factors. Overall, about 5% of people aged 45-65 are expected to be above the risk threshold for statins based on PRS and QRisk combined, but not on Qrisk alone. Applied to the number of 45-65-year-olds in England, if these extra individuals were all treated with statins about 9,500 cardiovascular events could be avoided over 10 years. Michael Brennan, 61, who is retired and lives in Darlington, said he had no hesitation in signing up for the pilot. “I’m probably not alone at this time of the year in thinking about health and lifestyle,” he said. He is waiting his results, but said he will be glad to find out either way. “If I know, I’ve got a chance of doing something about it,” he said. However, some have concerns that deploying the tests could lead to “genetic fatalism”, because unlike most other risk factors, genetic ones are not modifiable. There is also continued concern that the tests, which have been largely developed using genetic data from white Europeans, give less accurate results for people from other ethnic backgrounds. Donnelly said that the company had “worked hard” to address this issue that genetic ancestry is factored in when calculating risk scores. However, Prof David Curtis, a geneticist and psychiatrist at University College London, said that it had not been demonstrated that the tests work equally well for those of all backgrounds. “I maintain that this is a test that will work less well in people with minority ancestries and so would be expected to increase inequalities in healthcare,” he said. Prof Ahmet Fuat, the chief investigator on the pilot and a GP with a specialist interest in cardiovascular health, said genetic testing could be a “game changer” for primary care. “Genomic testing can improve our identification of patients who need extra management, screening or treatment, and better personalise those interventions to them,” he said. “Common diseases like cardiovascular disease place a great deal of demand on our resources and anything that helps us use those more efficiently and effectively is incredibly valuable.”There are many things we consider normal today that we wouldn’t have done just three years ago. To a certain degree, that’s life. It moves on. But at the same time, the happenings of the past few years – from extreme weather events caused by the climate crisis to the pandemic – have accelerated the pace of change far beyond what we may have previously experienced. And though it’s been dizzying at times, it’s not all bad. Sometimes it’s the biggest tests that push us to do better – to be better. Nonetheless, you’d be forgiven for having lost the thread a bit when it comes to considering what “normal” means these days. Fear not. Here’s your handy list of examples to get you back up to normal speed, just in time for it all to change again – inevitably. Wearing the same clothes from season to season Secondhand September – a campaign by Oxfam that encourages people to stop buying any new clothes for the duration of the month – has risen in popularity over the past few years, and resale sites such as Depop and Vinted have been gaining prominence. Once considered a topic worthy of a headline, celebrities now routinely re-wear clothes, normalising the idea that what we wear doesn’t need to be disposable and that repeating outfits is actually a pretty standard (and ethical) thing to do. Charity shops are the new fashion houses, darling, haven’t you heard? Voice notes First they came for phone calls, and now, it seems the humble text message has been rendered obsolete. Voice notes are the future. At least for the moment … Being really into houseplants Show me a city dweller without a legion of house plants to their name. You can’t! They don’t exist. No, we can’t afford houses, but succulents? Yes, I’ll take 500, thank you. Using reusable bottles When I was a kid, having branded mineral water was a status symbol on the playground, rather than a manky old bottle your brother stole from his mate at football. These days, though, we are (rightly) much more aware of plastics pollution and generally more eco-conscious, and the norm is to use reusable bottles – lest we be judged by our peers. Flexible working Gone are the days when working from home was something reserved for freelancers and company execs. These days, working flexibly has become more and more normal, benefiting a lot of people in various ways, but particularly those who had previously been struggling to juggle the competing responsibilities of work and family life. Added bonuses include working in your pyjamas, watching TV on your lunch break and cutting out frustrating commutes. Hooray! Zoom parties Rewind to a couple of years ago and imagine someone inviting you to a party, but instead of going to a venue and seeing actual people, you’re sitting at home on your computer looking at everyone on a screen. You’d have laughed in their face! Madness. And yet these days, not only are Zoom parties pretty normal, so are Zoom weddings, Zoom baby showers and even Zoom stag parties. Upsides include being able to say no to that last tequila shot and getting away with it, as well as not wasting money on an expensive taxi home when you’ve missed the last train. Downsides include … well, you’re really just alone at home, aren’t you? Flexible eating The rise of flexible eating – with more and more people adopting an exclusively or partially plant-based diet – has become far more mainstream over the past few years, with supermarkets offering meat- or dairy-free alternatives on their shelves. In general, many of us have branched out when it comes to eating and found that some vegan alternatives are even better than the foods they are imitating (hello, meat-free cocktail sausages). Having a complicated coffee order Gone are the days when your only choice at the coffee shop was a latte or a cappuccino. Thanks to the development of millions of other delicious alternatives and greater awareness of the environmental impact of coffee production, these days the marker of true normality is to have a wildly specific coffee order. I’ll have a decaf oat latte over ice – thanks for asking. You? Completing Netflix In days long gone, TV used to be an addition to our lives; something we watched a few nights a week as light relief from our busy and flourishing social and work lives. These days? TV is life, and never before has the concept of completing every single film, documentary and series on a streaming service been more relevant. Our hungry eyes need more … Give. Us. More!! Arguing with that one relative about the climate crisis There’s always one, isn’t there? One climate denier or “devil’s advocate” in every family. Trying to explain the concept of personal responsibility to them over a Sunday roast has become a competitive sport for many people; one that doesn’t tend to end well. Apparently shouting “you don’t know what you’re talking about” over and over again while getting angrier isn’t a mature way to win an argument. Who knew? ‘Unprecedented’ events At what point will we start to accept that there is now a very strong precedent for “unprecedented” events and start referring to them as “normal life” instead? Maybe by the end of 2022. Looking for dietary advice from a puppet? Watch THE NEW NORM&amp;AL SHOW. Season 1 streaming now. Find out more at oatly.comChinese authorities are urging citizens not to order goods from overseas, in the latest extreme measure aimed at curbing Covid outbreaks only weeks away from the biggest holiday of the year and the start of the Beijing Winter Olympics. The advisory on overseas packages was issued after authorities claimed that a recent Omicron infection detected in Beijing came from an international package sent from Canada. China is committed to its policy of zero Covid, but there is also pressure to allow some celebrations during the upcoming lunar new year festivities, typically the biggest travel period of the year. At the same time there is an urgency to keep the virus out of Beijing, which hosts the Winter Olympics in a few weeks. The Communist party government has pledged the Games will go ahead safely, albeit without overseas general spectators. On Monday the Games’ organising committee said tickets would be distributed to “targeted” groups of people and not be sold to the general public. In his new year address, the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, said “we will spare no effort to present a great Games to the world”, but the growing outbreaks have threatened the pledge. Officials are under pressure to stamp out infections, and many having been punished for apparent failures. Different measures have been imposed across different provinces and cities, of varying degrees of severity. Health authorities on Monday reported 223 cases from the previous 24 hours to midnight, including 163 local transmissions. The majority were in Tianjin, where 79 of its 80 cases were found in Jinnan district, and 68 in Henan province, of which 60 were in the locked down city of Anyang. One case reported in the southern city of Shenzhen, bordering Hong Kong, was confirmed as Omicron. Most of the infections so far have been detected in Tianjin – where China’s first case of Omicron was found in 9 December. However, the discovery of a lone Omicron case in Beijing over the weekend has sparked renewed alarm. At a press conference on Monday, officials said tracing had determined the infection came not from another province, but from a package sent from Toronto, via the US and Hong Kong. Liao Linzhu, the deputy director of the city’s post administration, urged people “to not buy products from oversea areas”. Authorities said the patient diagnosed with the Omicron variant on Saturday had “self-reported” that they had received a package on 11 January. The package had been sent four days earlier. Authorities have since quarantined the patient’s family, the courier, and more than 60 others as close contacts, and tested more than 16,000 people in the patient’s home district of Haidian. “Omicron virus transmits fast, please pay attention, avoid buying stuff from overseas, make sure you wear gloves, don’t bring the package indoors. If you have to, clean the package outside with alcohol, and wash your hands,” said Pang Xinghuo, the deputy director of Beijing’s health authority. China has claimed that numerous Covid infections throughout the pandemic have resulted from imported products – often cold chain items – but experts say the scientific basis for the claims is weak. Dr Ian Mackay, a virologist at the University of Queensland, said it was “a long bow to draw”, and urging people to clean packages and avoid receiving mail was “a wasted effort”. He said the overwhelmingly likely source of the infection was another person, and blaming packaging seemed more political than scientific. “We all know this virus can hang around in people who aren’t showing symptoms, especially early on in the disease,” he said. “If you’re looking for a reason for … a virus being introduced into a jurisdiction, the first thing you’d think of is humans coming in from overseas – where the virus is everywhere. “It’s an airborne virus. It’s not about surfaces. Technically, it can happen, sure. There’s a non-zero risk, sure. But is it happening again and again? No,” he said. “If you see and hear horses, don’t think zebras.” Response measures to the scattered outbreaks are varied and ad-hoc across the affected provinces. Local officials face conflicting pressures: they are largely responsible for implementation and face punishment over perceived or actual failures to control outbreaks. Beijing has introduced a requirement for all new arrivals to the city to obtain a negative Covid test within 48 hours before arriving in the city, and another within 72 hours after. It has also closed some temples and recreation sites, according to state media. Olympics personnel will enter a closed-loop system of accommodation and travel, but with people coming in from all over the world, the chance of imported infections is likely, said Mackay. In Zhuhai city, authorities have ordered residents to undergo three rounds of testing, with their electronic health codes – which dictate freedom of movement – restricted until all are completed. All tourist attractions have been closed, all restaurants in Xiangzhou district have cancelled dine-in, and all flights to Beijing cancelled. In Anyang, further residential areas have been locked down, with authorities planning to deliver food. The central city of Luoyang and southern city of Jieyang have both decreed travellers must report to employers, communities or accommodation three days prior to arrival. Cities including Beijing and Shanghai have ordered or strongly urged people not to travel for the lunar new year festivities. It is the only time many migrant workers in China are able to return to their home villages. In a video widely shared on social media, an older man told onlookers that he and co-workers from a Zhengzhou construction site in Henan province had been forced to stop work, but their home towns had entry restrictions and he had been left homeless. “Last night I slept under the South Third Ring Bridge. Not just me, a dozen people [also slept there]. We are all labourers. We are used to work now, and we don’t feel so cold. The key thing is that we can’t go home and we are anxious about it.” Additional reporting by Xiaoqian ZhuFood used to be simple. Meat was meat, vegetables were vegetables, and milk was something that came from cows. Then, more and more people started becoming conscious about the effects our diet has on the planet, chefs got more creative with plant-based ingredients, and everything started to change. Now we have “bleeding” burgers made of beans and beetroot, “sausage” rolls made with peas, and lattes made from oat drink. A restaurant without a vegan dish is now like a pub without drinks, and every time we go to the supermarket it seems there’s a new plant-based product. This change began when a binary division – those who never ate meat and those who always ate meat – began to crumble. It’s not that everyone suddenly became vegan, but people are starting to become aware that shifting from an animal-based diet to a plant-based one goes a long way in reducing our carbon footprint. The environmental impact of consuming animal products is certainly clear. At Cop26, the United Nations climate change conference in 2021, the UK’s chief scientific adviser Sir Patrick Vallance said eating less meat was key to tackling the climate crisis. Plant-based eating isn’t just better for the health of our planet than consuming animal products, it’s also good for our individual wellbeing too. Amid a growing awareness of healthy eating, studies have linked consuming animal products with serious health conditions, including diabetes, heart disease and cancer. The digital era makes it much easier to learn the advantages of eating a plant-based diet, with social media adding to the sense that our eating habits are evolving. Undercover videos, widely shared online, for example, have given people a glimpse of the grim reality of what’s involved in producing much of our meat. As plant-based eating becomes mainstream, innovations in the kitchen are making it more alluring for our tastebuds, too. Once, vegan options were limited to holier than thou health food shops serving dry nut cutlets, drab salads or something nondescript involving lentils. It was a moral lifestyle but not a very tasty or practical one. Now, everyone from master chefs to McDonald’s is offering delicious meat-free options. And more people than ever are starting to embrace a plant-based diet. According to an Oatly study, 43% of respondents said that 10 years ago they always ate meat in their meals, whereas only 24% said their meals nowadays always involve meat. And 53% of respondents said they eat one or two meat-free meals each week, compared with 44% a decade ago. We’ve come a long way – but what’s in store for the future? With the importance of environmentally friendly eating becoming more urgent than ever, how will a climate-positive diet look in years – and decades – to come? “Meat” that comes from a printer could take the place of farmed meat. In November, 3D-printed “meat” – containing no animal – began to be served as a “cut” of steak when the product was launched in four cities around the world. Lab-grown chicken and cell-based fish – fish meat that is produced from fish cells – will also become more mainstream, along with plant-based eggs. We are already seeing some unexpected ingredients start to appear on supermarket shelves and restaurant menus. How do you feel about algae protein bars, kelp noodles and seaweed crisps? Look out for cacti in soups, stirred into stews, diced and added into breakfast cereal, or even melted into jellies. So you don’t need to be vegan, vegetarian, flexitarian, or climatarian to chip in – every time you swap animal products for plant-based foods, you protect the planet a tiny bit. Looking for dietary advice from a puppet? Watch THE NEW NORM&amp;AL SHOW. Season 1 streaming now. Find out more at oatly.comChris Silverwood has been given no assurances over his future as England head coach but insists he retains the support of his players despite their Ashes thrashing. The 46-year-old has also become the latest member of the England setup to point the finger at the domestic structure and warned that whoever is in his place in four years’ time will face the same issues unless the County Championship moves into the height of summer. In the aftermath of a 4-0 defeat that exposed issues in selection and strategy, Silverwood is waiting on a post-series review by Ashley Giles, the director of men’s cricket, to discover if he will lead England in the Caribbean in March. “Nothing yet, no,” he replied when asked if he had been given any assurances. “I accept the job comes with that level of criticism and uncertainty as well. Until I’m told differently, I’ll start planning for the West Indies. I want to carry on but there are decisions above that [that] will be made. “I’m the head coach of England but I’m also an England fan. I’m passionate about England and love the fact I can get involved and I can help. I want to continue doing this job, I think I can do this job. I’d like to see changes that would help us do the job better.” Silverwood described the Ashes tour as the hardest of his career – either playing or coaching – and acknowledged that his naturally gentle approach with the players may have been a shortcoming. “I’m not a finished article as a coach and I want to get better all the time,” he said. “I’m not afraid to show my teeth, but you sometimes wonder in hindsight whether I should do it more. But then does it make it less effective? I don’t know.” Asked if England’s latest collapse of 10 for 56 suggested a dressing room no longer inspired by its leadership, Silverwood replied: “I believe they’re still playing for us. The comments I’ve had from the dressing room would suggest that as well. I think what we saw was players that are tired. We’ve pushed these guys for too long in [bubble] environments. There are obviously skill elements attached to that as well. “But it was hard to watch. At times, you were thinking: ‘Just get stuck in, show that fight.’ But we didn’t. There was no point saying we did, because we clearly didn’t. I would never question the lads’ commitment. They’re as passionate as the rest of us about England cricket. They want to perform. They train hard, they just came up short.” As well as the added complications due to the pandemic, Silverwood bemoaned the truncated preparation period and the loss of Jofra Archer and Olly Stone that left him with just one 90mph fast bowler in Mark Wood. He backed Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad to keep trucking in but, if he is retained, admitted changes elsewhere are almost inevitable – chiefly among the batting. Silverwood also echoed his captain, Joe Root, in blaming the marginalised County Championship schedule for reducing the amount of spin and rewarding medium-pacers, only to see this flip at international level. With the Hundred dominating peak months, Silverwood believes it is time to play first-class cricket concurrently and accept the divergence in formats. He said: “Front-loading and back-loading the County Championship is not helping anyone. The Hundred is here. I’m more concerned with how we get the Championship working in the middle of the summer. If you get that, firstly you’re getting the opportunity to learn how to play long innings, score big runs, put partnerships together. “But more importantly your spinners are going to come into it as well. [Seamers] have got to have that extra bit of zip or pace to get that movement to get the wickets. You look at the Australian bowling attack: the consistency with which they hit a length and make the ball do something is phenomenal. “We would like to find some equilibrium between white and red ball if we want to start producing Test cricketers again. If talk is all we do then in four years’ time you will be asking another person these same questions.”Firouzeh Khosrovani’s autobiographical documentary opens in a grand yet sparely decorated drawing room, painted in white. As an unhurried tracking shot pulls viewers into the strangely still space, a sense of mystery permeates: nearly all the furniture is draped in ivory-coloured cloth. Indeed, the film operates like an act of unveiling. Peering through the hazy gauze of the past, Khosrovani explores her parents’ complex against the shifting tides of Iranian history. On her wedding day, Khosrovani’s mother, Tayi, married with only a photograph of her father, Hossein, present, while he was studying radiology in Switzerland. Having grown up in a religious household in Iran, Tayi was never at ease in Geneva, where she spent the early years of her marriage. When she became pregnant with Firouzeh, she urged a reluctant Hossein to return to Tehran, right on the brink of the Iranian revolution. Photos, home videos and archival newsreels comprise the bulk of the film’s visual materials, showing how personal and collective memories deeply intertwine. Khosrovani deploys her family archive in a startling way. Instead of a simple slideshow, the camera gazes directly at the photos for an extended period, the slight unsteadiness in each shot mirroring the turbulence that soon seeped into the marriage. With an 18-year age gap between them, the couple had markedly different attitudes to their home country. Moreover, the more secular Hossein treasured western classical music, while Tayi became increasingly devout and conservative as the Iranian regime changed. Still, these changes are observed without judgment, but with a child’s empathetic curiosity about their parents. While the audio re-enactment of Tayi and Hossein’s conversations are occasionally overly narrativised, this is a beautifully crafted work of family history with an especially powerful ending. • Radiograph of a Family is in cinemas from 21 January.“You are what you eat” has a whole new meaning in 2022. Now, it feels like every morsel we put in our mouths not only has implications for our health and the future of the planet, but also for our identity. From vegavore to vegan, climatarian to flexitarian and reducetarian, what’s behind this need to label the way we eat? Do we even need to do it when the wider culture is collectively making more plant-based choices, so making this the new normal? And do these labels unknowingly undermine our good intentions in eating plant-based? Once upon a time, a “normal” diet used to mean eating meat, fish, dairy and a few standard vegetables, but that definition has grown in recent years. As lexicographer and etymologist Susie Dent explains, “normal” has meant many things over the years. “The word first appeared in an English dictionary in 1658, where ‘normal’ is defined as ‘done exactly, according to the rule’. But ‘normal’ has continued to change and grow. The question ‘what is normal?’ is not quite so simple as it sounds, and when it comes to food, things are changing fast.” So, while plant-based choices have shaken the idea of what’s normal, accurately labelling yourself is still not straightforward. Everything from vegan to flexitarian can be met with a roll of the eyes, regardless of the undeniable benefits of adding more vegetables to your diet. “When such labels proliferate, they risk becoming self-defeating, requiring more attention rather than less,” says Dent. “Not everyone will immediately grasp what a flexitarian or reducetarian is, and few of us would know a carnesparsian if we met one.” Yes, we had to look it up too: a carnesparsian describes someone who eats meat only occasionally. “Once these labels become opaque and exclusive, their positivity starts to fade.” In other words, we alienate people and undermine our shared goal of eating a planet-friendly, plant-based diet. “Not that all labels are political, or designed to further a cause, but food is surely something that should bring us together rather than set us apart.” Food is a reason for us to be with friends and family, to develop traditions and express our love to one another. Because what we eat is an innately emotional and personal decision. And the trouble with labels such as vegan, for example, is that it’s all or nothing. You either are or you aren’t, and if you have a drop of milk in your tea then you aren’t. This level of commitment to a label can be a disincentive for us to make plant-based choices that we’d be otherwise open to. As Dent puts it: “Even well-established food identities may, in their labelling, hinder more than they help. Vegans often feel that their eating choices are treated as a ‘thing’ by others, and are assumed to be somehow tricky or cultist. Equally, an invitation to eat a ‘vegan muffin’ will probably invite a whole load of preconceptions. If meat eaters don’t have to identify themselves as carnivores, do those who don’t eat meat still have to identify themselves as ‘different’?” Just think of the uproar when a company launched vegan sausage rolls a few years ago. Would it have been the same if the rolls had simply been presented as savoury pastries that happened to be plant-based? The outrage drummed up around them was, perhaps, an expression of disdain towards a certain type of person. “Attached to veganism, usually unfairly, are assumptions of elitism and expectations of high prices: not everyone can afford to shop from the ‘free from aisle’, yet changing diets doesn’t necessarily involve huge restrictions,” says Dent. “As more of us move towards a plant-based life, our labels may need to shift to reflect a whole spectrum of new ‘normals’.” And the presence of plant-based options is ever more apparent. Virtually every supermarket and restaurant has plant-based alternatives, making it easier than ever to adopt more plant-based choices even without taking on a wider label. The evolving language around our food choices is encouraging. “None of this means that the vocabulary of food and our approach to it should shrink rather than grow,” says Dent. “Many of us are trying to be conscious and ethical eaters, and there is a vast middle ground between carnivore and vegan. “Of all the new creations, ‘climatarian’ seems to hold the most promise – it implies an understanding of the issues at stake, and the freedom to choose what we consider justified and sustainable. Rather than setting us apart, climatarian seeks to be inclusive. But it’s not the most pragmatic choice, and nor will it be the last on the list. We will continue to search for the right words to express what we put on our plates, and why it matters.” Looking for dietary advice from a puppet? Watch THE NEW NORM&amp;AL SHOW. Season 1 streaming now. Find out more at oatly.comThe Scottish government is in line for a windfall of almost £700m after the largest ever auction of the country’s seabed plots attracted bids from big oil and renewable energy companies hoping to build next generation windfarms. Crown Estate Scotland has awarded oil companies including BP and Shell, and renewable energy veterans Scottish Power and SSE, permission to lease the Scottish seabed where they plan to build enough windfarms to power the equivalent of 23m UK homes a year. The bigger than expected auction, which awarded seabed permits to 17 windfarm projects from among more than 70 bidders, is expected to kickstart Scotland’s “biggest industrial investment programme” by laying the foundation for companies to develop 25GW of offshore wind capacity. The capacity of the new Scottish windfarms to be developed over the next 10 years will be more than double the UK’s existing 10GW of offshore wind, and equal to Europe’s current combined capacity. The UK plans to quadruple its fleet of offshore windfarms to reach 40GW by the end of the decade. Simon Hodge, the chief executive of Crown Estate Scotland, said the results were “a fantastic vote of confidence” in Scotland’s role in the offshore wind ambitions, which will deliver almost £700m “straight into the public finances and billions of pounds’ worth of supply chain commitments”. Crown Estate Scotland manages the Queen’s property, but unlike the crown estate – which manages property in the rest of the UK – it does not return its profits to the Treasury or the Queen. Instead, the revenues are handed to the Scottish Consolidated Fund, which in turn finances the Scottish government. The winning bidders have also promised to invest about £1bn in sourcing materials and services from Scottish supply chain companies for every 1GW of offshore wind capacity built, which could put local firms in line for £25bn of investment. Scottish Power, owned by Spanish energy conglomerate Iberdrola, emerged as the auction’s single largest winner after scooping up seabed rights to develop up to 7GW of offshore wind capacity alongside its partners – enough to power 8.5m UK homes. The company plans to develop two large-scale floating projects in partnership with Shell, a 3GW windfarm off the north-east coast of Scotland and another 2GW project off the east coast, as well as its own 2GW fixed offshore windfarm off the coast of Islay. Keith Anderson, chief executive of Scottish Power, said the latest auction would drive new investment in the energy industry and its supply chain “particularly in areas like the north-east”, which could open up “immense opportunities for businesses and institutions across the country”. “This is a colossal investment opportunity which could make this the biggest industrial investment programme in history for Scotland,” he told the Guardian. He added that the shift towards floating offshore windfarms off Scotland’s coast opened “massive opportunities” for universities and technology innovators to play a leading role in “the first industrialisation of floating offshore wind” in the world. More than half the winning bids came from developers hoping to build floating offshore windfarms, which can be located further from the coastline and capture the power of faster offshore wind speeds. SSE Renewables plans to partner with Japanese conglomerate Marubeni and Danish fund manager Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners to develop one of the world’s largest floating offshore windfarms off the east coast of Scotland. Bernard Looney, chief executive of BP, which won with a bid for a traditional fixed-base offshore windfarm, said the company would develop its 2.9GW project 60km off the coast of Aberdeen in partnership with the German energy company EnBW. Louise Kingham, BP’s UK boss, told the Guardian that its role in the UK’s offshore wind industry would help to lay the foundation “for the next 100 years” in Scotland’s energy industry. “There’s been a lot of thought about how to develop the wind industry in Scotland, and how you build a [wind power] supply chain alongside decommissioning the oil and gas industry. There are some very transferable skills here,” she said. Melanie Onn, deputy chief executive of RenewableUK, said the auction would be “a massive economic boost for the whole country at just the right time”. “These projects will attract billions of pounds from private investors, which will create thousands of skilled jobs and allow us to maximise supply chain opportunities all around the UK,” she added.Two startlingly different figures for what is ostensibly the same count have been released within days of each other: the government reported 150,000 Covid-19 deaths days before the UK’s lead statistical agency reported a death toll of more than 175,000. The difference between the two figures is stark but easily explained: the government’s figures count only those deaths that are known to have occurred within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test. The Office for National Statistics, on the other hand, counts all deaths where the virus was mentioned on the death certificate. But regardless of the counting method, the numbers represent individual human tragedies. So, what do we know about the 175,000 people whose deaths have been recorded to date? Age The pandemic has taken the greatest toll on elderly people: across the UK since the start of the pandemic more than seven in 10 registered deaths have been among those aged 75 or older. Meanwhile, deaths among those aged 44 or younger made up under 2% of the total. Nevertheless, the proportion of deaths made up by older people has changed over the course of the pandemic. During the first wave, which continued for most of 2020, three-quarters of all deaths were among those aged 75+. In subsequent waves this fell, in part thanks to vaccinations, decreasing to 59% of all deaths during the period where Delta dominated. Vaccination rates are highest among elderly people, NHS figures show. Location of death Connected to this metric is the stark difference in the number of deaths that occurred in care homes as the pandemic progressed. In England and Wales more than 20,000 Covid deaths were registered in care homes between early March and the end of 2020, equivalent to 68 deaths per day. The vaccine rollout, which prioritised care home residents and staff, brought these figures down dramatically. With just over 13,000 deaths registered in nursing homes in 2021, the average death toll in English and Welsh nursing homes fell to 36 deaths per day that year. Vaccination status ONS analysis covering the first 10 months of 2021 shows risk of death involving Covid-19 to be 28 times higher among unvaccinated people than among the vaccinated population. The data shows that deaths involving Covid-19 have been consistently lower for vaccinated people, which the ONS defines as people who received their vaccine at least 21 days beforehand, compared with unvaccinated people – a trend apparent across all age groups. Gender Throughout the whole of the pandemic, gender disparities regarding coronavirus deaths have been evident. According to ONS figures regarding coronavirus deaths registered up to 31 December 2021, men made up 94,433 – or 54% – of total coronavirus deaths within this period, despite the fact that men make up only 49% of England and Wales’ population. The theories as why this is include differences in lockdown behaviour between the sexes, men being more likely to drink, smoke and experience obesity; and differing immune responses. Although these percentages remained roughly similar throughout the pandemic, there were variations of this disproportionality between the different waves. Within the Delta wave, 58% of deaths were of males, whereas the lowest proportion of male deaths took place within the Alpha wave – at 53%. These calculations were made by using provisional ONS data regarding weekly coronavirus deaths registered. Geographic breakdown The spread of Covid deaths has not been even across the country: the crude death rate remains highest in the north-west, driven by the high number of deaths in 2020 after high case rates in the UK in the early part of the pandemic. Across the entire pandemic the virus has claimed 23,659 lives in the region, equivalent to a crude death rate of 321 per 100,000 population, higher than any other both by absolute numbers and rate. Among the four nations of the UK, Wales recorded the highest death rate of 291 coronavirus deaths per 100,000 population, driven partly by the fact that it has the highest proportion of people aged 65-plus of the UK’s constituency countries. The UK-wide crude death rates stood at 262 deaths per 100,000 registered deaths at the end of 2021. Deaths by occupation At the start of the pandemic – with essential workers going out to work while anyone who could stayed home – research focused on the link between occupation and Covid mortality risk. The ONS last published data on this topic in early 2021, analysing close to 8,000 deaths involving coronavirus within the working age population across England and Wales to the end of 2020, showing that those working in close proximity to others had higher death rates. Again, men were more exposed, making up nearly two-thirds of these deaths, with male workers in the care and leisure sectors and other public-facing jobs experiencing higher death rates. Female death rates were highest among machine operatives, those in the caring and leisure industries, and other customer-facing occupations. Among healthcare occupations, nurses had statistically significantly higher rates of death involving Covid-19 when compared with those of the same age and sex in the population. Deaths by ethnicity The ONS conducted provisional analysis, looking at deaths involving coronavirus between 2 March and 15 May 2020. The analysis found that, when taking into account size and age variations across different ethnicities, the mortality rate was highest among black men. After adjusting for region, population density and other sociodemographic characteristics, the raised risk of death for black people was two times greater for men and 1.4 times greater for women compared with white people. The analysis was updated in May 2021 and found that the mortality risk for black people relative to white British people was reduced in the second wave. Nevertheless, “most black and South Asian groups remained at higher risk than white British people in the second wave even after adjustments”, according to the ONS. Although the ONS data does not cover the whole of the pandemic, there remains evidence that minority ethnic people were at a higher risk of contracting and dying from Covid-19 compared with their white counterparts. Factors as to why this may be the case include socio-economic factors, and the prevalence of pre-existing health conditions. For example, people from a south-Asian background are already up to six times more likely to have type-2 diabetes than the general population. • The headline of this article was amended on 18 January 2022 to more accurately refer to people who died “with Covid”, rather than “of Covid” as an earlier version said.One in four doctors in the NHS are so tired that their ability to treat patients has become impaired, according to the first survey to reveal the impact of sleep deprivation on medics during the coronavirus pandemic. Growing workloads, longer hours and widespread staff shortages are causing extreme tiredness among medics, leading to memory problems and difficulty concentrating, according to the report by the Medical Defence Union (MDU), which provides legal support to about 200,000 doctors, nurses, dentists and other healthcare workers. The survey of more than 500 doctors across the UK, carried out within the past month and seen by the Guardian, uncovered almost 40 near misses as a direct result of exhaustion. In at least seven cases, patients actually sustained harm. Despite encouraging signs the Omicron wave may be fading, doctors admitted the constant pressure of the past 22 months spent fighting coronavirus on the frontline was taking a toll on their technical skills and even their ability to make what should be straightforward medical decisions. Medics admitted for the first time sleep deprivation was causing real harm to patients in the NHS. Almost six in 10 doctors (59%) reported their sleep patterns had worsened during the pandemic. More than a quarter (26%) of medics admitted being so tired that their ability to treat patients was “impaired”. Of these, one in six (18%) said a patient was harmed or a near miss occurred as a result. One described how their patient collapsed after being prescribed penicillin, something they had previously told the same doctor they were allergic to. The doctor blamed a “perfect storm” of “chronic fatigue” and “an unmanageable workload”. Another said widespread staff shortages meant “mistakes are more frequent by the end of the day”. “Doctors and their healthcare colleagues are running on empty,” said Dr Matthew Lee, the chief executive of the MDU. “Our members have come through a period of immense pressure caused by the pandemic and it is affecting all aspects of their life, including sleep patterns.” Fatigue increased the risk of mistakes and harm to patients’ and doctors’ health, he said. “In our survey, side-effects doctors reported due to sleep deprivation included poor concentration (64%), decision-making difficulties (40%), mood swings, (37%) and mental health problems (30%).” The MDU survey of medics within the last month had 532 respondents including hospital doctors, GPs, consultants, specialists and junior doctors. Nearly one in 10 (9%) medics said they felt sleep deprived at work on a daily basis. A further 28% reported feeling sleep deprived every week. More than one in six (17%) said sleep deprivation was affecting their technical abilities when caring for patients. Dr Michael Farquhar, a consultant in sleep medicine at Evelina London children’s hospital, part of Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS foundation trust, said that while fatigue among NHS staff had been a concern for some time, the pandemic had “exacerbated” the problem, to the point where it had become a “critical” issue, impacting patient safety and staff wellbeing. “Even before the pandemic hit, fatigue was a huge issue in an NHS which is acknowledged to have been under-resourced over the last decade,” he said. “Dealing with the impact of Covid has exacerbated significant issues which already existed, with many healthcare professionals ‘running on fumes’. “When doctors are sleep deprived they can lose insight, meaning they can persevere when doing the wrong thing. Clinicians are more likely to make errors in simple repetitive tasks, such as calculating medication, and our ability to process, retain and analyse information suffers, too, which means it can take longer to assess a patient’s symptoms and reach a diagnosis. “Fatigue has been a major issue in the NHS for a long time … and with staff now further exhausted by two years of the pandemic, it is a critical issue for both staff wellbeing and patient safety.” In total, 92% of the medics surveyed worked more additional hours than they were rostered or contracted to do, with more than half (52%) doing between five and 20 extra hours a week on average. Nearly one in three (29%) said they got no breaks during a working day. “Doctors should recognise when they need to take a break but equally, they need to be working in an adequately resourced environment in order to take one,” said Lee. “In our survey, three in 10 doctors got no breaks at all during the working day despite many working long shifts. In addition, 21% didn’t have anywhere to go such as a staff room, or quiet area, to take a break.” The MDU said the government and NHS organisations must do more to ensure there were adequate resources in place to allow doctors to take regular breaks. Lee added: “Taking regular breaks is vital in the interests of doctors and their patients. Pressures on frontline healthcare workers are likely to get worse for doctors in the coming weeks. At a time of considerable staff absence in the NHS it is more important than ever that those staff who are fit to work are properly supported so they can care for patients safely.” Last week, after a survey by the Royal College of Physicians (RCP) found that one in five doctors felt overwhelmed by work on a daily basis, Danny Mortimer, the chief executive of NHS Employers and deputy chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said: “Staff shortages and an exhausted workforce present the greatest challenge to the recovery of our NHS and the return of safe, high-quality health services for all.” A government spokesperson said: “Patient safety is paramount and NHS staff continue to go above and beyond to ensure people get the treatment they need. We are providing record investment to support the sector and tackle backlogs, and additional health and wellbeing support has been provided to staff. “There are record numbers of doctors and nurses working in the NHS with over 4,800 more doctors and over 10,900 more nurses compared to last year. We are committed to growing the workforce, with 50,000 more nurses by the end of this parliament.”A survey has found that one in four doctors in the NHS are so tired that their ability to treat patients has become impaired. Here doctors reveal how tiredness, fatigue and sleep deprivation are affecting their ability to provide the best care for patients in the NHS. The GP trainee As a GP trainee working in A&amp;E last year I made an error at the end of a long shift. Due to staff sickness I was nine hours into what should have been an eight-hour shift during which time I had not taken a toilet break, eaten or drank. When I asked about a break I was told that no one else was taking breaks, but it was ‘up to me’ if I really needed to. I felt I couldn’t. I saw a patient and took their medical history, which included them telling me they were allergic to penicillin. I documented this within the notes but did not add it to the allergy box or the drug chart as I was interrupted by a nursing colleague who asked me to assist with another patient. When I was able to return to the patient, I explained they would need to be admitted and we would start intravenous antibiotics. I prescribed IV amoxicillin and shortly after it was given, I was called to the patient as they had collapsed. I realised as soon as I saw the patient the error I had made. Thankfully they recovered with treatment. I later explained what had happened and apologised to them. The patient was understanding of my error but I still haven’t forgiven myself. I am always so careful but it was the perfect storm of chronic fatigue, thirst, hunger, bladder discomfort, distraction and an unmanageable workload that contributed to my mistake on that day. The consultant My sleep deprivation was affecting my daily work and I didn’t realise it until a near miss happened. I’m now off the on-call rota on health grounds. There’s simply not enough proactive management around the effects of sleep deprivation on cognitive errors in healthcare – a situation made worse by the pandemic and short staffing. Breaks should be longer and more frequent than daytime working. The truth is sleep deprivation is a systems failure and should be addressed by health and safety laws. The GP There is no capacity in the system to do anything about feeling tired or burnt out and managers have no solutions and therefore do not want to hear. I have been made to feel guilty for taking annual leave with my family. The consultant radiologist I work as a consultant radiologist in a district general hospital. I have suffered a severe case of burnout and was off work for over a year and consequently no longer do on-calls. It is now so busy that it is normal to have to report 50-plus emergency scans in 12 hours, with constant interruptions. This is mentally very exacting. The scans contain hundreds of images which have to be manipulated by powerful computers in order to aid interpretation. At the end of 12 hours staring at a computer continuously, your mind is tired and you don’t look at the scan with quite the same acumen as you did at the start of the day. We try to compensate for this by taking longer to do a report and reviewing tricky scans the next day but it is hard and there are many distractions and interruptions that break concentration. What can be done to combat this? Personal experience has taught me the value of building in several natural breaks to my day. Self-care is vital. We take it in turns to buy coffee for colleagues to allow a bit of social interaction.Hammers fight to the death for point West Ham battled well to claim a 1-1 draw with Tottenham on Sunday night after Hawa Cissoko put her team in the worst possible position. The Hammers were 1-0 down after 54 minutes and Cissoko, who was responsible for the tackle that led to Spurs’ penalty, was sent off two minutes later for a second yellow card. But West Ham managed to claw back a point in the dying moments through a Kate Longhurst header in the 92nd minute. The comeback highlights the team’s progression as last season they could well have sunk being a goal and a player down. But the resilience displayed in the second half shows how far they have come under Olli Harder and the potential they have for the future. Sarah Rendell Stanway leading Manchester City charge Georgia Stanway was in full ‘new year, new me’ mode against Aston Villa with a goal in both the opening and latter stages to secure a 3-0 away win. Stanway’s first was the result of a swashbuckling run through Villa’s midfield, making use of space in front of her to roll in City’s opener in the fifth minute - she made multiple attempts of the move during the match, to varying degrees of success. Villa found it more and more difficult to keep her quiet and it all became too much for Carla Ward’s defence in the 75th minute when Stanway ghosted her way to the far post, tapping in her fifth goal in three games. It’s unarguable that she is in fantastic form, making light work of Villa’s back four. Continue in this vein and Stanway will cement her status as the player leading City back to their best. Maryam Naz Arsenal try to buy their way out of their crisis Arsenal may have seen their weekend game cancelled because of Covid cases and injuries in opponents Reading’s squad but they have still been busy. The crisis-hit Gunners have collected just one win in five games since the start of December. Last week’s 2-0 loss to relegation battling Birmingham was a particular shock to the system. All is not lost though, Jonas Eidevall’s side remains in all four competitions and sits atop of the WSL table. There will be hope that the arrival of highly-rated Sweden forward Stina Blackstenius from Häcken and the defender Laura Wienroither from Champions League group opponents Hoffenheim will help stop the rot. Perhaps most important, however, is the return of influential centre-back Leah Williamson, who has been out injured since November, and the announcement that she has signed a new contract. Suzanne Wrack Manchester United and Galton on the rise Manchester United are believed to have missed out on the chance to recruit Blackstenius much to the frustration of fans. Marc Skinner’s squad is thin and the club are yet to announce any incoming or outgoing players. Yet with four back-to-back wins for the first time this season the current crop are showing signs that they have clicked with the way Skinner wants them to play. Five goals against a Birmingham team that secured a first win of the season against previously unbeaten Arsenal in their previous game is not to be sniffed at. Forward Leah Galton’s stock continues to rise with an assist and two goals in six minutes and United could take the advantage over Tottenham in the race for the third Champions League place should they beat them this weekend. SW Leicester off the bottom despite lack of goals The Foxes won by a single goal against Brighton at the King Power Stadium, courtesy of Shannon O’Brien’s 54th-minute winner. They now sit in 11th position, with a brief reprieve from the WSL basement spot - but for how long? It’s clear that the lack of goals has been a running theme this season and it could come back to ruffle up their tails. This is a Leicester team that have only netted six times in 11 games – only the 2019-20 Liverpool side had scored fewer at that stage, a despairingly low three. Leicester’s shots on target have also been on the drop under the reign of Lydia Bedford and against Brighton they only managed three. They have won two out of three now but may need to score more to keep Birmingham behind them. MN Will Chelsea’s big break hamper title hopes? Chelsea’s match against Everton was called off because off Covid cases and injuries in the Toffees camp. The postponement means the defending champions have not played a competitive match since mid-December and the elongated break could hamper their performances. They are in a prime position to take top spot in the WSL after Arsenal’s loss of form but the Blues have to be clinical and cannot afford to drop any points. If in the first leauge game back, scheduled to be against Brighton on Sunday, they are a little shaky or the cohesion that makes Chelsea so successful is missing – their chances of claiming the title for a third successive season could go up in smoke. Maybe their Continental Cup quarter-final against West Ham on Wednesday will get them up and running again. SRUnilever has pledged to grow its health, beauty and hygiene business and sell slower-growing operations as investors dumped its shares after its failed £50bn approach for GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer products arm. GSK rejected three Unilever bids for the consumer products arm it is seeking to spin off, the last of which was worth £50bn. The pharmaceutical company on Saturday said that the offer “fundamentally undervalued” the business, which owns brands including Panadol pain relief and Sensodyne toothpaste. Unilever shares dropped by 7% on Monday morning, making it the biggest faller on the FTSE 100. GSK shares rose by as much as 5%, putting it among the biggest UK blue-chip gainers as investors appeared to bet that a higher bid would materialise. Unilever, the owner of brands ranging from Dove soap to Marmite, has been under pressure in recent months under the leadership of the chief executive, Alan Jope. Its share price was almost a quarter below its record 2019 high before the bids were revealed. GSK plans to demerge the consumer healthcare business by the middle of the year, and the former Tesco boss Sir Dave Lewis has been lined up to chair it. Some analysts have estimated GSK may be looking for as much as £60bn for a takeover. GSK Consumer Healthcare would be a “strong strategic fit”, Unilever said on Monday. Unilever highlighted GSK’s oral care brands, which include Aquafresh toothpaste, as well as its vitamins, minerals and supplements brands such as Centrum and over-the-counter medicines. Jope said the company would be “a very attractive option” for Unilever but added “it’s not the only option”. He emphasised that Unilever would fund the health, beauty and hygiene push by selling slower-growing businesses rather than relying on taking on more debt. The company said it would return to current levels of debt relative to its size “over the short to medium term”. Asked about prominent food brands such as Hellmann’s and Marmite, Jope highlighted the fast growth of some products, including the mayonnaise and Ben &amp; Jerry’s ice-cream, but confirmed the company was considering its options for some products. “This is about portfolio rotation, not just scale through acquisition,” Jope told reporters on Monday. An acquisition would not be a “defensive” option to make Unilever itself an unpalatable takeover target, he added. “This is improving the quality of Unilever, not necessarily the size of Unilever,” he added. Jope’s comments came as Unilever rushed out a strategy update focused on investment in “sustainable market growth” and using its already strong presence in emerging markets, which are expected to use more consumer products as citizens become richer. Later this month it plans to update investors on a new operating structure that it hopes will improve its performance. However, Jope insisted these changes would be focused on making the company easier to manage, rather than cutting costs via job losses. Jope also defended the company’s focus on sustainability issues, following criticism from the prominent asset manager Terry Smith that it was “obsessed with publicly displaying sustainability credentials at the expense of focusing on the fundamentals of the business”. Jope said sustainability credentials were an “important filter” on potential acquisition targets, and the company believed they would perform better in the long term. Maryam Ali, an analyst at Creditsights, a debt rating agency, said in a note to clients that while she could see Unilever’s rationale for the GSK consumer products bid, a debt-funded deal would probably be accompanied by rating agency downgrades, although that could be mitigated by selling other parts of the business. “Ever since the aborted Kraft-Heinz takeover attempt in 2017, it always seemed like a matter of ‘when’ rather than ‘if’ that the company would carry out a big deal of its own to protect its long-term future,” Ali wrote. However, she added that “there may be a feeling that Unilever is looking to bite off more than it can chew given the company’s underperformance in recent years”.What’s not to love about Yellowjackets (Sky Atlantic), a series largely driven by the central mystery of which teenage girl has been eaten, and who ordered the eating? The US horror/thriller/drama, which is also truly a comedy (is it so wrong to laugh at an exploding plane?), has acquired a big following over the course of its first season. It tells the story of a girls’ high-school football team, whose plane crashes while they’re travelling to a national tournament, leaving survivors stranded in the wilderness, having to fight for their lives. Think of it as a hybrid of The Craft and The Island with Bear Grylls, or Lost – with intentional jokes – plus a hint of Big Little Lies, if that had more of an interest in cannibalism than property porn. I can’t remember the last time a TV series offered such unadulterated and outrageous fun. It even manages to navigate one of contemporary television’s most irritating trends, the split timeline, with style and panache. Half of the action takes place in 1996, starting out as a retro teen drama in the run-up to the crash, morphing into a folk-horror gorefest once the girls (and the odd boy or two) are right there in the thick of it. The other half takes place 25 years later, in the present day, as some of the women who made it out alive have to work out who knows what about the terrible things they did while they were stranded, and who is trying to blackmail them about it. But, really, Yellowjackets is its own invention, a macabre and amusing one. It shares the spirit of those mid-to-late-90s teen films, such as Scream and The Faculty, in the way it juggles horror and humour; and it places near equal emphasis on the small teenage dramas, such as stolen boyfriends and new crushes, and the hunger and desperation of trying to live in an inhospitable, and possibly haunted, environment. It plays with supernatural elements without ever leaning too heavily into them, leaving us with the notion that what is within us is the scariest thing of all. Karyn Kusama directed the pilot episode and executive produces; she is responsible for the perpetually re-evaluated and underrated film Jennifer’s Body, and this shares a lot of its knowing tone. The cast is brilliant, the younger actors impeccably matched to their older counterparts. It’s a nostalgia fest for 90s lovers, with Juliette Lewis and Christina Ricci putting in their best performances in years. Lewis is outstanding as the wild and troubled Natalie, while Ricci is in danger of creating an iconic villain – if you see her as a villain, though there are moments in which she verges on the heroic – in the fabulously unhinged Misty. Tawny Cypress is Taissa, an ambitious politician in the making whose trauma from the crash continues to manifest itself in strange and uncanny ways. The reliably wonderful Melanie Lynskey is pitch perfect as present-day Shauna, stuck in a domestic trap of her own creation but destructively desperate to break out of it, and suspiciously capable of coolly culling the rabbits in her garden. While there is a suggestion that dark forces surround their wilderness days, and the boundaries of reality are stretched – particularly when mixing hooch made from rotten berries with mushroom stew – the series holds our attention by rationing the reveals, carefully drip-feeding information about who may or may not have made it out, and by hinting at whatever gruesome business went down. While we know our central four characters survived into the present day, the identity and whereabouts of the others are not yet clear. Fan forums are teeming with theories and speculation. Who is the girl who appears to have been sacrificed? Who is the Antler Queen, conducting her acolytes? What happens to the baby? What do Lottie’s visions mean? What about Jackie? Was Adam really a random, handsome guy, who just happened to be everywhere that Shauna was? And just happened to be a little bit of a modern-day Yellowjackets fanboy? The impending season finale, which can’t come soon enough, should answer at least some of those questions. It has already been renewed for a second season, and rightly so. I have recommended Yellowjackets to a lot of people, and, up until this point, it has had a very strong hit rate. My only concern is that it will leave us hanging, that, with more seasons to go, we might have to wait a Lost length of time to get proper answers. But, then again, with Misty on the rampage and Natalie out for revenge, I can think of worse things to do than strapping in for the ride.He should have been a hero for a second straight week, but that’s just not how things are working out for Borussia Mönchengladbach right now. Yann Sommer had already flexed his considerable goalkeeping muscles last week, keeping Bayern Munich at bay to help bring home a famous win. This week, the Switzerland star perhaps even bettered himself. In Saturday’s late game with Bayer Leverkusen, a perennial rival for the Champions League places in recent years, Sommer saved not one but two penalties in the second half, and they were both great stops, first plunging to his right to deny Patrik Schick and then later to his left to fingertip Kerem Demirbay’s effort. He became the first goalkeeper to deny two penalties in a Bundesliga game since FC Nürnberg’s Raphael Schäfer kept out efforts from Domi Kumbela and Ermin Bicakcic in February 2014. The difference there was that Schäfer’s heroics helped Nürnberg win the game. For Sommer despite that and another of other stops, notably an excellent double save from Amine Adli to keep hope flickering for Gladbach as time ran out, there was no such reward. Even the greatest of goalkeepers can only do so much and for Sommer, the miracle was holding back the tide for so long. He faced 32 shots from Leverkusen ( they created from just 45% of the possession), 14 of which were on target, for an eye-watering xG of 6.22. Still, he kept the visitors hanging on. “We were more tense than usual on the bench in those last few minutes,” confessed Leverkusen coach Gerardo Seoane. “A set piece or a deflected shot can always happen to you.” Jonathan Tah, the defender, said, “another 2-2 would have been a disaster,” underlining how the shadow of Sommer was starting to loom in the minds of Leverkusen. The goalkeeper may not have earned his side a point, but he has perhaps earned Adi Hütter some cover. This fixture has usually felt like it had direct consequences of late, but not this time. The win put Die Werkself into third position but Gladbach will not be troubling them in a hurry, now trailing them by ten points. They are only four points ahead of the relegation play-off place and second-bottom Stuttgart and but for Sommer, could have suffered a truly humbling defeat. In a different context and with a different headline, Hütter’s defensive choices might be coming under greater scrutiny. Marvin Friedrich, who arrived from Union Berlin this week, was less thrown in the deep end, more chucked in the middle of the ocean without a life vest. The coach described the choice to include him rather than Matthias Ginter, who will not extend his expiring contract, as backing “a player for the future.” He does realise that in their current state of difficulty, he can’t rule any options out, though. “Ginter is a good player and I didn’t say the door was closed,” said Hütter. “We have to get out of this situation with or without him.” And what a situation it is, with Gladbach the owners of the third-worst defensive record in the division - behind long-gone Greuther Fürth and ailing Hertha - and the defence far from the only problem. The midfield is failing to protect the backline which is why Hütter underlined “you can’t compare” the status of Denis Zakaria, another on an expiring deal who might even go this month, with that of Ginter. Put simply, it is an area in which the team has far greater need. Laszlo Benes, starting a second Bundesliga game of the season in place of the unwell Christoph Kramer, looked lost even before conceding the first penalty. Robert Andrich headed Leverkusen in front from the resulting corner). At the other end, some product from Alessane Péa and Marcus Thuram (combined goals tally this season - three) would be also welcome to give Sommer some respite. Back in 2014 it may have worked out for Scäfer on the day but the season went downhill rapidly. Nürnberg lost 11 of their remaining 12 games and were relegated. Gladbach will hope the opposite fates after their goalkeepers’ big days will continue. Talking points One of Borussia Dortmund’s most complete performances of an unpredictable season, Friday’s 5-1 win over Freiburg, was quickly overshadowed by a post-match interview Erling Haaland - who scored twice - gave with Norwegian broadcaster Viaplay in which he told reporter Jan Aage Fjørtoft that “the club is trying to put pressure on me to make a decision” on whether he will stay beyond the summer. This was refuted by Sebastian Kehl on Sport 1’s Doppelpass (“we’re not pushing him at all, but it’s also clear that as a club we have to plan with surety”) but it is hard to see how this saga is resolved cleanly. The plus for BVB is that even if the title seems out of reach, they’ve never looked as comfortable in second place. The gap to Leverkusen in third (eight points) is bigger than the gulf between them and Bayern (six). Bayern’s lead at the top had thus been trimmed to three points overnight but the still-depleted leaders quickly scrubbed away any doubts in an imperious display at Köln on Saturday afternoon, despite still having a number of Covid-related absences. Robert Lewandowski’s hat-trick in a 4-0 win - punctuated by a magnificent strike by the soon-to-be-out-of-contract Corentin Tolisso - took him onto the mark of 300 Bundesliga goals, while Manuel Neuer got his hands on a rare prize afterwards, swapping his shirt for Effzeh coach Steffen Baumgart’s fabled flat cap. Leipzig continued their positive steps under Domenico Tedesco, winning a first Bundesliga away game of the season (and their first since emerging victorious at now-second-tier Werder Bremen in April last year), 2-0 at Stuttgart. With new Red Bull technical director Mario Gomez looking on from the stand, there was concern for Dominik Szoboszlai, who pulled up in the warm-up with an apparent thigh complaint and is due an MRI to assess the damage. After six straight losses in the Bundesliga alone Wolfsburg stemmed the flow, but hardly in glorious fashion, being held to a goalless draw at home by Hertha. “It isn’t enough,” admitted goalkeeper Koen Casteels, while for the visitors Fredi Bobic addressed his first general meeting since becoming the club’s managing director of sport. He denied accusations of cronyism in appointing Tayfun Korkut as coach (“he’s not my buddy”) and while remaining sanguine, emphasised a need for progress. “I want to see development,” said Bobic, intimating he would assess Korkut’s impact at the season’s end. History was made at Mainz, who beat Bochum 1-0, with Bo Svensson receiving his fourth yellow card of the season and thus becoming the first Bundesliga coach to be suspended for accumulation of bookings - he’ll be absent from the touchline for Saturday’s trip to Fürth. Defender Stefan Bell, the team treasurer, will be reminded by his teammates to collect the appropriate fine from the boss. “Of course he has to pay up,” said midfielder Kevin Stöger, “and I told him that right after the game.”The BBC’s funding will be frozen for the next two years, the government has said, leading the broadcaster to warn it will affect programming. The broadcaster has signed deals which mean that scores of BBC programmes, including Dr Who and Bodyguard, are shown on other streaming services like Netflix and Hulu. We would like to hear from under-25s in the UK about their views on the broadcaster’s output. What are the main services you use and why? If you’re part of the 30% that doesn’t access any of its services, what do you use instead? Share your thoughts You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The Irish foreign minister, Simon Coveney, has ordered an inquiry into a champagne celebration involving officials in his department at the height of the first Covid lockdown. A photo of the celebration in June 2020 showed about 20 officials drinking Moët &amp; Chandon champagne, without wearing masks or social distancing. A spokesperson said Coveney had asked the department’s secretary general, Joe Hackett, to send him a report on the “impromptu gathering” by the end of the month. The party on 17 June 2020 came as Ireland was three months into one of the strictest lockdowns in the world. Not only were indoor gatherings restricted to six people but people were not allowed move beyond their counties. A selfie tweeted by the then secretary general, Niall Burgess, now the ambassador to France, was posted on Twitter on the night but subsequently taken down. In his first public comments on the controversy Coveney told RTÉ that he had been made aware of the gathering after the photograph had appeared on social media. He said he had decided not to investigate at the time because officials admitted wrongdoing and he did not think it required further action. “My secretary general at the time acknowledged that it shouldn’t have happened and it was a momentary drop of our guard, I think was what he said,” Coveney said. “This was something that had happened. It was quite public because it was put up on social media. It was taken down, there was an acknowledgement of wrongdoing if you like. “I trusted my secretary general and I felt that clearly, what happened shouldn’t have happened. I didn’t feel that there was a need for follow-up after that.” The current focus on the gathering appears to have been fuelled by partygate in the UK, with renewed interest in the standards adhered to by public figures during lockdown. In the RTÉ interview on Friday Coveney was repeatedly asked about the gathering in light of the controversy in London. “People like me and my department need to lead by example. This is something that I think many in the department are very embarrassed about and feel ashamed about, but it happened and it didn’t happen since. I think from that point of view, the lesson has been learned,” he said.For most people, just a “yes” or “I will”, suffices. Megan Fox went a little further when the musician Machine Gun Kelly asked her to marry him. “Just as in every lifetime before this one,” she posted on Instagram, “and as in every lifetime that will follow it, I said yes … And then we drank each other’s blood.” Kelly proposed under the same banyan tree, at the Ritz-Carlton Dorado Beach hotel in Puerto Rico, where the pair met a year earlier. At that time they were filming Midnight in the Switchgrass, a Bruce Willis crime-thriller with an 8% rating on Rotten tomatoes. Kelly has since said he only took the role in the film so he could do a scene with Fox, which would be seen as incredibly creepy if they hadn’t hooked up, but now they’re getting married we can reclassify as cute. After he had been hanging around her trailer for a while, Fox picked up on his presence and invited him to have lunch with her. She asked him how he was feeling and he replied, “I’m lost”. Fox reportedly replied, “Well, let’s find you”, and the musician knew he had fallen in love. They have been finding each other, quite publicly, ever since: at their vampire-inspired GQ photoshoot where Kelly pretends to bite Fox’s neck while she gazes at the heavens in ecstasy; at the VMAs when Fox wore a barely-there Mugler dress and then told Entertainment Weekly her wardrobe choice had been inspired by Kelly telling her “You’re gonna be naked tonight” and her responding “Whatever you say, Daddy”; on an August webisode of Thirst Tweets for Buzzfeed Celeb when Kelly responded to a fan offering their feet for his delectation with the news that he was “only sucking one pair of toes”. For their first date, Kelly picked Fox up in a Cadillac and took her for a rose-petal-strewn picnic on LA’s Topanga Canyon where they ate sushi and “breathed each other”. They subsequently got each other’s names tattooed on themselves. No PDA goes unavoided, when Fox posted an Instagram of their vacation let, she did so with the caption “the table at this air bnb saw some things 🥵”. The pair showed up to the launch of Kelly’s nail polish line chained together via their nails. Fox and Kelly do not consider themselves just another couple. According to Fox they are not merely soulmates, but “twin flames”, which is “where a soul has ascended into a high enough level that it can be split into two different bodies at the same time”. After another pandemic year gave us the rise of the “normal celebrity” in the form of bland influencers like Addison Rae doing lackluster TikTok dances, the return of some real rockstar behavior is refreshing, even aspirational. Fox and Kelly have made love cool again, saving us from having to know which bland man with brown hair Taylor Swift is dating now, or pretending that Ye and New York socialite Julia Fox’s budding “romance” is anything but a W magazine psyop designed to sell Gap jumpers. They join fellow hot-girlfriend-and-pop-punk-boyfriend couple Kourtney Kardashian and Travis Barker, and even the (realistically, temporary) union of Kim Kardashian and Pete Davidson, who were first spotted holding hands on a rollercoaster, in signaling the end of dour please-respect-our privacy partnerships and the return of youthful, teenage intensity about the person you’re with. Kelly reciprocates Fox’s reverence: he told Howard Stern that he “didn’t know what [love] was until me and her made eye contact”. Perhaps he can’t believe his luck – he is, after all, about to marry a woman whose posters he put on his teen bedroom wall. Fox has had a long spell away from the limelight. She says she felt ridiculed by the film industry for speaking out against the way she was treated on set in the early days of her acting career. “I feel like I was sort of out and in front of the #MeToo movement before the #MeToo movement happened, I was speaking out and saying, ‘Hey, these things are happening to me and they’re not OK,’” Fox said in a 2019 interview with Diablo Coady who she worked with on the film Jennifer’s Body. “And everyone was like, ‘Oh well, fuck you. We don’t care, you deserve it.’” But Fox’s relationship with Kelly seems to not only have brought her happiness, but inadvertently also helped to relaunch her as a major celebrity, once again returned to magazine front covers. People get a hard time for “being famous for being famous” but if celebrities aren’t going to do anything actually useful like redistributing their wealth let them at least keep us entertained by wearing vials of each other’s blood. “Some people give, like, a handkerchief to their partner or whatever,” Kelly said of the gift given to him by Fox early on in their relationship so that he could keep her close while she flew abroad for work. “She gave me her DNA.” Not since the days of Pamela Anderson and Tommy Lee have we seen such unbridled, unhinged horniness.A young, majority-black theatre company’s rewriting of Shakespeare will “change the face of classical theatre” by bringing the bard’s work back to the “slang” in which it was born, Sir Mark Rylance has said. Rylance, an esteemed Shakespearean actor and the first artistic director of the Globe, is a trustee of Intermission Youth Theatre, a charity that aims to transform the lives of disadvantaged young people by getting them to perform Shakespeare’s work. Intermission’s most recent production, Juliet &amp; Romeo at the Chelsea Theatre, was a radical retelling of Shakespeare’s classic tale of doomed romance, using modern references and dialect to explore London’s postcode violence. The roles of the main characters were also swapped, making Juliet a Montague and a dominant force who pursued her shy and meek love interest with an unexpected passion and vigour. “There was a question of identity for Shakespeare that’s very much a part of this culture,” Rylance said. “We forget that the English language in Shakespeare’s day was a minority language in Europe. French, Italian, Greek, Latin all seemed much more powerful. So Shakespeare created new words, compounds, and he also stole words. “When I’m around these young people, there’s a lot of words they’re using I don’t understand, and that’s on purpose. My dominant culture isn’t letting them in. It’s in that spirit that Shakespeare was born, a creative use of language to create identity.” Intermission’s reimagined plays make the political and personal struggles of centuries gone accessible, not just for a modern theatre audience, but also for those who have previously felt disfranchised by the art form and industry that surrounds it. Trained by the company’s artistic director, Darren Raymond, teens have gone on to study at leading drama schools and performed with major companies including the Globe, the National Theatre and the Royal Shakespeare Company. “This is work that is going to change the face of classical theatre … it’s going to change the actual kind of productions and the way we speak,” Rylance added. Raymond, who originally set up the company at a theatre church in 2008, said the writing was a collaborative process between him and the young actors, who bring their own experiences to the text. “It always surprises me, the discoveries we make when we look at a piece with young people,” he said. “Those young people have grown up in some of the toughest boroughs of London, where there’s a lot of gang warfare. One of them recently spoke about losing a friend to knife crime, and the massive impact it had on their life … I’m very passionate about making sure that our young people believe they can have ownership over Shakespeare. Because it can open a lot of doors inside of us.” For Rylance, who played Thomas Cromwell in a TV adaptation of Hilary Mantel’s Wolf Hall, it’s important to work with young people when they’re first encountering Shakespeare to ensure they’re not put off. “I want there to be more diversity on our stages … that means going back to the root,” he said. “It means making sure that at the first contact with this stuff, no young person feels that they’re inferior to it. Shakespeare isn’t for everyone, but some people have a gift for it. The next Lionel Messi or Ronaldo might emerge from anywhere in society.” A lot of the young actors at Intermission, he added, “haven’t been given intellectual thoughts and fears” about Shakespeare by meeting his work in the classroom. “So it becomes something to kick about. They’re able to commit themselves emotionally and vulnerably, which is very moving.” Diversity on stage isn’t the only notable thing at Intermission’s productions. On a Thursday night in December, most of the audience was from a black or ethnic minority background. There were cheers, dancing to a soundtrack including UK garage classics, and an immersive Q&amp;A with the cast after the show. “Some of the audience have never stepped into a theatre before,” Raymond said. “And they’re sitting next to avid theatregoers, lords and ladies. I look at our audience and think: this is how it should be.” This bending of Shakespeare’s classic characters is becoming more familiar to theatre-goers. In a recent production of Hamlet at the Young Vic, the prince was played by Cush Jumbo, a black woman, while Rosencrantz and Guildenstern were influencers who took selfies and vaped.A crisp, golden exterior that, when bitten, yields a soft, richly spiced and seasoned middle: eating bhajis is like sinking into beautifully aromatic pillows of goodness – comfort food at its best. And yet there is a wholesomeness to these ochre-stained morsels, with the turmeric-hued broccoli and sweet but tart pomegranate salad. They have a goodness that nourishes the body just as the fatty, sweet strands of onions feed the soul. A wonderfully devil-may-care January dish to gobble in front of a good movie. Purple sprouting broccoli and chickpea bhajis with pomegranate chopped salad These are delicious with dried mango powder (amchoor) sprinkled over, giving them tantalisingly sour notes. Prep 20 min Cook 10 min Serves 4 250g chickpea flour 2 tsp turmeric ¼ tsp mild chilli powder 1 tsp salt 250g purple sprouting broccoli, stem, leaves and florets roughly chopped 1 largish red onion, peeled and finely sliced 1 red chilli, finely chopped 2 handfuls fresh coriander leaves Vegetable oil, for frying For the chopped salad 1 cucumber, diced small 2 big handfuls baby tomatoes, quartered Seeds from ½ pomegranate 2 big handfuls mint leaves Juice of ½ lemon 1 tbsp olive oil To serve Yoghurt Mango chutney Amchoor (optional) Make the chopped salad first. Put everything in a bowl, toss, then season. Taste and add a pinch of sugar if needed, or a pinch more salt – it should taste delicious, fresh and fragrant. Put to one side to allow the flavours to mingle. In a large bowl, combine the flour, spices and a teaspoon of fine sea salt, then whisk in 230-250ml water to make a thick batter the consistency of thick cream (the exact amount of water will depend on the weather and the flour and spices you are using). Stir in the broccoli, onion, chilli and coriander leaves until everything is generously coated. To fry the bhajis, fill a deep pan or wok a third full with oil and heat it to 180-190C (or when a small crumb of bread turns golden in 15 seconds). Line a plate with kitchen paper to drain the bhajis. Add heaped tablespoons of the mix to the hot oil and fry in batches for three to four minutes, being careful not to crowd the pan or it will bring the temperature of the oil down and the bhajis will be greasy instead of crisp. Turn the bhajis while cooking, until golden all over, then scoop out on to the plate. Keep them warm in a low oven while frying the rest, or eat the bhajis as they come out of the fryer. Sprinkle the bhajis with flaky sea salt and a dusting of amchoor, if using, and serve with the salad, yoghurt and mango chutney alongside. The simple flex … Try adding a touch of ground coriander or cumin to the batter, or serve the bhajis with a slow-cooked mutton curry or fragrant dal for the ultimate curry night. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoChina’s Wang Qiang secured her first win over a top-20 player since beating Serena Williams at Melbourne Park in 2020 after upsetting 18th-seeded Coco Gauff 6-4, 6-2 at the Australian Open on Monday. It was Wang’s first win on tour since last year’s French Open, where she beat Su-Wei Hsieh in the first round before losing to Gauff in the second. Gauff saved four match points from 5-0 down on Monday, but that was the only good news in a match in which the American made 38 unforced errors. “It’s just learning when do I play my best tennis, and today wasn’t the best tennis,” the 17-year-old Gauff. It was the first time she had been beaten in the opening round of a major since the 2020 US Open. Elsewhere, Madison Keys came out on top in an all-US battle against the 2020 Australian Open champion, Sofia Kenin. Keys has been in excellent form in the lead up to this year’s tournament and claimed the Adelaide Open last week, her first title since 2019. Keys is currently ranked No 87 in the world after suffering injuries and a loss of form. Kenin, who was the No 11 seed, is undergoing struggles of her own and has not won a title since March 2020. Elsewhere in the women’s draw Alison Riske, who Keys defeated in the final at Adelaide, beat Donna Vekic in straight sets. It was a generally successful day for the American men in Melbourne. Reilly Opelka won a battle of giants with Kevin Anderson as the 6ft 11in No 23 seed beat the 6ft 8in South African 6-3, 6-4, 7-6. Tommy Paul and Mackenzie McDonald also won their openers but Sam Querrey fell to Italy’s Lorenzo Sonego.When all else fails, send in the big guns. Or rather, pretend to. In the 1997 American satire Wag the Dog, a devious president invents a fictional war with Albania to distract voters from an embarrassing sex scandal. And by shamelessly whipping up a patriotic storm, he almost gets away with it. While Boris Johnson has thankfully stopped short of declaring a war, he appears to be offering wobbling Conservative voters the next best thing: Operation Red Meat, involving threats to deploy the RAF and the navy against migrant boats in the Channel, plus some ritual BBC-bashing and assorted other wheezes designed to buy a beleaguered prime minister time. Presumably, he wants Daily Express readers to be under the vague impression that Britain is ready, if not quite to bomb refugees back to France, then at the very least to up the ante. Like the rest of Operation Red Meat, however, this one whiffs of something long past its sell-by date. The plan, insofar as it can be called that, is to deploy military assets to track small boats crossing the Channel and escort them ashore for processing, but then shift the actual processing somewhere less appealing than England. (Last time this plan surfaced, it was to be Albania, until the Albanians announced this was the first they’d heard of it; now Rwanda and Ghana are floated.) The idea of militarising Britain’s response to terrified refugees will of course be offensive and distressing to many. But the twist in the tale for its intended audience of core Conservative voters is that if it works as planned, it could, if anything, make the crossing safer. People are less likely to drown under military escort than slipping ashore unnoticed in the dark. And while the threat of being ushered straight to an asylum processing centre may deter migrants keen to disappear into the black market, it’s less obvious why the two-thirds of boat passengers estimated to end up successfully claiming asylum would fear being whisked into a system they want to enter anyway. The culture secretary Nadine Dorries’ full-frontal attack on the BBC, declaring “it’s over” for them before the review of its future funding has even begun, looks no better thought through. Like it or not, perhaps there’s an electorally seductive case to be made that viewers who have decamped to Netflix shouldn’t be made to pay for channels they don’t watch. But couching it as a nakedly political attack on the BBC just raises hackles, making any ensuing legislation less likely to get past the House of Lords. Or to put it another way, what a Johnson government promises may not be what a Johnson government actually delivers, something we should arguably all be used to by now. As recovery plans go, this one is a classic of its hastily conceived kind; chuck a few unfortunate people off the back of the sledge and give the newspapers something else to talk about. Johnson’s principal private secretary Martin Reynolds is duly emerging as the likely fall guy for the May 2020 garden party that the prime minister claims not to have realised was a party; and since Reynolds sent the invite asking staff to bring a bottle, his position does look increasingly untenable. But it remains difficult to believe that an experienced Whitehall official, who had worked with Johnson at the Foreign Office before No 10, somehow went rogue behind his back. Are we really to believe Johnson, that well-known innocent in such matters, was led astray by party animal Sir Humphrey? And to think that Tories used to complain civil servants were stick-in-the-muds. The new policy agenda, meanwhile, not only falls apart when prodded but lacks a compelling reason for Johnson himself to lead it. There are things, even now, that only Johnson can do; parts of the country only he can reach, emotional registers only he can strike, gambles so wild only he can get away with them. But does any Conservative voter keen to see this stuff enacted really imagine that Liz Truss couldn’t send in the gunboats, or that Rishi Sunak wouldn’t be eyeing up the BBC’s funding? Unlike Brexit, these aren’t concepts requiring the Johnson magic touch to bring them alive, and they don’t even convincingly feel like his idea. If Operation Red Meat is a strategy for surviving the next few days only, rather than the next few years, then right now it may be the best that an office full of people worrying they might be sacked can manage. If they can just hang on long enough – and Theresa May hung on longer than seemed possible, as her chief tormentor Johnson doubtless recalls – then the shine may well come off potential successors in the meantime. Truss may overplay her hand, or Sunak be tarnished by the cost-of-living crisis. So long as Tory voters tell pollsters they’re switching to “don’t know” rather than directly to Labour, there’s always a chance of winning them back. But not with a plan that sounds as if it could have been scribbled on the back of a fag packet after a particularly heavy “wine time” session, and not with a leader who still doesn’t seem to understand why people are so angry. It’s not the lack of red meat on the menu. It’s not the way the kitchen operates. It’s that they no longer believe the chef. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistChina has warned the US and Europe against a rapid rise in interest rates that would “slam on the brakes” of the global recovery from the pandemic. Central banks should maintain the monetary stimulus or risk “serious economic consequences” from the spillover effects with developing markets bearing the brunt. In a virtual speech to open the World Economic Forum’s Davos Agenda, the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, said that while global inflation risks were emerging, policymakers should strengthen economic policy coordination and develop policies to prevent the world economy from dipping again. “We must do everything necessary to clear the shadow of the pandemic and boost economic and social recovery and development,” he said. “If major economies slam on the brakes or make major U-turns in their monetary policies there will be serious negative spillovers. They would present challenges to global and economic financial stability and developing countries would bear the brunt.” China is among many countries across Asia, Africa and South America concerned about plans flagged by the US central bank to accelerate a series of planned interest rate rises this year and begin rolling back its quantitative easing stimulus programme. The Federal Reserve has came under intense pressure to respond to rising inflation, which soared to 7% in December, its highest level in 40 years. The effect of higher US interest rates will be to make it more costly to finance dollar-denominated debts. Policymakers at the Bank of England and the European Central Bank are also expected to tighten monetary policy in the coming months, heightening the risk of indebted countries failing to meet loan repayments. Tensions with the US extend beyond monetary policy to concerns over intellectual property, trade, the fate of Taiwan, human rights and the South China Sea. Xi said: “We need to discard cold war mentality and seek peaceful coexistence and win-win outcomes. Our world today is far from being tranquil,” said Xi, through a translator. “Protectionism and unilateralism can protect no one. They ultimately hurt the interests of others as well as one’s own. Even worse are the practices of hegemony and bullying, which run counter to the tide of history. “A zero-sum approach that enlarges one’s own gain at the expense of others will not help,” he added. “The right way forward for humanity is peaceful development and win-win cooperation.” Xi was speaking after the latest figures showed China’s economy slowed at the end of last year to 4% in the three months from October to December compared with the same period in 2020. Data from the National Bureau of Statistics revealed the weakest expansion in 18 months as the Covid-19 pandemic and the crisis in its property sector hit growth. In the first three quarters of 2021 China’s economy expanded by more than 9%, but since the summer it has slowed dramatically, prompting Beijing to cut a key interest rate. Analysts have blamed Beijing’s zero tolerance approach to the Covid-19 virus, which has included restricting all movement in cities that have only a handful of cases. Retail sales growth slowed sharply to just 1.7% year-on-year in December, down from 3.9%, the bureau said. Spillovers from the crisis at indebted property developer Evergrande also weighed on China’s economy. Louis Kuijs, the head of Asia economics at Oxford Economics, said Xi’s administration was unlikely to tolerate GDP growth of less than 5%, which meant a further cut in borrowing costs was possible. “If growth is weaker than that, Beijing will feel strongly motivated to pursue more policy easing,” she said.It has been 12 years since Ivan Juric told an interviewer from Rolling Stone magazine that footballers “don’t know shit about music”. The Croatian was enjoying the final days of his playing career at Genoa, soaking up knowledge from a manager, Gian Piero Gasperini, who would become his greatest influence as he prepared to make his own move into coaching. Still, Juric harboured one regret. “The only other metal-head I have played with in a 15-year career was an Argentinian goalkeeper at Crotone,” he said. “I started at 14 years old with Metallica and Megadeth, then I moved on to more aggressive things. Death metal is my passion, bands like Napalm Death, Obituary and Carcass.” Little did we know that he was preparing to bring the energy of those bands to Serie A training grounds. Where Jürgen Klopp unleashed “heavy metal football” on the Premier League, Juric’s approach was defined by one writer from the Sky Sports-owned analytics site ultimouomo.com this week as being outright “satanic”. To be clear, nobody is accusing the now Torino manager of actual devil worship. The author defined satanism as “the practice of a negative theology, of turning good into bad”, the undoing of a “canonical idea of football as the creative expression of a human being through a football.” It was an elegant way of saying that Juric’s football is percussive, violent, destructive. And most of all fiendishly effective. Torino are soaring under Juric, hired to replace Davide Nicola in the summer. A side that finished 16th and 17th in Serie A over the last two seasons ended this weekend in ninth – 15 points better off than they were at the corresponding point in 2021. In the space of five days last week, they thrashed Fiorentina 4-0 and then beat Sampdoria 2-1 at Marassi. These were two very different games, each with much to tell us about the team’s recent growth. Fiorentina – a side with stated European ambitions who had even been discussed as a dark horse for the top four – were simply overrun, unable to escape Torino’s relentless high press. The broad strokes of Juric’s gameplan were nothing new. Like his mentor, Gasperini, he frequently pairs players up one-on-one with opponents all over the pitch and trusts them to engage in individual duels. Where the approach sometimes differs is in the sheer levels of aggression. Juric encourages his forwards to attack the ball-carrier at almost every opportunity. That approach can make for messy matches. Torino commit more fouls than any other team in Serie A, and it’s not close: averaging 17.6 per game compared with just 14.5 for the second-most prolific offenders, Verona – the team who Juric coached for the preceding two seasons. Yet Torino sit middle of the pack when it comes to yellow cards, with 11 other teams collecting more. Their fouling is not reckless but often tactical, premised on the idea that it is better to give away an innocuous free-kick deep in opposition territory than to let a move get started. Such infringements are also far less likely to draw bookings. And the longer that a team stay trapped in their own half, the more likely that they become impatient and flustered. As the above piece from ultimouomo.com also observed, Torino give up fewer passes per loss of possession to opponents than any other team in the league. Not every adversary, however, can simply be shut out of a game. Saturday’s win was complicated by a goal conceded against the run of play. Francesco Caputo opened the scoring for Sampdoria in the 18th minute, punishing a careless clearance from Torino’s goalkeeper, Vanja Milinkovic-Savic. Now Juric’s team had two sets of mental hurdles to overcome. They had not taken points from a losing position all season, and nor had they won away from home since September. Torino’s death metal dance has made them brilliant at not conceding goals, but they still often struggle to score them. Andrea Belotti, after hitting double figures in each of the past six seasons, has been sidelined for most of the campaign with injuries. His teammates turned things around on Saturday with two headers, Wilfried Songo converting a cross from Mërgim Vojvoda and then Dennis Praet doing likewise from a Sasa Lukic delivery. The ball went straight through a hole in the net on the second occasion, leading to a few brief seconds of confusion and then several minutes of amusement as an ever-growing cast of high-vis jackets arrived to consult before one finally accepted the task of stitching it back together. The pause provided us with another moment to reflect on Juric’s successes. Vojvoda had begun the season as a back-up to Songo at right wing-back, collecting just a few minutes here and there before being swapped to the left in November. The Kosovo international was unfamiliar with playing on that flank but has grown into the role brilliantly. This was his second assist in as many games. There are coaching success stories to be found all through Torino’s first team. Sasa Lukic’s improvement in central midfield has been remarkable to watch after two underwhelming seasons. Loan signings Praet and Brekalo have impressed behind the attack. The question now is how far Torino can go. Their president, Urbano Cairo, was keen to play down talk of a European push on Saturday, saying they could leave such considerations for the end. “Every season Atalanta say that their first objective is to get to 40 points,” he observed. “If they say it, a team who have been in Europe for a few years, then we can say the same.” Juric was a little less shy, saying that his team needed to stay focused on the present but that “up until now I think we’ve earned it”. Regardless, he will carry on the work he has been doing. Week by week, his team look more confident in the tune they are playing.Brentford have offered Christian Eriksen the chance of a return to the Premier League as the playmaker assesses his options for a competitive comeback. Eriksen, 29, has not played since suffering a cardiac arrest during Denmark’s Euro 2020 game with Finland on 12 June, and became a free agent when Internazionale terminated his contract last month. He is keen for a return to top-level action ahead of the World Cup and Brentford have moved to offer him a six-month deal, which would have the potential to be extended. Should Eriksen accept, he would return to the English top flight two years after leaving Tottenham for the Serie A club. Eriksen is not short of suitors and, despite Brentford’s interest, no decision has yet been made over his future. However, a move to the west London side could be appealing given the heavy Danish presence in their squad. Eight of their players are from Denmark and so is the head coach, Thomas Frank, who has steered them to 14th place in their first Premier League season and worked with Eriksen in the national youth team set-up. Eriksen received lifesaving treatment on the pitch in Copenhagen after his cardiac arrest and was fitted with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator device (ICD). His departure from Inter owed to the fact Serie A rules do not allow players with an ICD to compete but Eriksen has been training at Odense, his old club in Denmark, and said this month that he feels ready to come back. “My goal is to play in the World Cup in Qatar,” he said. “I want to play. That’s been my mindset all along. It’s a goal, a dream. Whether I’ll be picked is another thing. But it’s my dream to come back. I’m sure I can because I don’t feel any different. Physically, I’m back in top shape.”The chairman of Credit Suisse, António Horta-Osório, has resigned after the Swiss bank found that he had broken Covid-19 quarantine laws, with attendance at the Wimbledon tennis tournament thought to be among the allegations. Horta-Osório, the former chief executive of Lloyds Banking Group, said in a statement that his “personal actions” had made it more difficult for him to represent the bank. He had also admitted breaking Swiss quarantine rules. It means that Horta-Osório managed less than a year in the job, after he was brought in to steady the bank after a series of expensive failures, including its involvement in the collapse of Archegos, an investment company, and Greensill Capital, a supply chain finance firm. “I regret that a number of my personal actions have led to difficulties for the bank and compromised my ability to represent the bank internally and externally,” Horta-Osório said in a statement issued by Credit Suisse on Monday. “I therefore believe that my resignation is in the interest of the bank and its stakeholders at this crucial time.” The board held talks with Horta-Osório over the weekend informing him of the findings of its investigations into a series of alleged breaches of Covid-19 rules, according to a person briefed on the issue. It is understood that Horta-Osório decided his position would be untenable after being informed of the findings. The alleged UK breach emerged in December, after Reuters reported it had been discovered through a preliminary investigation by Credit Suisse’s legal team. The news came just weeks after Horta-Osório admitted that he had breached Covid rules in Switzerland, having flown out of the country within three days of arriving on 28 November despite being required to quarantine for 10 days. The alleged Swiss breaches were first reported in the national press. Swiss newspapers also alleged that Horta-Osório had consulted a senior politician to try to secure an exemption from rules, despite his apology later describing his error as “unintentional”. Credit Suisse confirmed on Monday that Horta-Osório had resigned after an investigation commissioned by the board but did not give any details of the findings. The bank has appointed Axel Lehmann, formerly a senior executive at its Swiss rival UBS and the Swiss insurer Zurich, to take over as chair of its board. Lehmann said the bank had “set the right course with the new strategy” that Horta-Osório had overseen, and added it would carry it out in a “timely and disciplined manner, without distraction”. Horta-Osório attended the Wimbledon tennis tournament on 10 and 11 July 2021, having flown to the UK from Switzerland. At that time Switzerland was on the UK government’s amber list of countries that required arrivals to isolate for 10 days. Breaching quarantine rules was a criminal offence, according to UK government guidance, which stated that police could issue offenders with fines starting at £1,000 and rising to £10,000 for repeat offences. The Portuguese executive had been brought in by Lloyds in 2010 as chief executive after the bank’s government bailout during the financial crisis. The government sold its last remaining shares in May 2017 under his watch, but Horta-Osório had already drawn criticism for large bonus payments. Lloyds announced his departure in 2020, and Credit Suisse reported his appointment six months later. Horta-Osório was brought in to steady the ship after the bank admitted hiring private detectives to spy on executives. Just as he was due to start in the role, Credit Suisse’s prime broking arm was hit by a loss of £3.4bn related to Archegos, a previously little known hedge fund that borrowed from banks to make a series of disastrous bets. It was swiftly followed by the collapse of Greensill Capital, a supply chain finance fund run by Australian banker Lex Greensill. Horta-Osório had been tasked with overseeing a strategy relaunch, including a clearer focus on managing the risks posed by clients. He had also worked with the Credit Suisse chief executive, Thomas Gottstein, on replacing several senior managers.The Guardian and Observer climate justice appeal is to remain open for another few days after raising just short of £1m for charities supporting communities severely affected by climate-induced extreme weather events. After a late surge in donations over the weekend, the total had reached £940,000 by midnight on Sunday when the appeal was originally scheduled to close. The appeal will now remain open in the hope it can hit the £1m mark. More than 8,800 generous readers have so far donated to the appeal. Donations will be shared between four charities: Practical Action, Global Greengrants Fund UK, Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, and Environmental Justice Foundation. The theme this year is climate justice, inspired by stories of people and communities uprooted by climate volatility, whether flooding, wildfire, melting ice or drought, from Madagascar to the Arctic Circle. The appeal has struck a chord with many readers, who in hundreds of messages left via the appeal donation website emphasised the urgency of tackling the climate crisis. “It is a privilege to do a small thing to support grassroots projects doing direct work in communities hit hardest by climate change,” one donor wrote. Sarah Roberts, the chief executive of Practical Action, said: “I’d like to say a huge thank you to Guardian and Observer readers for their support. The money will help the world’s most vulnerable people living at the sharp end of the climate crisis gain vital new skills to adapt their lives to their new environmental reality.” Eva Rehse, the executive director of Global Greengrants Fund UK, said: “Thank you to everyone who has given so generously. We are so grateful for your donations, which enable Global Greengrants and our partners in the Clima Fund to support grassroots movements for climate justice led by those already most impacted by the climate crisis – women and girls, youth, Indigenous peoples and rural communities.” Introducing the appeal in December, the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, wrote: “The stark truth is that the world’s developing countries have seen the vast majority of the death and destruction caused by climate-induced disasters, and yet they are responsible for a tiny fraction of global emissions.” Donations can be made online by credit card, debit card or PayPal, or by phone on 0151 284 1126. We are unable to accept cheques.An architect has applied at the high court to change his name by deed poll to “Kill the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Bill” in protest at punitive new anti-protest legislation being debated in the House of Lords on Monday. Nick Newman, 35, from London, went to the Royal Courts of Justice on Monday morning to make the application. It comes as peers have an unusual opportunity to vote down some of the most controversial of the government’s proposals. “My hope is to share a humorous action with a serious message to convince a couple of lords to vote the right way,” he said. The police and crime bill has been criticised by protest groups, human rights organisations and even parliament’s joint committee on human rights, with many highlighting how, among other measures, it would criminalise causing “serious annoyance”, with potential 10-year sentences for offenders. “I wanted [the name change] to be something which was clearly not something that would be useful in everyday life and in fact could be described as ‘really annoying’ to use,” Newman told the Guardian. “To my friends and family who think that the name is going to be a bit too annoying, my answer to them is: ‘Just call me Bill.’” Newman is an environmental activist who has been arrested several times for protests in the past few years. Among them have been lock-on actions, where protesters attach themselves to a structure to make it more difficult to remove, which will be specifically criminalised under amendments being debated in the Lords on Monday. “This new policing bill is really going so far that people in my position who wish to exercise their rights to protest are going to be seriously curtailed,” he said. “Some of the things which have been proposed specifically in these amendments which are being debated in the House of Lords today are going to impose prison sentences for simple things like attaching yourself to a structure. “So if I had redone some of the protests that I had already done under the new bill then I would go to jail for up to a year.” The action was intended to tie in with a “really annoying demo” planned by the comedian Mark Thomas at Westminster later on Monday. Once Newman has received his new name, he will be attending the protest from 5pm at College Green, opposite the House of Lords.Marlon Bundo, the family pet rabbit of former vice-president Mike Pence, has died, marking the end of an unlikely career as a prominent gay rights figure in the US. Charlotte Pence Bond, Pence’s daughter, announced Bundo’s death in posts on social media. “Somehow, you taught me how to always try to be kind first and never stop making an effort to get along. We had some wild times together and I’m forever grateful. Rest in sweet peace, little bunny,” she wrote. Political pets are a common theme in American politics – from the president on down – but Bundo’s high media profile was unusual. Firstly, he figured as the central character in a series of children’s books written by the second family. Secondly, as a parody of Pence’s deep social conservatism and history of opposing gay marriage, Bundo was also the main theme of a satirical book launched by late-night TV comedian John Oliver, that chronicled his search for a same-sex bunny partner. That book was called A Day in the Life of Marlon Bundo and Oliver described the Pence rabbit as a “very special boy bunny who falls in love with another boy bunny”. Proceeds were donated to the Trevor Project, which works on suicide prevention organization for young LGBTQ+ people, and the Aids United charity. It was in marked contrast to the Pence family books which were called things like A Day in the Nation’s Capital and Best Christmas Ever. Oliver’s book, written by Jill Twiss, a comedian and staff writer on Oliver’s show, became a runaway bestseller in the US and hit the top spot on Amazon, outpacing the Pence books and delighting LGBTQ+ rights groups. Pence is staunchly opposed to gay marriage, and once said in 2006 it would lead to the “deterioration of the family” and “societal collapse”. But in Oliver’s world Bundo wants to marry a handsome fellow boy rabbit called Wesley in a tale “of tolerance and advocacy ... [exploring] issues of same-sex marriage and democracy”.The new German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, sought to reassure a nervous Ukraine that she will not allow Germany to compromise on the basic principles of Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty when she meets the Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, in Moscow for the first time on Tuesday. Baerbock, a member of the Green party, said on a visit to Kyiv she was ready for serious dialogue with Russia about mutual security, but was not willing to backtrack “on basic principles such as territorial inviolability, the free choice of alliances and the renunciation of the threat of violence”. She said Moscow, which has massed troops on Ukraine’s borders, would suffer if it launched an attack. “Each further aggressive act will have a high price for Russia, economically, strategically, politically,” she told a news conference with her Ukrainian counterpart, Dmytro Kuleba. “Diplomacy is the only way.” Her visit is being watched warily by European, UK and US administrations for signs that Germany may revert to its traditional role of seeking independent dialogue with Russia in preference to firmness. Baerbock is seen as part of younger generation of German politicians strongly committed to projecting human rights in foreign policy and determined to take Germany away from its historic willingness to compromise with Moscow, but the SPD-led German chancellery is thought less inclined to break with the policy of the former German chancellor Angela Merkel. It will be deeply frustrating for some other western states if Germany continues to act as a drag anchor as Europe and the US have been making strenuous efforts to present a united front inside Nato. Her visit comes after three high-level diplomatic meetings last week ended with Russian troops still on Ukraine’s borders, but no definitive sign whether Putin would risk a military incursion or instead start talks with the US about arms control in Europe, a more limited agenda than his call for a redrawing of the security architecture of Europe. Parts of the eastern Ukrainian regions of Luhansk and Donetsk have been controlled by pro-Russian separatists since 2014. Despite the Minsk peace plan negotiated under Franco-German mediation, the conflict continues and the terms for elections in the regions are disputed. Baerbock said in Kyiv she would explore in Moscow if there could be a return to the four-way Normandy format negotiations with Russia, Ukraine, Germany and France that have been on hold for a long time. There has been talk the US may join the talks to restore some energy into them. “I want to find out on the ground whether there is a willingness to find solutions through diplomatic channels – above all, to breathe life into the Normandy process again and finally make progress in implementing the Minsk agreements,” she said. “The most effective lever we have to back Ukraine is the unanimous commitment of the EU, the G7 and Nato that any further aggression would come at a high price for the Russian regime […] And we mean that very seriously,” she said. “No country has the right to dictate to other countries which direction they may take, which relationships they may have and which alliances they may enter into. Ukraine’s sovereignty can and will never be subject of negotiations.” She rejected calls for Germany to supply arms to Ukraine, citing a “historical responsibility” for Germany not to export weapons to conflict zones, but said Berlin was willing to provide technical expertise to help Ukraine defend itself from cyber-attack. Andrij Melnyk, the Ukrainian ambassador to Germany, said earlier in comments to the dpa press agency he found the ban “very frustrating and bitter […] the world is currently facing the greatest danger of a huge war in the middle of Europe, the worst since 1945.” The debate in Europe on Russia and Ukraine is playing out on three levels: the continued political viability of the Nord Stream pipeline from Russia to Germany given Europe’s gas shortages; whether Germany should relax its ban on sending weapons to Ukraine; and finally, the extent of the economic sanctions that should be placed on Russia if it did invade Ukraine. Baerbock is aware that Joe Biden last week fought off a Republican attempt in the Senate to slap sanctions back on Nord Stream 2, which bypasses Ukraine, largely because he wanted to stay in harness with Germany. If there is no reciprocation from Germany, the Biden team will have to review its strategy. The pipeline is complete but cannot be used since German and EU regulators have yet to decide if it breaches either German or EU competition laws. The delay allows the German coalition government to avoid an internal split on the issue, but it is clear the SPD want it to go ahead while the Greens, who are in charge of the foreign and climate change ministries, do not. Yuriy Vitrenko, the head of the Ukrainian energy company Naftogaz, has claimed Germany would have economic advantages if Nord Stream 2 made it the most important distribution point for Russian gas but the whole point of the pipeline was for Putin to punish Ukraine for choosing Europe over Moscow. “After we signed the Association Agreement with the EU, Russia decided to build Nord Stream 2. So that we lose revenue from gas transportation. If Germany benefits economically from Russia’s punishment of Ukraine – do you call that fair?” he asked. The claim by the new German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, that the project is purely commercial is not shared in Poland, France or the UK. Bruno Le Maire, the French finance minister, said Europe needed to be less dependent on Russian energy. “Our economies must not depend on the geopolitical considerations of Russia, Ukraine or other parts of the world,” he said. Baerbock, who at one point referred to the Russian regime, as opposed to the government, in her Kyiv press conference also repeated a German offer to help Ukraine develop hydrogen technology as an alternative to gas.Today’s tennis stories from the Australian Open. If you’re partial to quality journalism, why not subscribe here? And that will be all for today. The tennis at the Australian Open has finally begun after the seemingly endless Novak Djokovic visa/vaccination saga ... and I can exclusively reveal that tennis is much more fun. We’ll be back tomorrow for more. Much more! Bye. “Cameron Norrie certainly never stopped trying. Even as game after game fell away and the match rushed to an increasingly unavoidable outcome, his footwork remained pristine, he continued to land as many returns as he could and he searched diligently for solutions." Pushing half-past midnight, the No 18 seed Karatsev has finally done it! Munar pushed him to deuce, threatening to go even deeper into the final set, but Karatsev serves it out, and will progress into the second round. Beat that! Karatsev, in the end, hit 107 unforced errors. Presumably he raised his racket to the crowd when he reached his ton? And now 30-30. Karatsev two points away ... Munar has 15-30 on the Karatsev serve. Drama. I’m seeing on Twitter that Karatsev has reached a century of unforced errors in this match. Impressive. Munar holds serve against Karatsev. Karatsev is now serving for the match at 5-4 in the fifth set. What a cracker! China’s Wang Qiang shocked Coco Gauff, the 18th seed, in the women’s singles earlier today. Here’s the report of that match, among others: I’m unable to watch, but Munar v Karatsev sounds spicy. Munar had three break points at 0-40 on Karatsev’s serve which would have made it 4-4 ... but Karatsev eventually held and now leads 5-3 in the final set. Munar is serving to stay in match and tournament. As the attention in Melbourne Park swiftly shifted from Australia’s legal courts to its tennis courts, the two most successful women’s players over the past few years both took their first steps towards a possible collision in the fourth round of the Australian Open. Naomi Osaka, the defending champion in Melbourne, returned to grand slam competition early in the day by defeating Camila Osorio 6-3, 6-3. The world No 1, Ashleigh Barty, followed her later in the day as she picked Lesia Tsurenko apart 6-0, 6-1 to reach the second round. Emma Raducanu claimed a grand slam trophy even before she played a major champion but the 19-year-old could face a daunting task on her Australian Open debut when she meets former US Open winner Sloane Stephens on Tuesday. Raducanu became the first qualifier to win a grand slam in the Open era when she defeated Leylah Fernandez in New York last September but the teenager has struggled to replicate the same form since, with early losses at Indian Wells and Linz. She also contracted Covid-19 late last year and pulled out of the Australian Open warm-up tournament in Melbourne, before an early defeat by Elena Rybakina in Sydney but Raducanu said she was not bogged down by disappointing results. “I think it’s going to be a tough match for sure. I’m going to go out there and enjoy the match because just playing in this grand slam, I had to work so hard to be here. Yeah, I’ll just go out there and enjoy,” Raducanu said. Three former French Open champions are also in action on the main showcourts at Melbourne Park, as the Spaniard Garbine Muguruza takes on Clara Burel, Poland’s Iga Swiatek plays Harriet Dart and Romanian Simona Halep faces Magdalena Frech. Among the men, Russian second seed Daniil Medvedev takes on Swiss Henri Laaksonen on Rod Laver Arena, while fourth-seeded Greek Stefanos Tsitsipas plays Swede Mikael Ymer. Russia’s Andrey Rublev is also in action against Italian Gianluca Mager. (Reuters) It’s past midnight in Melbourne. What an epic duel between Karatsev, seeded 18, and Munar. The Spaniard, who comes from Majorca, has forced it back to 4-3 in the final set. Karatsev has gone 4-1 up in the final set against Munar: 6-3, 6-7 (1), 7-6 (3), 4-6, 2-4 Dominant stuff from Paula Badosa today. She’s one to watch for sure. Aslan Karatsev, the No 18 seed, has gone a break up in the final set of his epic five-set duel with Jaume Munar. He leads 3-1 and 40-0. Eurosport don’t seem to be showing it anywhere, though, not on either of their UK channels or in the app. Badosa has a chat with the clock close to midnight in Melbourne: “I’m really happy to be here, to play on this stage, I always saw this court [Margaret Court Arena] on TV, it’s my first time playing on this court, and I really enjoyed playing here ... credit to the physio [in the first-set medical timeout], they did a good job, three minutes I know is not a lot time ... it helped me a lot ... I knew I had to go for my shots, I’m a little bit exhausted, but it goes how it goes ... “I want to thank the Aussie people, I wasn’t expecting having today people cheering for me and I really appreciate it ... it’s amazing to play in front of crowds again. I appreciate it more because it’s very late, so thank you for staying. She’s an amazing player, I played her last week and it was a very tough match, and I was expecting a very tough one ... I wish her a speedy recovery, and the same for me, because I’m playing in two days.” The first set was closer, the second set was completely one-sided. Both players took a medical timeout in the first set, so perhaps there is a question mark on Badosa’s fitness ... but on that kind of form, she is a threat for the title. Badosa 6-4, 5-0 *Tomljanović (* denotes next server) Another very easy hold for Badosa, who had an excellent year last year, and on this form will be very hopeful of going deep into the tournament. Can Tomljanović get on the board in this second set? Badosa* 6-4, 4-0 Tomljanović (* denotes next server) Badosa is crushing the ball from the baseline. She strikes one particularly powerful forehand winner down the line. She punches the air as her opponent, the Australian Tomljanović, looks a bit shell-shocked. Badosa is a double break up and cruising into the second round, unless Tomljanović can somehow turn the tables. Munar v Karatsev (18) is turning into an epic: Latest score is 6-3, 6-7 (1), 7-6 (3), 4-6. They are into a fifth and final set. Badosa 6-4, 3-0 Tomljanović* (* denotes next server) Badosa now holds to love, the first love game of the match. She is running away with this ... Badosa* 6-4, 2-0 Tomljanović (* denotes next server) The Spaniard, who is striking the ball with tremendous authority and moving superbly around the court, breaks early in the second set, while Tomljanović shakes her head in disbelief. This is going to be over sooner rather than later unless Tomljanović can upset her opponent’s momentum. Badosa holds to begin the second set against Tomljanović. 6-4, 1-0. “You can reach over, but you cannot touch the net ... he’s done incredibly well there.” As I mentioned earlier, this shot by Altmaier was a bit of a madness ... look at the backspin on the shot by Zverev, on the replay from courtside! I didn’t notice at the time but it appears that Zverev didn’t actually realise he’d sealed the match when he won the decisive point against Altmaier. Comical scenes. The Spaniard and No 8 seed Badosa has a fourth match point against Tomljanović ... and she takes it! She wins the first set, 6-4. Zverev speaks: “Not much went to plan today, to be honest, except that I won, but that’s how it is sometimes, it’s the first round of hopefully a very long tournament ... you’re not always going to play your best tennis, except if you’re Roger or Rafa, you always come out and you’re always perfection, but I’m not like them ... it was a good match for me to get into the tournament, and hopefully next time will be better.” Asked a question about the wind and whether or not it was difficult to deal with, Zverev says: “It’s very tough to understand what you’re saying, ... I am German, with Russian roots, living in Monaco,” he replies, smiling, as the crowd laughs “English is my fourth language, so ...” The crowd cheers and continues to roar with laughter. Zverev now looks ahead to his second-round date with John Millman: “I played him a few times, I played him once at the French Open which was five-and-a-half hours, five sets, so ... yeah, he’s a very difficult player to beat ... hopefully it’ll be another fun one, and I’m looking forward to being back on court.” Altmaier, deservedly, gets a fine ovation from the crowd on Rod Laver Arena. That was a stern examination for the world No 3 and third seed Zverev against the world No 87 ... a cracking match in the end. Two hours and 38 minutes, in the end, and Altmaier fought impressively hard on his first appearance at the Australian Open. Zverev bashes an Altmaier second serve down the line for 5-1. Utterly lovely stuff from Zverev, forcing Altmaier into submission, crashing a forehand deep into the corner that his opponent has zero hope of getting back. 3-1 in the tiebreak, and now 4-1, and this looks all but over. Zverev tonks a trademark serve down for 1-0, then edges another gruelling baseline rally for 2-0 in the breaker ... did Zverev expect this match to be so tough? Altmaier hits back with a good wide first serve for 2-1. Tomljanović trails Badosa 5-4 in the first set ... both players have broken serve three times! He’s done it! 7-6, 6-1, 6-6. It’s a third-set tiebreak. Hats off to Altmaier for keeping the vibe alive. Zverev hits long! Another game point for Altmaier, and a chance to force a tiebreak! Can he seal it? Altmaier forces a game point. Zverev saves it – and swiftly creates match point no 4 ... but Altmaier crunches a stunning first serve down the middle, and he’s still alive! Altmaier double-faults for 0-15 in this potentially decisive game. A punishing, physical rally then finishes with the younger man finding the net and it’s 0-30. Two points away for Zverev. Zverev then whips a stunning crosscourt backhand which fizzes away beyond Altmaier. Simply too good. Zverez smells blood, but then a brilliant sliced backhand from his opponent, approaching the net, gets him on the board in this service game and it’s 15-40 ... Zverev soon hits beyond the baseline for 30-40 ... and hits it out, again, and Altmaier has fought back to deuce! A dimissive service hold from Zverev and it’s 6-5 in the third. The overall scores on the doors are 7-6, 6-1, 6-5. Altmaier has fought really well. But now he needs to serve to stay in the match. In the women’s singles, on Margaret Court Arena, Ajla Tomljanović and Paula Badosa are in the first set, with the Spanish No 8 seed leading 4-3. We’ll join up with that one as soon as Zverev v Altmaier is done and dusted. A cracking rally, in which Altmaier has Zverev on the back foot, ends with Altmaier volleying wide for 15-30 and Zverev is only two points away from progress to the next round. Altmaier comes again, though, sneaks to 30-30 and then sets up a game point ... and he gets it! There seemed to be a call of ‘out’ from the crowd, which perhaps confused Zverev, but anyway, it’s 5-5! We still have a game on here. Here’s that odd little winner from Altmaier from earlier on, courtesy of Eurosport Germany: Zverev holds with ease and moves to 5-4 in the third. He is a game away from a straight-sets win. Hats to Altmaier for fighting back into this match after he flaked in the second set ... but can he turn up the heat again, and force Zverev into some uncomfortable places at the business end of the third? Tell you what though, it’s nice to see some actual tennis after all the Novak Djokovic nonsense, isn’t it? I wonder what happened to him. Zverev cruises into a 0-40 lead on the Altmaier serve. But the 23-year-old, who hails from Kempen near Düsseldorf, produces a couple of massive serves, and massive points, to grind it back to deuce from what then became 15-40. Zverev hits a poor shot long, to give Altmaier a game point, but Altmaier then double-faults at what feels like almost the worst possible time. Mentally, however, Altmaier is present and correct, and cracks a superb deep forehand to the corner to bring himself another game point ... But Zverev isn’t going away, he saves that game point, and then Altmaier attempts a strange floaty effort wide which bounces out. Zverev then forces another error, and he soon breaks, and that feels very significant indeed, because Altmaier was so, so close to moving to 5-4 there. Instead it’s 4-4 and Zverev has cancelled out the break. Daniel Altmaier is fighting back against his compatriot, Alexander Zverev. A pretty comfortable hold for Zverev for 4-3, sealing it with a power-packed first serve down the middle. Altmaier holds! He comes to the net and crushes an overhead volley which bounces high and out of the court, and he leads 4-2 in the third set! Altmaier is firmly back in this match. He powers a brilliant inside-out forehand winner down the line and then wins an exciting rally with both players attacking the net. But then he sends a forehand wide to make it 30-30 instead of what would have been 40-15. “He has to keep stamping on Zverev,” as the commentator observes, but fails to do so, dumping a backhand low into the net, and coughing up a break point. Zverev hits fractionally long on that break point, though, and we are on deuce in what’s looking to be a crucial sixth game of the third set. Munar wins the third set against the 18th seed Karatsev! It’s 6-3, 6-7, 7-6 there. Altmaier breaks! Well done! Well done indeed. He converts his first break point of the match, Zverev putting a volley into the net, and the 23-year-old German forges 3-2 ahead in the third set. If he can win this set and force his way right back into this contest, it would be fairly astonishing, given the meekness with which he surrendered that second set. Altmaier is back and fighting. He forces 0-30 on the Zverev serve. He crushes a big forehand to the baseline and has his opponent under pressure but then produces a poor attempted drop shot which Zverev easily runs down and puts away for 30-30. That was a big chance missed ... and Altmaier shakes his head knowing exactly that. Zverev continues to try and outmuscle his opponent with some big groundstrokes but Altmaier is fighting as hard as he can. He has a foothold in this set, at least, in comparison to the second set which was surrendered in double-quick time. Altmaier holds serve for 2-2 and he’s battling hard. Zverev races through his latest service game for 2-1 in the third. He can see the finish line. Munar and Karatsev are still duking it out in the third set, at deuce, with Munar leading it 6-5. Altmaier comes to the net and plays an odd volley with the ball spinning back to Zverev’s side, reaching over the net to hit it, and prompting a glance at the umpire from Zverev ... on the next point, Altmaier is racing around the court like a man possessed and produces a couple of inspired shots to force an error from Zverev and take it to 40-15 on his serve ... Zverev then hits long after another good rally and Altmaier is on the board in the second set at 1-1. Zverev had won eight of the previous nine games. Zverev, fully in control now against his compatriot, moves 1-0 ahead in the third set. Altmaier, incidentally, has only won one tour match on hard court before now. Millman has secured a fifth visit to the second round at his home grand slam. Over on the Show Court Arena (or is the John Cain Arena?) Jaume Munar and the 18th seed Aslan Karatsev are at 5-5 and deuce in the third. It’s 1-1 in sets. Zverev has won the second set against Altmaier, 6-1, so he has cruised into a two sets to love lead. The victorious Australian, Millman, speaks to Jim Courier on Margaret Court Arena: “Look, I think I started off really well, and Feliciano wasn’t serving too well ... but he started landing that first serve in the third and fourth set ... I think probably the crowd got behind me, you know? “Look, the last 18 months for an Australian tennis player have been extremely challenging ... the people have been in and out of lockdowns ... Australian players sent the best part of 18 months in tournament bubbles ... to be able to come out now, and have crowds, and use their energy ... it’s great ... it’s really nice to have a win after an average start to the year that I’ve had. “You have to be playing great tennis to match it against the top guys ... hopefully we can get on a big court [against potential match v Alexander Zverev], the crowd can get behind me, and I’ll give it my all.” Millman whips a lovely backhand pass crosscourt for 0-15. Lopez comes to the net, next up, and forces Millman to hit wide for 15-15. A close-range exchange at the net in the next point has the crowd on their feet, Millman making it 15-30 with a fine winner from way out wide, and then the Australian clips a lovely winner down the line to create two match points. Lopez saves one with a volley ... but then dumps the next volley into the net! And Millman has it! Altmaier stems the bleeding and makes it 4-1 in the second against Zverev. The answer, as to what’s occurring in Lopez v Millman, is 5-5 and 30-30 in the fourth. Millman produces a timely ace and brings a cheer from the smattering of fans on Margaret Court Arena. Lopez then attempts a big, booming forehand to the corner but it’s a touch long and Millman takes the game. He’ll have a tiebreak, at the least, and a chance to win the match now that he leads the Spaniard 6-5. Zverev plays a somewhat outrageous little backhand drop volley which sets up a winner for 15-0. Then he immediately dumps another drop volley into the net for 15-15. Two big serves and it’s 40-15 ... and Zverev rounds off another regulation service game with a big ace down the middle. It’s 4-0, and I’m going to switch over to see what’s going on in Lopez v Millman. Altmaier looks almost ready to crumble, as Zverev quickly forces two break points and finds himself on the verge of a double break of serve in the second set. Altmaier rallies and grinds out a couple of points and takes it to deuce, but then butchers a single-handed backhand down the line to hand Zverev a third break point of the game. Zverev nabs it, and eases into a 3-0 lead in the second set. Worrying signs for Altmaier after he battled so impressively in the first set. Lopez 4-4 Millman are in the fourth. Millman leads by two sets to one. Zverev, again, tries to wear his opponent down with a succession of punishing groundstrokes from the back of the court. But Altmaier won’t be bullied and eventually forces a mistake to save a game point and make it 40-30. At the next time of asking, though, Zverev dispatches a regulation volley after coming to the net and creates a 2-0 lead in this second set. Zverev races to a 0-40 lead on Altmaier’s serve in the first game of the second set, and quickly rounds off the break of serve at the earliest possible opportunity with a dismissive backhanded crosscourt finisher. It looks like that first set tiebreak will prove to be a key moment ... unless that very indifferent service game from Altmaier proves to be a mere blip. Altmaier is fighting impressively hard here but the combination of Zverev’s fearsome power and accuracy, allied to his fluent mobility around the court is proving a little too much ... Zverev winds up a massive, emphatic crosscourt forehand to seal the first set in 63 minutes. A couple of big, booming forehands from Zverev forces it to 5-2. Zverev grabs a mini-break and leads the first-set tiebreaker 3-1 ... but then double faults for 3-2! Altmaier holds with a sensational volley from close range, with both players at the net, showing superb reactions, and we have a tiebreak in the first! Meanwhile, Lopez and Millman are 2-2 in the fourth. Not sure about these shorts from Zverev, if I’m honest. After a titanic battle in the previous game, Zverev races through his next service game, rounding it off with a big overhead volley, and he edges 6-5 ahead in this first set. Altmaier must serve, once again, to stay in the first set. Zverev had his chances to take it on his opponent’s serve last time. Can he do it this time? Having saved three game points, Altmaier digs out another huge, wide serve, wins the game and it’s 5-5! That was a great battle. A slice of luck from Zverev with a volley at the net brings another set point. Altmaier reacts with a huge first serve down the middle that Zverev can’t get back: back to deuce. Zverev snatches another set point, his third, but soon clips a forehand long and again we are back to deuce in what feels like a decisive game. Zverev forces it to 15-30 on Altmaier’s serve ... his eyes then light up with a chance for a winner crosscourt which he slams towards the tramlines, but it’s called fractionally out. No matter – he brings set point for the first time – and then tries to bully his opponent out of a stunning 33-shot baseline rally with brute force. But Altmaier, impressively, stands firm and eventually forces the mistake. Having brought it back to deuce he smashes an ace down the middle ... and then tries a bizarre attempted drop shot which skews off his racket and goes long. Back to deuce and the game goes on ... On the Margaret Court Arena, Millman holds serve in the first game of the fourth set against López. Zverev fashions game point with a lethal combination of a big, wide serve followed by a powerful double-handed backhand which is deep into the opposite corner. Altmaier has no answer, Zverev moves 5-4 ahead in the first set, and his countryman must now serve to stay in it. Hello everyone, Luke McLaughlin taking over from John Brewin for the next while. Zverev takes Altmaier to 30-30 on his compatriot’s serve ... but Altmaier holds it together well and cracks a decisive down-the-line forehand which Zverev can’t get back. Zverev sends a return long on the next point, on second serve, and Altmaier holds. We haven’t had a break point for either player in this first set. Feliciano Lopez serves for the third set against John Millman, who has the home support on his side but goes a set point down, with two in hand for the Spaniard who takes the set, job done. It’s 1-6 3-6 6-4 and Lopez may well have the momentum. This German pair continue to slug it right out, in the kind of style that can be viewed here. Zverev leads 3-2 but is being made to work by Altmaier. Some quotes from Rafael Nadal after his three-set defeat of Marcos Giron. This has been especially difficult because it’s not only a comeback from an injury, it’s a comeback trying to be back on the tour after almost two years playing not many events with the virus. But here I am. I am super happy about all the work that we have done to try to be back. We are here enjoying the tennis, and that’s it. We’re going to keep trying hard. Altmaier hits back and it’s 1-1 on the Rod Laver, and Zverev is made to work on his next service game, too, eventually won to lead 2-1. This looks a tough assignment for the world number 3. A Wikipedia search reveals a player who has only reached one grand slam final is the ninth biggest earner in tennis history. In the Rod Laver Arena, Alexander Zverev, one of the game’s most talented players, a semi-finalist in 2020 here, is taking on his German compatriot, Daniel Altmaier. There’s an early double fault for Zverev in the opening service game, though the higher seed eventually takes that. Australian fans are currently whooping it up as their man, John Millman is in a two-sets lead over Feliciano Lopez, though he is a break down and 2-0 down in the third set. That’s being played in the Margaret Court Arena. By the way, Barty will next meet Italy’s Lucia Bronzetti, the world number 145, after she beat Russia’s Varvara Gracheva in the opening round. Some quotes from Cameron Norrie after his comprehensive 6-3 6-0 6-4 loss to Sebastian Korda. I think that’s maybe my worst match in the last eight months or so. I had a week off to prepare, prepared as well as I could, and just I was slow, I was missing routine backhands, which I never miss. I honestly can’t put a finger on it. I just need to get better and improve. Lots to work on. Korda was too good today. Any time I had a chance to come back, he served his way out of it. And on the bigger points he was much better than me. I didn’t play well in really any big point today. That’s part of it and just a disappointing way to start the year with this match. Jelena Dokic is the interviewer as Ash Barty speaks, and Dokic gets all emotional about last year’s Wimbledon win. This isn’t the way Gary Richardson used to do it but it brings some interesting answers. This is beautiful, it’s felt like an eternity. Nice to be back on home soil, it was a lot of fun out here. It was nice and clean, end to end, I did a good job, it’s windy at court level. I feel like I enjoyed it, that was the important thing. [On her Vogue spread] I am a proud indigenous woman, I love my heritage, I love to celebrate my heritage, it’s what keeps connected with the people, it’s what keeps me connected with the land. Easily done this time, with three match points gained on her serve. The first goes out, and the home favourite from Ipswich, Queensland then misses her second winning chance. Nerves, can’t be? No, a crashing serve gets the job done. Nice and easy does it. Barty, at 5-0 up, seeks to complete a perfect match. She goes to 30-30 on the Tsurenko service, which remains as shaky as ever. Match point arrives at 30-40, but then a slow second serve brings up an unenforced error from Barty. Deuce it is, where a long rally is won by Barty’s greater accuracy to set up a second match point. Then comes another Barty error. Nerves? Then a winner sets up an advantage for Tsurenko, who takes her first game. The double bagel is avoided. Sofia Kenin, the 2020 champion, is out! With Madison Keys having beaten her 7-6 7-5. Does that register as a shock? Not in the light of Keys having won the Adelaide Open and Kenin’s ranking falling off a cliff. Another thing to show how much has changed in the last couple of years. “The serve brutalised,” says Simon Reed on the Eurosport coverage in the UK. “Like shelling peas, couldn’t be easier.” Is shelling peas easy? Tsurenko smashes the ball into the net for 4-0 to Barty. This is getting cruel. 3-0 now in the second set, all nine games won in 36 minutes for Barty. Highly impressive from her, devastating for her opponent. Guess what? Barty goes 1-0 up in the second set with some ease, too. This is not going at all well for the world number 120. The 2-0 arrives after a double fault on the Tsurenko’s service. It’s a tad painful to watch. And Barty takes the first set 6-0, about as easily as is possible to imagine. Tsurenko is having a nightmare and is halfway to defeat in just 24 minutes. Tsurenko’s serve is letting her down and 4-0 to Barty arrives quickly. 5-0 comes almost as fast, only for a winner to be missed. “Out” screams the line judge, in an officious female voice that has a tinge of a warder on Prisoner (Cell Block H). That was on the outside etc etc. Barty faces a ding-dong on her second service game, with Tsurenko looking dangerous but eventually sees it out after a couple of deuces and some shaky serving. She’s 3-0 up. Matteo Berrettini had stomach problems during his defeat of Brandon Nakashima, and this was his performance-enhancing drug to get him through a five-set win. Tsurenko’s serve is speedy but she seems nervous, and overcooks a chance for a winner on the second point before Barty easily sees out a break point to to 2-0 up. So, Lesia Tsurenko, the Ukrainian, takes on Barty, who is clad in kid that looks a little like that German World Cup 2018 kit that was considered so hip and trendy at the time. There’s some rowdiness in the Rod Laver Arena of the “Aussie Aussie Aussie” variety as Barty serves out for a 1-0 lead in the first set. G’day, pretty warm reception for Barty from that sadly limited crowd in Melbourne, the biggest star the host nation has in this sport at the moment. Ash Barty is dancing about in the bowels of Rod Laver Arena, preparing to head out onto court. She’ll be out soon enough. And on that note, I’ll leave you in the capable hands of John Brewin, who will guide you through the opening stages of the evening session at Melbourne Park. Serbian players Laslo Djere and Dusan Lajovic have voiced their support for compatriot Novak Djokovic on the opening day of the Australian Open, which has been notable for the absence of the world No 1. “Not just Serbians, I think the whole world saw it and they probably will have a new or different opinion about Australia,” said Djere, who lost to Denis Shapovalov. “I mean, the guy had the exemption and they still deported him. “I don’t know the details, so I also don’t want to be too harsh. But what everyone could read, yeah, he’s not vaccinated, but we were told that we can enter the country with an exemption, which he had, and yet he’s not here with us. “Something went horribly wrong. Yeah, it was a true catastrophic situation.” Lajovic, who will play in the second round after his win over Hungary’s Marton Fucsovics said the way Djokovic had been treated was “terribly wrong”. “The decision itself was terribly wrong, and also the reason why they did it is also for me terribly wrong because based just an idea, I don’t think it’s the right way. “I hope that in the future he will be the best tennis player in history and that this will be only looked at as a setback on his path to be the best tennis player to ever play the sport.” The all-American clash between 2020 winner Sofia Kenin - her only grand slam success to date - and Madison Keys is under way on John Cain Arena. It’s on serve so far in the first set, with Keys holding a 3-2 lead. The evening session is not far off now - play is scheduled to start at 7pm local - that’s about 10 minutes away - with Ashe Barty headlining on Rod Laver Arena in the world No 1’s opener against Lesia Tsurenko. Stick with us for that one. Another tidbit from Naomi Osaka’s presser and more insight into her new, fun outlook, notably on that botched overhead that might at one point have weighed heavily on the Japanese player. Today, she was able to laugh it off. “I just feel like there are situations where I previously would get upset but at this point in my life I’m here because I want to be here and because I find that it’s fun for me. I think just to be playing on Rod Laver and to have such a good streak on it is something I could be proud of and something I enjoy. “I can’t expect myself to win every match, but I do expect myself to have fun and challenge myself.” Local hopes that Thanasi Kokkinakis might play Nadal in the second round have been tempered after the Australian lost the opening set in his match against Yannick Hanfmann. The wild card trails the qualifier 6-2, 1-0. A little more on Nadal’s win earlier. Hubert Hurkacz, the 10th seed, brings to an end a humdinger over on John Cain Arena against Egor Gerasimov. It goes four sets and 3 hours 12 minutes before the Pole is able to see off his dogged opponent, 6-2, 7-6(3), 6-7(5), 6-3. Coco Gauff is out of the Open! What a victory for Qiang Wang, who completes a 6-4, 6-2 victory over the 18th seed. Pat Cash, Qiang’s coach, is pictured celebrating in the stands of Margaret Court Arena as his charge books her place in the second round. Local favourite Thanasi Kokkinakis is under way in his opening match against German qualifier Yannick Hanfmann - this one promises to be one to watch, not least because it’s the boisterous Court Three that is playing host. Coco Gauff, the 18th seed, is in real trouble against Qiang Wang. The American is a set and 5-0 down to the Chinese world No 112. This is either going to be a very disappointing trip for Gauff, or one of the most incredible comebacks of all time. She manages to break back and pull back to 6-4, 5-1, but Qiang remains just one game away from the match. One of the biggest stories of the day at Melbourne Park is undoubtedly that of Australia’s Aleksandar Vukic who earlier upset No 30 seed Lloyd Harris in front of a boisterous local crowd. The 25-year-old needed nearly three hours to post a famous 4-6, 6-3, 7-5, 7-6 (3) win to delight the home crowd who had flocked to Court Three to support him. “It was one of the loudest atmospheres I’ve ever seen to be honest and it was all for me, all for the Aussies,” said Vukic. “I couldn’t have done it without them. It’s a dream for sure.” Vukic now plays Moldovan qualifier Radu Albot, with third seed Alex Zverev potentially awaiting in the third round. But it was disappointment for another Australian, world No 49 James Duckworth, who led two sets to one but ultimately lost 6-4, 2-6, 3-6, 6-2, 6-1 loss to Frenchman Adrian Mannarino. And in the women’s draw, Naomi Osaka knows the identity of her next opponent after Madison Brengle moved past Dayana Yastremska, who retired from their clash with the American on the cusp of victory. Another American, Coco Gauff, the 18th seed, is under way against Chinese qualifier Qiang Wang. And twice former champion, Vika Azarenka, is also through, having just won match point to secure a 6-3, 6-1 win over Panna Udvardy. Elsewhere in the men’s draw, Wimbledon runner-up Matteo Berrettini made a slow start before finding his rhythm to get past unseeded Brandon Nakashima of the US 4-6, 6-2, 7-6(5), 6-3 . Poland’s 10th seed Hubert Hurkacz needed just three sets to beat Egor Gerasimov of Belarus and move through. Karen Khachanov, the 28th seed, joined the pair in the second round after beating Denis Kudla in four sets. Okey dokey, that’s Rod Laver Arena action done and dusted for the opening daytime session. Next up, it’s Ash Barty in the first match of the night session, starting in a tick under two hours. So, let’s get up to speed with what’s been happening elsewhere at Melbourne Park while we’ve been focused on Nadal. First up, a big shock for Britain’s No 1 and men’s 12th seed Cam Norrie, who has been dumped out of the tournament by Sebastian Korda, 6-3, 6-0, 6-4. Both players had tested positive for Covid in the build-up but the up-and-coming American was too sharp for Norrie and needed just one hour 42 minutes to advance. And finally on his potential second-round opponent, Thanasi Kokkinakis: “He always have been a fantastic player. He have been very unlucky with aloft injuries. I am really happy to see him back at very, very high level, probably playing better than ever. So, if that happens gonna be a big challenge for me, but that’s why I’m here, just to face the best players and Thanasi with this amazing start of the year with semi-finals and title, it is today, going to be a big test. I hope to be ready for it and just enjoy to play here one more time.” And on how a recent bout of Covid has impacted him: “I don’t know. I don’t know if sometimes you are a little more tighter because of it or because I haven’t been on the tour for the last six months. It’s difficult to know exactly, but yeah, the symptoms haven’t been nice. I have been four days in bed and then three more days destroyed physically, you know. But after that I started to feel ail little bit better. I was... I had PCR negative after the ninth or tenth day and then I had one or two practices at home and then I game here.” More from Nadal, when asked by Jim Courier about how close he is to his best level: “Well, it’s difficult to think about it now, but, you never know. As I say a lot of times, when could you comeback from injuries that, unfortunately I know about it very well, things are always difficult and you need to go day by day. You need to accept the mistakes. You need to forgive yourself when the things are not going the proper way, because that’s the only way. You know at the beginning the things are going to be difficult. Of course, you will not have the best feelings sometimes on court, but staying positive, playing with the right energy and, of course, being on the tour, practising with the guys and winning matches, for sure, helps and last week had been important for me. I won three matches. I won a title. It’s always beautiful and I think I am doing better and better.” Let’s hear from Nadal before we go around the grounds for a day one update. “Yeah, been very challenging months. Not only the last six months, obviously have been tough being outside of the competition but since the first lockdown in 2020. “Everybody knows I have important injury in my foot since the beginning of my career but I was able to manage or or less well but is through that... After that two months being at home, when I came back, I been very challenging since that. I was able to play at the end of 2020 and beginning of 2021, but honestly have been, yeah, very tough moments, of course with a lot of doubt and still doubt, but here I am and I can’t be happier, to be back here in Australia in this amazing stadium, it’s just fantastic for me. It means a lot.” Giron 1-6, 4-6, 2-6 Nadal Nadal digs himself out of a little hole he makes for himself with a sloppy overhead volley that sees him fall to 0-30 before he is forced to save break point with a thunderbolt ace. But dig he does and progress to the second round he does, in straight sets, and in pretty comfortable fashion. Second set: Giron 1-6, 4-6, 2-5 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Nadal hits a peach of a forehand down the line to kick things off before both players have the crowd in raptures as each keeps the point alive with various displays of athleticism. Rafa is called out on the next two points allowing Giron to hang in there - for now. Nadal will serve for the match. Second set: *Giron 1-6, 4-6, 1-5 Nadal (*denotes next server) Nadal in a hurry. He holds serve to love and this one’s over shortly. Meanwhile, more Djokovic-dodging from a post-match press conference, this time from Naomi Osaka (expertly done, in my opinion): Question: Do you believe Djokovic should be playing at the Australian OPen this year? Osaka: Is my opinion going to help anything? Question: Asking what othere players think of the situation. Osaka: Yeah, I’ll kind of pass on that. Thanks, though. Second set: Giron 1-6, 4-6, 1-4 Nadal* (*denotes next server) At the receiving end, Nadal is shrouded in shadow until he emerges into the sunshine with menace, more often than not with a booming forehand return. Giron gets back into the game after falling 0-30 down with a thrilling point, but he can’t sustain the comeback and Nadal breaks yet again. He’s now just two games away from the match. Second set: *Giron 1-6, 4-6, 1-3 Nadal (*denotes next server) Nadal is in total control still, even if a fantastic Giron forehand winner at 40-0 up elicits a “bravo” from the Spaniard. Another service game collected. Second set: Giron 1-6, 4-6, 1-2 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Giron faces a mountain to climb here now, but this is better from the American. He was in danger of being blown away but he digs in to hold serve. It’s not as simple as Nadal’s last hold, but it’s a hold nevertheless. Second set: *Giron 1-6, 4-6, 0-2 Nadal (*denotes next server) Nadal appears to wants this one over with as quickly as possible. He races through his next service game, firing down two aces and winning it to love. Second set: Giron 1-6, 4-6, 0-1 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Nadal emerges from the sheds after a quick costume change at the break box fresh and raring to go. And he continues where he left off, breaking in the first game of the third set to seize an early advantage. Second set: *Giron 1-6, 4-6 Nadal (*denotes next server) Serving for the second set, Nadal errs with a double fault to open. But there will be no stopping the sixth seed and he roars to a two-set lead. He wraps it up in 49 minutes and from here it appears to be a matter of how long Giron can delay the inevitable. Injury news: women’s third seed Ons Jabeur of Tunisia has withdrawn from the tournament with a back injury. Her place in the draw has gone to Irina Bara, who takes on Nuria Parrizas Diaz of Spain. Second set: Giron 1-6, 4-5 Nadal* (*denotes next server) There it is again, Nadal’s forehand. Giron makes a crucial error - he drops it short and Nadal is allowed to weigh up his shot before whipping another winner back past his opponent. That brings up the first of two set points which, credit to Giron, are both saved. The game goes to four deuces in total and Nadal has another two set points - both of which are also wasted, to the disappointment of the Spaniard, who shakes his head - before Giron holds serve in what proves to be a mammoth game. Hanging tough. Second set: *Giron 1-6, 3-5 Nadal (*denotes next server) Nadal wobbles slightly this game but he can always rely on his forehand - at 40-30 he just opens up his body and whips another winner into the corner of the court, leaving Giron little to no chance of reaching the ball, let alone returning it. Second set: Giron 1-6, 3-4 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Back to current events on Rod Laver and Giron is still in this second set after another service hold. Third seed Garbine Mugaruza kicks off things on Rod Laver Arena on Tuesday with men’s second seed and the highest seeded player remaining in the tournament, Daniil Medvedev, to open his campaign during the day session. In the evening, women’s second seed Aryna Sabalenka and Stefanos Tsitsipas, seeded four, grace centre court. Alex de Minaur and Emma Radacanu headline what looks to be an entertaining evening on Margaret Court Arena, while an Andy Murray-Nick Kyrgios double-header is not to be missed on John Cain Arena. Second set: *Giron 1-6, 2-4 Nadal (*denotes next server) Nadal holds to love in double-quick time. Tuesday’s order of play has been released.... Second set: Giron 1-6, 2-3 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Giron’s serve continues to fire and he lands his second ace of the day. The American’s not going anywhere just yet. Second set: *Giron 1-6, 1-3 Nadal (*denotes next server) Nadal responds immediately a pair of aces, which wouldn’t get you much in a card game, but is worth a 30-0 lead here. He somewhat spoils that opening with a double fault, but he gets back on track to hold again. Second set: Giron 1-6, 1-2 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Excellent love service game from Giron here, including a simply brilliant final point in which he keeps his hopes alive with a gutsy reach that he has no right to get, before unleashing a stunning backhand winner. The American takes the game to love and he should take some confidence from that. Second set: *Giron 1-6, 0-2 Nadal (*denotes next server) Bounce, bounce, bounce, pull, tuck, tuck, wipe, wipe, bounce, bounce, serve. Nadal goes through the motions each point, as Giron manages to force the game to a deuce and then to a break point - his first of the day. He’s out though and he’s not going to get another chance from Nadal this game. Some wonderfully soft hands at the net from the sixth seed brings up game point soon after and when Giron’s sliced backhand finds the net, that’s that. Second set: Giron 1-6, 0-1 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Nadal is motoring. He’s moving very well and at the moment Giron doesn’t have much of an answer. Nadal picks up in the first game of the second set where he left off in the first and he breaks at the first time of asking to claim an early advantage. First set: *Giron 1-6 Nadal (*denotes next server) It takes Nadal just 24 minutes to safely tuck the opening set into his back pocket. Ominous stuff from the Spaniard. Eight winners to Giron’s three, 27 total points won to the American’s 10. First set: Giron 1-5 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Giron finds himself in trouble now as Nadal literally and figuratively begins to flex his muscles. The former world No 1 secures a double break, sealing the game off the back of two terrific winners - the second a classic example of his formidable forehand. Gael Monfils was asked about Novak Djokovic in his press conference earlier. The French 17th seed was not particularly interested in answering. Question: What are your thoughts on how the whole Djokovic situation unfolded? Monfils: To be honest, I just think about the tournament now. Question: What about the opportunity that his absence creates for other players? Monfils: To be honest, it’s great for you guys. I don’t know. I don’t see any opportunity. You have opportunity to play a match after each win. I don’t know where he was in the draw, who got the opportunities or whatever. You know me, I’m just happy to have another opportunity to win another match, maybe go to another third one in the Australian Open. First set: *Giron 1-4 Nadal (*denotes next server) Nadal consolidates that break with ease. No dramas at all for the sixth seed. First set: Giron 1-3 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Giron is holding his own this game as he takes a 40-15 lead, but his concentration slips and when he’s long at deuce, Nadal has a great chance to break. Again, Giron probably thinks he’s won the point with an excellent drop volley that has Nadal scrambling, but you just can’t write off the Spaniard and he reaches it before responding with an incredibly deft backhand. The first break of the match goes Nadal’s way! First set: *Giron 1-2 Nadal (*denotes next server) Nadal’s familiar serving ticks are in evidence as he collects a second service game, capped with another ace. But Giron shows what he’s capable of midway through the game with a great backhand across the court. On serve. First set: Giron 1-1 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Giron could be forgiven he’s fashioned a decent point at 30-15 ahead when he has Nadal running across the court and stretching for a ball, but the Spaniard gets there, as he does, and whips one of his classic forehands, as he does, to win the point. The American shrugs off the disappointment and holds anyway. First set: *Giron 0-1 Nadal (*denotes next server) Nadal opens in style. Ace. Boom. He doesn’t lose a point in the opening exchange. Giron, the 28-year-old, faces a tough examination today, if it needed saying. Britain’s No 1, Cam Norrie, is also warming up ahead of his match with Sebastian Korda of the US - another one of 60 matches being played across Melbourne Park on day one of the Australian Open. Australia’s visa cancellation regime has been exposed as “dysfunctional and dangerous” by the Novak Djokovic case, legal experts have said, arguing his expulsion is a “terrible precedent” that could lead to “political and populist” deportations. The Djokovic case has drawn public attention to the so-called “God powers” held by Australian immigration ministers, granting them extraordinarily broad powers to summarily cancel visas. Migration law experts say the Djokovic case – his visa was cancelled because the government believed he was a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment” – demonstrates the laws could be used to exclude a person who has previously expressed political views the government did not agree with. Read the full story here: Here’s Rafa, into the bright sunshine on Rod Laver Arena. The Spanish great plays Marcos Giron, coming right up. Rafael Nadal is up next on centre. In the meantime, let’s go around the ground, briefly. Denis Shapovalov, the men’s 14th seed, is through, a winner in four sets over Serbia’s Laslo Djere as is crowd favourite Gael Monfils who breezed past Federico Coria 6-1, 6-1, 6-3. Spanish 18-year-old Carlos Alcaraz, who reached the US Open quarter-finals, beat Chilean qualifier Alejandro Tabilo 6-2, 6-2, 6-3. Belarusian Ilya Ivashka has withdrawn from the tournament due to a leg injury and has been replaced by lucky loser Damir Dzumhur, who will play Pablo Andujar on Tuesday. Osaka is asked what it is about Melbourne that brings the best out in her: “I’m not sure if it’s the heat. I don’t know, I really like hot conditions. I just feel like whenever I come here everyone is so warm and welcoming... You guys are all very nice. I’m sure that has a really positive effect on me.” Here’s Osaka, on-court with Jelena Dokic. “Yeah, definitely always feels special for me to come back here. I played the warm-up tournament before the grand slam a week ago. I have a lot of really good memories here. It just feels really nice to start the year always in this tournament. “I thought I played really well given the circumstances. I didn’t really have that much information on my opponent. I thought she played amazing. She was fighting for every point. I think that’s a really good quality. I’m sure we’ll see her on this court pretty frequently. Yeah, I’m just overall I’m happy to be here. I’m happy to see everyone in the audience. I’m really glad, and I hope we give you a really good performance.” Osaka 6-3, 6-3 Osorio The sun is out on Rod Laver Arena as Osaka safely negotiates a tricky opening encounter. The final game is not without its drama as the chair umpire is brought into the match. “Sorry, sorry, sorry!” Osaka cries as a fierce Osaka forehand wallops into the chair umpire. “It was hard,” comes the understated reply. She’s OK to continue and it doesn’t take Osaka long to wrap things up. Osorio can only find the net on match point and that’s that. Second set: Osaka 6-3, 5-3 Osorio* (*denotes next server) Osaka is convincingly winning the unforced error count so far today 27-14. The latest one comes early in this game, but the defending champion still holds and moves to within a game of the second round. Second set: *Osaka 6-3, 4-3 Osorio (*denotes next server) Yet Osorio is staying in touch and showing a lovely touch at that, with a delicate clip over the net at close quarters that Osaka has no answer to as the Colombian seals this seventh game of the second set. Second set: Osaka 6-3, 4-2 Osorio* (*denotes next server) I’m not sure if Osaka is enjoying this, but she’s grinding it out and inching closer to victory. Another service game, another game nearer to a place in the second round. Osorio’s intensity has dropped slightly, and she can’t afford that against one of the best players in the world. Second set: *Osaka 6-3, 3-2 Osorio (*denotes next server) Osorio seals her next service game with an ace to stay on Osaka’s coattails. Second set: Osaka 6-3, 3-1 Osorio* (*denotes next server) Meanwhile, Osaka confirms that break of serve and opens up a two-game lead. There’s a big story over on Court Three, where Australian wildcard Aleksandar Vukic has caused a stunning upset, beating South Africa’s 30th seed Lloyd Harris in four sets. Vukic, 25, is ranked 144 in the world. Not a bad way to make your grand slam debut. Second set: *Osaka 6-3, 2-1 Osorio (*denotes next server) Osorio is certainly the more vocal of the two out there - she lets out a huge roar after winning the first point here. But silence soon follows as her serve goes a bit skewiff and three straight double fault gift Osaka two break chances. She needs both but gets the job done on the second. The defending champion noses ahead once again. Second set: Osaka 6-3, 1-1 Osorio* (*denotes next server) Another fist bump here from Osorio. The momentum seems to be with the lower-ranked player as Osaka lands a forehand out and the Colombian draws level at 30-30. Osaka’s forehand again lets her down and she has to dig deep to stave off a break point. That sequence repeats itself - poor Osaka forehand, break point opportunity, good save by Osaka - before the Japanese finally manages to hold her serve. A big hold, that one. Second set: *Osaka 6-3, 0-1 Osorio (*denotes next server) Osorio’s ascension continues with a relatively comfortable service game. Very much different to her first service game of the opening set. Indeed this is a different match now Osorio has hit her straps. First set: Osaka 6-3 Osorio* (*denotes next server) “Vamos” is the cry as Osario delivers a beautiful backhand winner to bring up two break point opportunities. She’s pumped here! But both slip by the wayside and an Osaka set point arrives after a booming ace from the Japanese. She takes it - and breathes a sigh of relief. The defending champion was made to work then as Osorio found her feet, but the writing was already on the wall. Osaka takes the first set! First set: *Osaka 5-3 Osorio (*denotes next server) Osorio has the wind in her sails now - she looks dead and buried on the second point of this game but puts the pressure on Osaka’s overhead volley again and somehow wins the point. She builds on that to hold serve and you get the sense she’s settling into life on Rod Laver Arena now. Quick note on Osaka’s overhead game - it’s not been great so far. First set: Osaka 5-2 Osorio* (*denotes next server) Well, look at this. At 30-30, Osaka completely misjudges an overhead volley at the net - she affords herself a smile as the absurdity of the eventual shot - and Osorio takes full advantage to bag her second game of the match on the next point. First set: *Osaka 5-1 Osorio (*denotes next server) A big cheer emanates from the sparsely-populated stands on Rod Laver Arena as Osorio finally gets herself on the scoreboard. Hopefully the Colombian can take some confidence from that - and a couple of errors from Osaka. First set: Osaka 5-0 Osorio* (*denotes next server) Make that a five-game lead. Absolutely no messing about from Osaka in this quickfire game as she lands another ace on her way. This has been very impressive from the defending champion so far. First set: *Osaka 4-0 Osorio (*denotes next server) Osorio threatens to trouble the scoreboard but the Colombian is not helped by a double fault that lets Osaka back in at deuce. A couple of points later and Osaka is four games to the good and cruising. First set: Osaka 3-0 Osorio* (*denotes next server) Osaka’s got her groove on already here. She throws down a first ace of the match before forcing Osario into a couple of errors to open up a three-game lead early on. First set: *Osaka 2-0 Osorio (*denotes next server) Osaka gives an early indication of her power with a couple of ferocious forehand winners early in Osorio’s opening service game. The Colombian doesn’t really recover and Osaka claims the first break of the day. First set: Osaka 1-0 Osorio* (*denotes next server) Osaka’s first serve is wayward, but she finds her range pretty soon after that and the Japanese takes the opening game to love. A light smattering of applause from the centre court crowd follows. OK, here we go then. Osaka will serve first. Play. Ranked 50 in the world, the up-and-coming Camila Osorio faces a big test of her credentials today. The 20-year-old, who is yet to win a WTA title, is making her Australian Open debut and would probably prefer to be facing a different opponent. But here she is. Both players are now out on court, warming up, and we’ll be under way soon enough. The Djoko-tracker is up and running. So, all eyes turn to four-time grand slam winner and defending champion Naomi Osaka, the world No 14, ranked 13 in Melbourne this year. Osaka is coming off a break from the game for mental health reasons, after the Japanese dramatically pulled out of last year’s French Open in what was one of the biggest stories in sport of 2021. She will kick off the defence of her title in Melbourne against Colombia’s Camila Osorio with something of a new outlook on tennis. “I just want to feel like every time I step on the court I’m having fun,” she said at the weekend. “I can walk off the court knowing that even if I lost, I tried as hard as I could. I just feel like for me, I’m the type of person that cared a little bit too much about the results and the ranking and stuff like that. “And I just need to find a way to enjoy the game again because that’s the reason why I was playing in the first place.” The pair will be on court shortly. Maria Sakkari soon follows as the fifth seed wins a second-set tie-breaker to beat Tatjana Maria in one hour and 46 minutes on Rod Laver Arena, 6-4, 7-6(2). Elina Svitolina is through! The 15th seed from Ukraine advances to the second round with a 6-1, 7-6(4) win over Fiona Ferro. But she’s not the first to book a place in the next round - Camila Giorgi has that honour after the 30th seeded Italian completed a 6-4, 6-0 victory over Anastasia Potapova on court six. Belinda Bencic is also through, a 6-4, 6-3 winner over Kristina Mladenovic. Hype travels fast. A relatively full crowd on Court 7 has been getting its first glimpse of Carlos Alcaraz in his second Australian Open main draw appearance. The 18-year-old had an incredible breakout year in 2021, reaching the US Open quarter-final and ending the season by winning the Next Gen ATP Finals. His movement, intensity and weight of shot off both wings are all already top quality and it also looks like he has bulked up a little in the off-season. Clearly one to watch this year in Australia. The fifth seed, Maria Sakkari, is being made to work by the other Maria, Tatjana Maria, on Rod Laver Arena, where the Greek has just held serve to level at 5-5 in the second set. Now would be a handy time for her to break serve. Reminder: Naomi Osaka is up next on centre court. Here’s more as promised earlier on the Australian prime minister’s commentary on Djokovic, courtesy of our foreign affairs and defence correspondent Daniel Hurst. Novak Djokovic was deported because he tried to breach entry rules at the border, even though the immigration minister did not dispute the tennis star’s belief he had a valid medical exemption. The Serbian tennis player boarded an Emirates flight from Melbourne to Dubai on Sunday night, hours after the full federal court upheld the minister’s decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa. Morrison said on Monday the world men’s No 1 had failed to comply with “the rules”, that to enter Australia that “you either have to be vaccinated or you have to have a valid medical exemption and show evidence of it.” “It’s as simple as that,” the prime minister told 2GB radio. “This is about someone who sought to come to Australia and not comply with the entry rules at our border. That’s what this is about.” Read the full story here: Around the grounds: Canada’s Denis Shapovalov is a set up against Laslo Djere after winning a tight first set on a tie-break while Australian wildcard Aleksandar Vukic has just levelled at a set apiece in his clash with South Africa’s 30th seed Lloyd Harris. Quite possibly the biggest cheer of the day so far as the 25-year-old from Sydney won set point there. Headlining the women’s draw at the moment, Maria Sakkari is a set up but locked at 3-3 in the second against Tatjana Maria of Germany while Elina Svitolina has been pegged back by Fiona Ferro, who is now serving to level at one-set all. Swiss 22nd seed Belinda Bencic is 6-2, 4-2 up against Frenchwoman Kristina Mladenovic. The distraction of Djokovic in the run-up to the tournament has been wide-reaching. While focus has been on the Serb’s visa issues, it should not be forgotten that Rafa Nadal now has a golden chance to move out on his own as the winner of 21 grand slam titles - ahead of Djokovic and Roger Federer, who are also on 20. There are other serious contenders of course - the Big Three no longer has a monopoly on major titles - but with his favourite French Open next up later this year, the next fortnight could well provide Nadal with a chance to steal a march on his long-time rivals. Nadal is up after Osaka on Rod Laver Arena, but not before 2pm local time, against American Marcos Giron, the world No 66. John O’Malley has emailed with some thoughts on women’s world No 1 Ash Barty. “Interesting she didn’t play Sydney. It was a clever move as there was a really tough draw.” Also what a week out of the spotlight has achieved is that Barty now, perhaps weirdly for a world No 1, is flying somewhat under the radar. That might change once she hits the Rod Laver Arena court in today’s evening session, but her preparations must surely have benefitted. Will be interesting to see what kind of shape she is in tonight. Over on Margaret Court Arena, Elina Svitolina, the world No 16 and seeded 15 here, is in the mix to become the first player to book a place in the second round after blitzing her opponent and alliteration lovers’ dream Fiona Ferro of France to win the opening set 6-1. Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison - as indeed pretty much every politician in the country - has been asked about the Djokovic saga today. More on his thoughts in a moment, but for now, in case you missed it (there’s no way you did), here’s a handy timeline of how the whole Djokovic saga panned out: Just a housekeeping note - we’ll continue to float around the grounds until Naomi Osaka gets onto centre court, at which point expect a game-by-game report. One of those in early action is Carlos Alcaraz, the exciting 18-year-old Spaniard who despite his talent is definitely NOT the new Rafa Nadal. He’s 3-2 up in the first set in his opener against Chilean qualifier Alejandro Tabilo. Andrew Benton has emailed in. “What happened to the seedings with no Djokovic, have they been shifted around, or was there no time for that?” Given the ruling to deport the Serb was made after Monday’s order of play was set on Sunday, the seedings have stayed the same - it’s the same men’s draw, just without a top seed (and with lucky loser Salvatore Caruso parachuted into Djokovic’s spot). So Daniil Medvedev remains second seed, Alexander Zverev third and so on. Fans are filing into Melbourne Park, but we won’t be seeing packed stands at any stage of the tournament - ticket sales were last week capped at 50% due to Victoria’s surge in Omicron cases. All fans attending the tennis will have to wear masks. Weather update: It’s overcast in Melbourne today, and the mercury is hovering around the 19C mark. Rain is not expected today, or indeed for the rest of the week by the looks of it. Around the ground, first-round matches have started up. Greek fifth seed Maria Sakari is up on Rod Laver, 15th seed Elina Svitolina on Margaret Court and Denis Shapovalov, the men’s 14th seed, on John Caine are among those in action. On the subject of the veteran former world No 1, Murray is back at the Australian Open for the first time since 2019, when it appeared retirement was on the agenda after the hobbling Scot. Since then, he’s risen, phoenix-like, and even reached the final of last week’s Sydney International. There’ll be interest in how he backs up when he takes on Nikoloz Basilashvili in his first-round match (not today). Here’s more from Tumaini Carayol: As we await the first serve of the tournament, not sure anyone would argue with Andy Murray’s summation of the events over the past few weeks: “It feels everything here happened extremely last-minute and that’s why it became such a mess.” Novak Djokovic is gone but, would you believe it, the world is still turning and that means finally there is some actual main draw grand slam tennis to talk about. After the most drawn-out, scrutinised and lamentable build-up to a major tennis tournament ever, the familiar tik-tok of tennis balls being hit over a net will finally take over from the relentless stream of Djokovic takes on, um, TikTok and such like. Of course, the shadow cast by the saga very much remains over Melbourne Park, and Djokovic will remain a hot topic for some time to come, but at least the presence of the likes of Naomi Osaka, Rafael Nadal and Ash Barty on court today will help return focus to the actual game of tennis. Osaka, the reigning Australian Open champion, kicks off her title defence second up on Rod Laver Arena, where play starts today at 11am local time, midnight in the UK and 7pm in New York. The Japanese returns from a mental health break with what should be a straightforward opener against Colombia’s world No. 53 Camila Osorio. Nadal follows, not before 2pm AEDT, against Marcos Giron of the US, as the Spaniard begins his bid to to move out on his own as the winner of 21 grand slams, before women’s world No 1 and home hope Ash Barty gets the evening session under way against Ukrainian qualifier Lesia Tsurenko. Plus plenty more around the grounds throughout the day, of course. Right, you can drop me a line at mike.hytner@theguardian.com or tweet @mike_hytner. Otherwise, strap yourselves in for day one of the year’s opening grand slam.The world’s 20 top performing hedge fund managers earned a record $65.4bn ($48bn) profit for their clients in 2021 after bets placed on rising stock markets paid off. The biggest winner was TCI, the fund run by British billionaire Sir Chris Hohn, which made a gain of $9.5bn last year, according to the annual rankings by LCH Investments. TCI, which manages about $44bn of assets and is known in the City and on Wall Street as one of the most aggressive activist investors, made a gain of 23.3% in 2021. TCI, which stands for the Children’s Investment fund, has made total gains of $36.5bn since it was set up in 2003. Hohn, a philanthropist and climate crisis activist, paid himself $152m last year, less than a third of the $475m he received the previous year. He has pumped more than £4bn into his personal children’s charity and in recent years has taken on a second cause: the climate crisis, promising to use TCI’s $44bn of investments to “force change on companies who refuse to take their environmental emissions seriously”. Hohn is the single biggest individual donor to Extinction Rebellion (XR), which has staged high-profile climate protests around the world. “Humanity is aggressively destroying the world with climate change and there is an urgent need for us all to wake up to this fact,” he said when he was revealed as XR’s main funder. The top 20 hedge funds returned 10.5% on average, making total gains of $65.4bn, up from $63.5bn and the most since LCH started collating the data in 2010. “The net profit generated by the top 20 managers for investors was the highest ever,” Rick Sopher, the chair of LCH said. “While hedge funds have not been the best performers of the past decade, they may become more useful if the market environment changes, which it inevitably will,” he added. “Equity markets have been soaring and bond markets are precarious, so the risks of traditional equity and bond investors losing money in the future are high and rising.” The second-best performing fund was Citadel, a US fund run by Ken Griffin, the world’s 54th wealthiest person with an estimated personal fortune of $27.5bn. Last year, Citadel made $8.2bn, a 26% return. In 2019 Griffin bought a Grade II* Georgian mansion within sight of Buckingham Palace for almost £100m. He purchased 3 Carlton Gardens, which overlooks the Mall and St James’s Park in central London, for £95m. He owns string of luxury properties across the world, including the most expensive ever sold in New York, Chicago and Miami. Last year he bought a four-level penthouse at the top of Chicago’s No 9 Walton apartment complex for $58.8m. When it is fitted out the apartment will feature a private pool and several balconies. Griffin mostly lives and works in Chicago, where Citadel is based, and also owns a condominium that occupies the whole of the 37th floor of the city’s Waldorf Astoria hotel.Thaddeus and Nanci, the subjects of Laura Plancarte’s intimate documentary, make for an idiosyncratic couple. While the bubbly Nanci has a natural, charismatic openness, Thaddeus is much more elusive and reserved. Still, their differences run deeper than a matter of contrasting personalities. Thaddeus, born into the Northern Cheyenne tribe, was removed from his Native American community at a young age. Meanwhile, Nanci, who is white, grew up on a Lakota reservation. Despite the differences in their backgrounds, what Nanci and Thaddeus do share – apart from their love for each other – is a difficult childhood, marred by domestic abuse and financial precariousness – the same stories of disenfranchisement that ripple through generations of Native Americans living in Montana. Conversations that Thaddeus and Nanci have with their friends and neighbours make free mention of suicide and addiction, spoken with a tragic matter-of-factness. These intergenerational traumas form a wedge between the pair as they prepare for their wedding. Thaddeus wants Nanci to adhere to the traditional roles of a Northern Cheyenne woman; this means leaving all the household domestic responsibilities to her. On the other hand, Nanci, who has a PhD and works at a university, feels sorely burdened by these expectations. Still, while Thaddeus’s attitude is outdated, the film as well as Nanci don’t make simple judgment calls – both acknowledge that such mindsets stem from an innate need to cling to one’s disappearing heritage. While several of Plancarte’s stylistic choices are at times odd, including an on-the-nose inclusion of Ben Rogers’s Cowboys and Indians tune, the film is a heartfelt ode to the resilience of love that can triumph over differences. • Non Western is available on 21 January on True StoryThere is so much that could go wrong even between Monday morning and Saturday that it feels reckless to suggest it, but it is increasingly likely that the Clarence House Chase at Ascot this weekend could be that rarest of races over jumps: a season-defining, perhaps even an era-defining, contest which will unfold with something other than Cleeve Hill at Cheltenham as the backdrop. Shishkin and Energumene, the outstanding two-mile chasers in the UK and Ireland respectively, both stood their ground for Saturday’s Grade One at the five-day stage on Monday morning. First Flow, last year’s winner and something of an Ascot specialist, remains a potential runner too and if all three go to post, we could well see the best jumps race outside the Festival since Moscow Flyer beat Azertyuiop and Well Chief in the 2004 Tingle Creek. As was also the case at Sandown 18 years ago, Shishkin and Energumene will be meeting for the first time if they line up on Saturday, but unlike the main protagonists in 2004 – who took the Arkle Trophy in 2002, 2003 and 2004 respectively – they are both eight-year-old, second-season chasers. Energumene was scratched from last season’s Arkle just a few days before the Festival, and bitterly disappointing though that was at the time, a 10-month delay has only increased the anticipation. Bookmakers – and, presumably, punters – seem fairly confident that Shishkin will emerge in front when the two horses finally meet. Nicky Henderson’s chaser is chalked up at a top price of 8-15 for Saturday’s race with Energumene – who would be racing outside Ireland for the first time - on 9-4. In the Champion Chase betting, meanwhile, Shishkin is 11-10 to follow up his Arkle win at the Festival in March, with Energumene on 5-2. With no prior head-to-head to work with, however, these odds are based as much on impressions and sentiment as cold, hard form, with perhaps some recency bias in there too, as Shishkin made his deeply impressive return to action at Kempton’s Christmas meeting three weeks ago. On the ratings, though, there is almost nothing between them. The much-respected Timeform operation has Shishkin 1lb in front of Energumene, but Energumene dispatched his three rivals in a Grade One novice at Punchestown in April with every bit as much authority as Shishkin showed at Grade Two level at Kempton last month. Neither horse has ever been extended over fences and it is impossible to say which of them might find the decisive finishing kick if they land over the last side-by-side. Ascot will hope to welcome around 10,000 racegoers on Saturday but this promises to be one of those races that many times more will make a point of watching live, wherever they are and whatever they happen to be doing. In the age of the smartphone, of course, that no longer means having to find a betting shop if you are out and about on a Saturday afternoon. Back in 2004, somewhat bizarrely, I ended up watching Moscow Flyer win the Tingle Creek in a bookies at Brighton Marina, standing next to the man who happened to run it: the notorious – and subsequently jailed – former punter, John “Jock” McCracken. The surroundings will feel a little less intimidating at Ascot on Saturday, but the race itself, hopefully, will live just as long in the memory.After a slew of close loyalists followed Dominic Cummings out the door in November 2020, Boris Johnson had a tough task appointing a new chief of staff and director of communications. He opted to promote his well-connected press secretary, Jack Doyle, and hire an outsider, Dan Rosenfield. Sarah Sands, a former editor of the Evening Standard and Radio 4’s Today programme and Peter Dominiczak, a former political editor of the Daily Telegraph, were said to have turned the jobs down. Now, with both Rosenfield and Doyle rumoured to be on their way out, Johnson is facing a dilemma of persuading former loyalists to return or an experienced professional to take a risk on his – currently chaotic – reign in Downing Street. Both jobs would ordinarily be coveted by ambitious professionals, but Whitehall sources say there is significant reluctance to take on the roles – not least because any new office holders would be likely to have their own lockdown activities under immediate scrutiny. Conservative MPs have been clamouring for Johnson to appoint a party man or woman, with a deep understanding of the Tories and campaigning experience. In other words they are expecting someone with a deep understanding of rightwing politics who can push the party in that direction. The other delicate matter is the prime minister’s wife, Carrie Johnson. An experienced PR professional herself who ran communications for Conservative campaign headquarters, she has very specific ideas about how the operation should be run, and clashed with the former director of communications Lee Cain, who rejected the chief of staff role and resigned. There are also other options for ambitious Conservative campaigners and communicators. “Boris will be gone soon,” one senior Tory official observed. “Any big guns who want to work in No 10 will be hitching their horse to Rishi’s team.” Who could join? Sir Edward Lister A former chief of staff and one of Johnson’s veteran loyalists. Johnson is reported to have asked Lister to return to No 10 several times since his departure in January last year. Lister himself has been caught in multiple conflict-of-interest stories and would most likely take some significant convincing to return. David Canzini A former head of campaigns for the Conservatives who now works alongside the elections guru Sir Lynton Crosby, Canzini is the name on many Tory MPs’ lips – though he is believed to think of it as a poisoned chalice. “Canzini’s not Einstein but he’s practical; he works hard; he understands the Tory party,” one former cabinet minister said. “He was on Boris’s campaign, so he’s trusted.” Meg Powell-Chandler A senior No 10 staffer with comms experiences whose stock is high in Downing Street, Powell-Chandler is one of the “musketeers” of Michael Gove loyalists inside No 10 in senior roles, the others being Henry Cook and Henry Newman, under the deputy chief of staff, Simone Finn. All four are also close to Carrie Johnson. Any could be bumped up to one of the top jobs. Paul Stephenson Stephenson was one of the key figures in Vote Leave, and securing him for No 10 would be a coup for Johnson. A former political adviser, Stephenson co-founded the advisory firm Hanbury Strategy and would take some tempting to leave for a volatile Downing Street. Lynn Davidson The Sun’s former Whitehall editor was special adviser to Penny Mordaunt at the Ministry of Defence and then moved to the private sector, returning to lead Alok Sharma’s communications for Cop26. Whitehall sources say she impressed in the role. Jess Glover A director general of the Cabinet Office, Glover is being tipped by the Sunday Times as Reynolds’ replacement. Others tipped for promotion: Oliver Dowden’s spad, Lucy Noakes, the No 10 press officer Sophie True.A dangerous winter storm brought significant snowfall, strong thunderstorms and blustery winds to the north-east of the US on Monday as well as rare snow flurries and deadly tornados to Florida. More than 50 million people were under winter weather alerts on Monday morning the huge system affected a gigantic swath of the country stretched from Florida to Maine. Air travel was hit as more than 1,200 US flights were canceled Monday morning after 3,000 US flights were canceled Sunday, according to FlightAware.com. Power was out to more than 180,000 customers from Georgia to New York, according to PowerOutage.us. In Florida the Panhandle region in the north-west of the state saw rare snowfall and the system also spawned tornados across the state Florida that destroyed or damaged scores of mobile homes. New York City and Boston were spared the heaviest snowfall, which was accumulating at higher elevations in western Massachusetts, eastern Pennsylvania and parts of New England. A severe thunderstorm warning remained in effect for New York City early Monday, and high winds made travel treacherous across the region. The howling winds spread a fire that destroyed a motel and two other structures in coastal Salisbury, Massachusetts, early Monday.Ben Stokes is set to join Joe Root in making himself unavailable for this year’s Indian Premier League auction following England’s Ashes defeat in Australia. The all-rounder has featured in the last four seasons of the lucrative Twenty20 tournament, playing for the now defunct Rising Pune Supergiant franchise on a £1.7m deal in 2017 – and winning the MVP award – before joining Rajasthan Royals the following year for £1.3m. Stokes was released by the Royals after missing the bulk of last year’s campaign through injury, but as a fast bowling all-rounder he was expected to attract another bumper contract when the world’s best players go under the hammer on 12 and 13 February. However, amid an ever-crunched international schedule made even more gruelling by the pandemic, and having only returned from a four-month break to address a finger injury and his mental health before the recent Ashes campaign, the 30-year-old is understood not to have registered his name for 2022. Root stated a similar intention to turn down the IPL after the 146-run loss in the fifth Test in Hobart and though he went unsold in 2018 – his only previous time in the auction – and a buyer was not guaranteed, the creation of two new teams with a combined 16 overseas berths had increased the possibility. “There’s a lot that we need to do for this [Test] team, which deserves all of my energy,” said Root. “I’ll keep sacrificing as much as I can because I care so much about Test cricket in our country and trying to get us to where we want to be.” England’s relationship with the IPL – unique in world cricket due to its overlap with the home summer – has thawed in recent times such that Test players who held deals were rested by the national set-up during last year’s packed winter schedule and also missed the belatedly-scheduled home series against New Zealand. A heavy Ashes defeat means centrally-contracted players are set to be limited in terms of their IPL availability this year. The tournament starts on 3 April, less than a week after a three-Test series in the Caribbean ends on 28 March, while its final is slated for 3 June, the day after England’s home Test series versus New Zealand begins.Tickets to the Beijing Winter Olympics will not be sold to the general public, but distributed to “targeted” groups, organisers have announced, in China’s latest attempt to control the spread of the highly-infectious Omicron Covid variant. Beijing reported its first locally transmitted Omicron case over the weekend, piling renewed pressure on authorities in the run-up to the Games, which are due to start on 4 February and coincide with the lunar new year celebrations week, typically the biggest travel period of the year. Organisers of the Winter Olympics previously said the Games would be kept in a “closed loop”, meaning that only a limited number of spectators would be allowed in venues. Overseas spectators will not be allowed to enter the country, and personnel involved in the Games will have to avoid contact with people outside the loop. On Monday, the organisers cited the “severe and complex” Covid-19 situation and the need to protect the safety of Olympics personnel and spectators in an announcement. “In order to protect the health and safety of Olympic-related personnel and spectators, it was decided to adjust the original plan to sell tickets to the public and [instead] organise spectators to watch the Games on site,” they said. Local spectators who receive tickets must observe strict Covid prevention measures before, during and after attending Olympic events, the organising committee said, without giving further details, or specifying how tickets would be distributed. China’s attempts to enforce its “zero-Covid” containment policy are threatened by the Omicron variant. On Monday, authorities urged citizens not to order goods from overseas, after they claimed that a recent Omicron infection detected in Beijing had come from an international package sent from Canada. China has claimed that numerous Covid infections throughout the pandemic have come from imported products – often cold chain items – but experts say the scientific basis for such claims is weak. Last month North America’s national hockey league said its players would not participate in the Beijing Winter Olympics due to Covid disruptions of the league schedule. The latest information on the first Omicron case in Beijing came hours before President Xi Jinping vowed to present a “streamlined, safe and splendid Games to the world” in his keynote speech at the Davos economic forum. Chinese health authorities on Monday reported 223 cases from the previous 24 hours to midnight, including 163 local transmissions. The majority were in Tianjin, where mainland China’s first Omicron case was identified on 9 December. The authorities said 79 of its 80 cases in Tianjin were found in Jinnan district, and 68 in Henan province, of which 60 were in the locked-down city of Anyang. One case reported in the southern city of Shenzhen, bordering Hong Kong, was confirmed as Omicron. Additional reporting by ReutersThe future of press freedom in Indian-administered Kashmir has been thrown into question after pro-government journalists and police officers forcibly took over its independent press club, which the authorities later shut down. The incident, which follows the harassment and detention of dozens of journalists in Kashmir in recent months, is the latest attack on independent journalism in the region, which is disputed between India and Pakistan. A small group of journalists supportive of the Indian government stormed the Kashmir Press Club with the assistance of armed police over the weekend, allegedly threatening its ruling body, and locked up the building, preventing journalists from entering. The club, which has irked the government by defending media freedoms and its critical reporting, had been about to hold new elections. The overthrow was widely condemned. The Editors Guild of India said it was “aghast at the manner in which the office and the management of Kashmir Press Club … was forcibly taken over” and accused the state of being “brazenly complicit in this coup”. The former chief minister of Indian-administered Kashmir, Omar Abdulllah, also called it a “state-sponsored coup”. The worst fears of the independent journalist community in Kashmir were confirmed on Monday when the regional administration declared the press club had been deregistered as a society and “ceased to exist”, and that the land on which it stands was being taken back into government hands. “It seems the ultimate goal was to shut down the Kashmir Press Club,” its general secretary, Ishfaq Tantray, said. “By this action, they wanted to stifle the voice of journalists that resonated through the forum … the only democratic and independent journalist body” in the region. The government defended its actions as protectiing press freedom and ensuring the “safety of bona fide journalists”. There has been a growing crackdown on independent journalism in Kashmir since the national government led by Narendra Modi unilaterally revoked the region’s autonomy in August 2019, stripped it of statehood, dissolved its government and brought it under Delhi’s control. Journalists reporting critically in the region have faced intimidation, harassment and lengthy and exhausting interrogations and investigations. More than 40 have been subjected to raids or police questioning in the past two years or placed on no-fly lists, preventing them from leaving the country. The government also introduced a draconian new media policy for Kashmir in June 2020, which introduced mandatory background checks for journalists and gave the administration power to prosecute those whom officials decide are spreading misinformation or fake news. The press club is the latest independent civil society group, following the Kashmir High Court Bar Association and the Kashmir Chamber of Commerce, to be forcibly prevented from holding elections since August 2019. “Journalism has been choked in the region, especially in last two years, with continuous summons and detentions of journalists,” said Fahad Shah, the editor of the local newspaper the Kashmir Walla. “Multiple raids have been conducted at journalists’ houses and offices too. It is just unfortunate how brazenly power is being used and laws are being scuttled to force people to toe a line that the government is comfortable with.” Sajad Gul, an independent journalist from Kashmir who has reported on alleged “fake encounters”, in which the military stages the death of civilians as militants, was detained on Monday under the Public Safety Act, a law that allows people to be arrested to prevent them acting against the security of the state. Shah, who has published Gul’s work, said he had been detained for doing his job and that Kashmir Walla lawyers were fighting his case. “Freedom of press in Kashmir has been a casualty under the current government,” he said.There is “massive anger” among grassroots Conservative party supporters over the Downing Street parties scandal, the head of a leading group has said as its survey found 40% thought Boris Johnson should resign. Ed Costelloe, chairman of Grassroots Conservatives, said it had been years since the group last polled its supporters and followers but it felt compelled by the “unique” nature of the public mood. “Obviously nobody is happy. There is massive anger, absolutely. And justifiably,” said Costelloe, adding that most people said they had written to their MP or local party branch to express their opinion. “But some people said this is not necessarily the time to change the captain on the bridge. A lot of people have said they think he should go, but not yet.” Tory MPs reported being inundated with emails about the issue, with one describing the numbers as “off the scale”. A staffer said a lot of emails to their MP contained “stories of personal hardship from new people, not the regulars”. These were emails they would usually respond to as soon as possible but it was difficult to do so while awaiting the findings of an inquiry by Sue Gray, they said. In some areas, anger spilled over into vandalism, with the constituency office of Derbyshire MP Robert Largan daubed with the word “lies”, according to pictures on Sunday. Last week the office of Wellingborough MP Peter Bone was graffitied with the word “liar”. Conservative associations across the country said members were growing increasingly frustrated and some were leaving the party in protest. “If he doesn’t go soon we will lose all the local elections that are coming up, or very many of them, and do immense damage to the party,” said Ann Stribley, the chairman of Poole Conservative Association. “We have had a number of members saying they can’t continue to be members while Boris [Johnson] is there. It’s been very difficult. A small minority have resigned.” “The sad thing for me is that good councillors and people who work hard for their constituents on a local level will probably end up paying the price in the [local election] polls in May,” said Philip Sagar, deputy chairman of the Grantham and Stamford Conservatives, who said he thinks Johnson should resign, though not immediately. “I think he endeared himself to people because he is seen as being fallible and making mistakes. People loved him for that, and whether he has squandered all that goodwill, I do worry about that. So yes, I am angry and disappointed.” Merilyn Davies, a cabinet member on West Oxfordshire district council, said: “If the prime minister wants Conservative councillors to have a chance of winning back their seats in May, he needs to step aside and let us get on with the important job of providing vital services to our residents. This will not go away until he resigns.” James Johnson, formerly in charge of polling at No 10, said he questioned focus groups of voters last week in the “red wall” seat of Bolton North East, which went Tory for the first time in 2019 with a majority of just 378. Tory voter responses included the stark: “He’s a coward.” Another talked of quite liking Johnson at the beginning but “now, it’s like, we’ve been made a fool of”. Another said: “It’s the fact that he lied. If he turned round and said: ‘Yep, I’ve done it, I’m sorry,’ that would have been OK. But he lied. What else has he been lying about? I think he’s completely lost everyone’s trust.” Another said: “They’re all up there backing him, most of them. That’s my worry now, with the party. ‘Oh he’s apologised, let’s just get on with the job.’ No – you’ve lied about doing the job. The rest of his party, apologising and saying they are going to back him. How can you?” James Johnson said he asked all the first-time Boris Johnson voters whether they would vote for him again. “Not one person put their hand up.”The hostage-taking attack on a Texas synagogue has renewed fears of increasing antisemitism in the US. The incident, which Joe Biden called “an act of terror”, comes as organizations tracking antisemitic violence say it is increasing across the US. “Assault, harassment and vandalism against Jews remain at near-historic levels in the US,” said the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) in its most recent Audit of Antisemitic Incidents. According to the group, there were more than 2,100 acts of assault, vandalism and harassment last year, an increase of 12% over the previous year. After the hostage crisis at the synagogue in the Fort Worth suburb of Colleyville, the anti-hate group ADL called on Congress to increase funding for non-profit Jewish organizations, including schools and houses of worship, for assistance in bolstering their security. “With threats against synagogues and other Jewish institutions arguably at an all-time high, it is imperative that the federal government provides appropriate levels of funding to mitigate the threat,” said Jonathan Greenblatt, the ADL’s CEO. The ADL also urged legislators in the Senate to confirm Deborah Lipstadt as the state department’s special envoy to monitor and combat antisemitism. The incident in Texas ended at about 9pm Saturday when the last hostages ran out of the synagogue and an FBI Swat team entered and killed their captor, Briton Malik Faisal Akram. It came despite the congregation receiving security training from local authorities and the Secure Community Network, which was founded in 2004 by a coalition of Jewish organizations. “In the last hour of our hostage crisis, the gunman became increasingly belligerent and threatening,” the congregation’s Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker said in a statement. “Without the instruction we received, we would not have been prepared to act and flee when the situation presented itself.” The standoff has led US law enforcement agencies to tighten security at potential Jewish targets across America, including New York City, where police said that they increased their presence “at key Jewish institutions” out of an abundance of caution. Sunday’s incident comes after a 2018 attack on the the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where 11 worshippers were killed, and a deadly antisemitic attack on a congregation in Poway, California, the following year. Ronald Lauder, president of the World Jewish Congress, said in a statement that the attack had shown the Jewish communities around the world “are living in dangerous times”. “Just as when the target of a violent antisemitic attack was the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh, or the synagogue in Halle, Germany, or the Chabad of Poway synagogue in California, the attack on Congregation Beth Israel is an attack on all of us. “We must continue to tackle this age-old hatred head on,” Lauder added. The FBI issued a statement calling the ordeal “a terrorism-related matter, in which the Jewish community was targeted”. The agency said the joint terrorism task force is investigating. Akram was specifically focused on demanding the release of Aafia Siddiqui, a Pakistani neuroscientist suspected of having ties to al-Qaida who was convicted of trying to kill US army officers in Afghanistan and is serving an 86-year sentence in nearby Fort Worth. In a statement, the ADL said Siddiqui’s release has been a focus for non-extremist groups as well, who allege mistreatment and fabricated charges. The group warned that rightwing and other extremists would attempt to exploit the Colleyville crisis to advance their own ideologies – “a clear indication that acts of antisemitism tend to inspire further expressions of antisemitism”.Richard ‘Dick’ McCourt I’d wanted to be a children’s TV presenter ever since I was 12. I had a place at Bournemouth University, but instead got a job as a runner at Children’s BBC, and ended up on screen when they were looking for someone to join The Broom Cupboard. Dom was a magician from Exeter. He was on another CBBC show called The Friday Zone and would come into The Broom Cupboard. The boss saw that there was chemistry and we were employed to do links as Richard and Dominic. As we grew as mates offscreen, we became Dick and Dom. CBBC had just launched on digital, so they said: “Do you fancy doing some long links around the cartoons on a Saturday?” We said: “Yeah, sure.” Then they decided it should be an actual programme. Ali G Indahouse was big at the time, so they went: “How about Dick and Dom In Da House?” Then another boss – I think they were quite drunk at a dinner party – said: “In Da House isn’t original enough,” and somebody shouted: “How about Dick and Dom In Da Bungalow?” So the title came first. The format stuck from the off – a gameshow with six studio contestants called Bungalow Heads. We were up against SM:TV Live (with H and Claire from Steps) on ITV and The Saturday Show (with Fearne Cotton and Simon Grant) on BBC One, so at first we hardly got any viewers. But by late 2002, we were pulling in half a million a week, which was unheard of on a digital channel. The BBC said: “This should be on BBC One.” And soon we were. It was popular with kids, parents and students. The BBC were overjoyed. They realised they had a huge hit on their hands so they left us to it. We were just trying to do original content that kids would find funny. We didn’t set out to get complaints. We were the second children’s programme ever to be mentioned in the House of Commons. Blue Peter was mentioned for something boring. Then an MP called Peter Luff said of In Da Bungalow: “Why should the licence-fee payer be paying for such lavatorial content?” I don’t think you’d be able to make anything like it now. That’s why Saturday morning is now all just cooking. Dominic ‘Dom’ Wood I struggled with dyslexia and knew that academia wasn’t going to be my path, so I got into drama and joined the National Youth Music Theatre. I saw Chris Evans on The Big Breakfast and thought: “I want to do that.” I thought magic could be my tool to get into TV so I kept sending in my VHS showreel to CBBC. Then, one holiday morning, I switched on the telly and there was this fresh-faced new presenter from Sheffield called Richard. I thought: “You absolute pig. You’ve stolen my job!” You can’t manufacture a double act. We got on straight away and lived together for years. There was no big game plan, we just understood our audience – kids want to see you having fun. We didn’t plan to make it to BBC One and win Baftas. But we were delighted when Charlie Brooker called us “a carnival of cackling clowns” in the Guardian. Then we were on the cover of a Halloween edition, with me dressed as a pumpkin and Rich pouring custard over my head. The producer used to play Bogies when he worked in the theatre (where you shout a word in public at increasing volume), only he used a much ruder word. He thought: “Why don’t we try it on kids’ TV?” We screamed it in Madame Tussauds and it was really funny. Then we went to Nando’s, screamed in there for a bit, and it just evolved into this very naughty animal. This country loves a catchphrase and ours will be attached to us for the rest of our lives. If we snuff it in some horrific accident, you’ll know because Bogies will be trending on Twitter. It’s hard to look back at Bungalow without it triggering traumatic stress disorder. That bit with the cow is deeply weird. Back then, a lot of great entertainment – like TFI Friday and Chris Moyles on BBC Radio 1 – was ad-libbed. Our script was just bullet points. It just said: “Cow gives birth.” So I’m stood next to a giant cow. The cow goes into labour with this weird noise and gives birth to Rich, who’s covered in this disgusting afterbirth that he slips around in like Bambi. He stands up and goes: “It’s me!” Then everyone cheers – and I get sucked back into the cow’s, well, wherever Rich came out of. I mean, you just don’t get that on TV any more.Novak Djokovic may not be allowed to defend his French Open title in May after the French government ruled that all athletes will have to be vaccinated in order to attend and compete in sporting events in France. The French sports minister, Roxana Maracineanu, has announced that athletes would not be exempt from France’s Covid pass, which will soon come into effect for over- 16s. “The vaccination pass has been adopted. As soon as the law is promulgated, it will become mandatory to enter public buildings already subject to the health pass (stadium, theatre or lounge) for all spectators, practitioners, French or foreign professionals,” she wrote on Twitter. Earlier this month Maracineanu had suggested that athletes could be exempt from France’s vaccination requirements through a “bubble” system but the government have now scrapped any such plans. Stanislas Guerini, the French MP and executive director for En Marche, said Djokovic’s behaviour was “irresponsible” as he discussed the Covid pass in an interview with RTL on Monday morning. “All the big events which will take place in France will also adopt the Covid pass,” he said. “Who would understand if we asked our citizens to make an effort and respect the rules if we authorise some to get out of them?” Djokovic arrived back in Belgrade, Serbia, via Dubai on Monday after being deported from Australia following the cancellation of his visa by the Australian Immigration Minister, Alex Hawke. Under Australia’s visa cancellation rules Djokovic is currently banned from reapplying for a visa for three years. Djokovic was greeted by some supporters and journalists at the airport on his return to Serbia and, as the Australian Open began, Serbian players spoke publicly about his deportation. “I think the way they treated him was terribly wrong,” said Serbian No 3, Dusan Lajovic. “I think the decision itself was terribly wrong, and also the reason why they did it is also for me terribly wrong because, based [on] just an idea, I don’t think it’s the right way.” Laslo Djere described Djokovic’s visa cancellation as a “catastrophic situation” and said the world will have a different opinion on Australia after the incident. and believes he will come back stronger than ever. “That’s also in our Serbian mentality. When we get beat down or we are treated a bad way or how we maybe don’t deserve, we just try to – especially him – tries to be inspired by that and gain strength from that.”China’s coal production reached record levels last year as the state encouraged miners to ramp up their fossil fuel output to safeguard the country’s energy supplies through the winter gas crisis. The world’s biggest coal producer and consumer mined 384.67m tonnes of the fossil fuel last month, easily topping its previous record of 370.84m tonnes set in November, after the government called for miners to work at maximum capacity to help fuel the country’s economic growth. Official government figures show that China’s coal binge also spurred the country to record high coal output over the year as a whole. Chinese coal production climbed to an all-time high of 4.07bn tonnes, up 4.7% on the previous year, in a blow to climate campaigners months after the UN’s Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow. The International Energy Agency (IEA) predicted that global consumption of coal power, which is the world’s single biggest source of climate emissions, would reach record levels in 2021 driven by a surge in demand for energy to kickstart global economies following the coronavirus pandemic. Coal power fell by 4% in 2020 as the pandemic caused a global economic slowdown, but the IEA found that the surge in demand for electricity during 2021 outpaced the growth in low-carbon sources, leading many wealthy economies to rely more heavily on fossil fuel power plants. The IEA’s most recent report, published last week, found the steepest ever increase in global electricity demand last year was stoked by a 9% increase in coal use compared with the year before, or more than half of the global increase in power demand, to reach an all-time peak. China’s record coal consumption comes weeks after the conclusion of the Cop26 climate talks, which ended in a fierce disagreement over a pledge to abandon coal. A last-minute intervention by India successfully watered down the language of the pact from “phasing out” to “phasing down”. After the talks, held in Glasgow last month, the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, said India and China would “have to explain themselves to poor nations” after watering down the Glasgow climate pact, adding that their actions had left him “deeply frustrated”. The IEA found that coal plants in the US and the EU produced 20% more electricity last year, from low levels in 2020, but their use remained below the levels recorded in 2019. The reliance on coal plants is expected to decline again next year as electricity demand slows and the expansion of renewable energy alternatives continues.Rwanda – one of two African countries to which the UK government is reportedly considering sending asylum seekers for resettlement and processing – was previously embroiled in a highly controversial migrant deportation scheme involving Israel. Although few details have emerged after a report in the Times that migrants could be sent to Ghana and Rwanda, Rwanda’s previous involvement in receiving African deportees from Israel raises serious concerns over whether – even with UK funding – it has the resources or even willingness to host deportations. The suggestion that people could be sent to the two African countries was included in proposals reportedly under consideration by British ministers, which also include using the armed forces to push back small boats crossing the Channel. The inclusion of Rwanda as a potential destination, however, is bound to raise eyebrows. Of about 4,000 people estimated to have been deported by Israel to Rwanda and Uganda under a “voluntary departure” scheme between 2014 and 2017, almost all are thought to have left the country almost immediately, with many attempting to return to Europe via people-smuggling routes. In addition, at least one deportee still in Rwanda, tracked down by Israel’s Haaretz newspaper in 2018, described being destitute and living on the streets of Rwanda’s capital, Kigali. Clouded in secrecy, and with Rwanda officially denying its involvement, details of the arrangement and the fate of some of those deported have been described in several reports, some of which included testimony from those who said they had been sent to Rwanda. Critics at the time, including the rights group Amnesty International, also pointed out that Israel had a far smaller number of refugees than Rwanda, and was a much wealthier country. Amnesty said Israel was “foisting its responsibility on countries who have only a fraction of the wealth and resources”, an argument that would also apply to the UK. Details of the arrangement between Israel and Rwanda were thrust into the spotlight in 2018 at a time when Israel’s supreme court was considering whether to approve a compulsory programme that would offer African migrants the option of a financially incentivised deportation to one of two “unnamed African countries” or face indefinite detention. That scheme, however, followed a “voluntary departure programme” that had been running for several years and had been beset by serious problems. At the time, the two unnamed African countries involved were widely reported to be Rwanda and Uganda, with the UN’s main refugee agency, UNHCR, expressing its concern about the lack of transparency around the secretive arrangements. The UNHCR’s assistant high commissioner for protection, Volker Türk wrote in 2017: “From the start of this programme, some 4,000 Eritrean and Sudanese were relocated under the government’s ‘voluntary departure programme’ to two African countries, named in media reports as Rwanda and Uganda. “Due to the secrecy surrounding this policy and the lack of transparency concerning its implementation, it has been very difficult for UNHCR to follow up and systematically monitor the situation of people relocated to these African countries. “UNHCR, however, is concerned that these persons have not found adequate safety or a durable solution to their plight and that many have subsequently attempted dangerous onward movements within Africa or to Europe.” A report by the International Refugee Rights Initiative two years earlier interviewed a number of individuals who said they had been deported from Israel to Rwanda. Testimonies collected by IRRI suggested “that the majority, if not all, are being smuggled out of the country by land to Kampala [in Uganda] within days of arriving in [the Rwandan capital] Kigali. “They are not given an opportunity to apply for asylum, and even if they wish to stay in Rwanda, their refugee claims cannot be assessed as the national refugee status determination committee has not yet been established. “These transfers appear to be coordinated by the people who receive the asylum seekers at Kigali airport. From Kampala, the majority travel north to South Sudan, Sudan and Libya, with many ultimately risking crossing the Mediterranean or falling into the hands of the Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham (IS) in the hope of finding safety in Europe.” Some of those interviewed by IRRI described being given only a holiday visa on arrival in Rwanda and being sent to a hotel from where they were encouraged to travel to Uganda illegally. Among the very few deported from Israel voluntarily who did opt to stay was a 28-year-old Eritrean man named Goitom, who spoke to Haaretz newspaper in Kigali in 2018. He had not been allowed to work and was living on the streets. “Things are so bad. I am living very badly. I have no home, there is no work,” he told the paper. “Before, there were a few people who helped me. The United Nations also helped – they gave me money for lodging and food. But they stopped.”Vice-president Kamala Harris on Monday warned that the right to vote in America was “under assault” and tens of millions of Americans faced disenfranchisement unless threatened voting rights legislation was passed by US lawmakers. The speech was given on the Martin Luther King Day public holiday and comes as King’s family and other civil rights activists in America are pushing for expanded federal voting rights legislation despite political opposition from Republicans. Activists want politicians to pass two measures aimed at expanding voting rights across the country – the Freedom to Vote Act and the John R Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. Passing voting rights legislation is seen as crucial in the face of a wave of Republican state legislation aimed at erecting barriers to voting that are likely to suppress the votes of communities of color. Harris delivered strong words – though no new concrete plan of action – regarding fighting off a wave of Republican-led voting rights suppression. She said: “Our freedom to vote is under assault,” adding that “voter suppression laws can make it more difficult to vote for as many as 55 million Americans, or one out of six people in the country”. “The proponents of these laws are not only putting in place obstacles to the ballot box; they are also working to interfere in our elections, to get the outcomes they want and discredit those they do not. That is not how democracy works,” Harris added. Martin Luther King III, King’s eldest son, his wife, Arndrea Waters King, and their daughter Yolanda Renee King led a march on Monday morning across the Frederick Douglass Memorial Bridge in Washington DC. In a statement last week, King III spoke of his father, who would have turned 93 on Saturday, and said that the “stakes could not be higher to protect and expand” his father’s legacy of activism and racial justice. “Senators now face one of the most existential choices of their tenure: protect our voting rights or go down in history as an enabler of voter suppression,” he said. In a speech at King’s Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, Georgia, King’s youngest daughter, Bernice King, emphasized the urgency of expanding voting rights. “It’s … critical that we shift our priorities so that our freedom to participate in the democracy via the vote isn’t threatened and thwarted by bipartisanship politics and agendas, but is cemented in our constitution and in our collective conscience,” she said. “We must say to our Senate that voting rights is not an ephemeral effervescent domestic issue that can be kicked about by reactionary guardians of the status quo,” she said, adding, “It is rather an eternal moral issue which may well determine the destiny of our nation.” Senator Raphael Warnock of Georgia echoed King’s sentiments, saying, “Right now … we got voter suppression bills having been passed in 19 states, introduced in 49 states and governors and members of Congress are channeling all states’ rights arguments to fight against voting rights.” “Surely the state doesn’t have a right to block people from voting,” he said. In December, more than 800 faith leaders, led by King III and his wife, called on the Biden administration and Senate Democrats to pass voting rights legislation. “The communities we represent will continue to sound the alarm until these bills are passed. While we come from different faiths, we are united by our commitment to act in solidarity with the most vulnerable among us,” they said in an open letter. Harris’s speech urging the Senate to pass the voting rights bills comes after a disappointing week for the Biden administration and skepticism about her and Joe Biden’s ability to do anything to pass the new laws. Last week, Biden went to the Capitol to urge Senate colleagues to change the chamber’s rules so they could overcome Republican opposition to the voting rights bill, only to be forcefully rejected by two conservative Democrats who hold effective veto power. The two Democrats, senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, have remained opposed to changing filibuster rules, which are necessary to move the bills through. The filibuster means most major legislation requires 60 votes to pass the senate, not a simple majority, and the senate is split 50-50 with the Democrats controlling a tie-breaking vote. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has announced that the Senate will take up voting legislation on Tuesday. Biden too issued a new statement saying Americans must protect “the sacred right to vote, a right from which all other rights flow”. “It’s time for every elected official in America to make it clear where they stand,” Biden said in a video address. “It’s time for every American to stand up. Speak out, be heard. Where do you stand?”Name: Magikkun. Age: New for the pandemic. Appearance: Potentially misleading. Is it an acronym? No, it’s Korean. For what? It’s a blend of the English word “mask” and the Korean word “sagikkun”, meaning fraud. It’s a big buzzword in the world of Korean online dating. Does it mean people wearing masks when they go on dates? No. Because you’re supposed to wear a mask when you go out. This is about people wearing masks in their dating app profiles. That’s a bit cautious; I don’t think you can catch Covid over Tinder. Nevertheless, it’s very popular. A sharp increase in the number of masked profile pics has led to South Korean dating sites banning or restricting them. Because they make you look less attractive? Because they make you look more attractive. Since when? A study by researchers at Cardiff University, published last week, found that while masked faces were once seen as unattractive – due to associations with illness and disease – they are now rated higher in attractiveness than unmasked faces. But why? It seems that in the age of Covid, masks offer people reassurance and make the wearer appear caring. For that reason, blue medical masks are rated highest of all. Or it could be because they hide all the unfortunate parts of your face. There’s that, too. When the brain is obliged to fill in the blanks, it tends to be a bit optimistic. Hence the possibility of deception; hence magikkun. We should really have our own word for it. We do, sort of: “maskfishing” was coined in 2020, when the site Adult FriendFinder issued a “no maskfishing mandate” to curb the practice. Still, if you go on a date with someone and they wear a mask the whole time anyway, was their profile pic really so misleading? Or maybe what someone looks like isn’t all that important to begin with. Are you kidding? It’s a hookup site, not chess club. At least a masked photo shows a potential romantic partner you’re not a Covid-denier. True. If I fancied spending four hours talking about Bill Gates and microchips, I would have gone home for Christmas. The South Korean app, Blind Date, has struck a nice compromise: “We make sure only one photo with a mask on is allowed per profile,” said CEO Kang Ba-da. Seems fair. Show me your Covid pass, and we’re away. I’m swiping left, actually. Do say: “You have lovely eyes.” Don’t say: “OK, you can keep the mask on, but the cowboy hat has to go.”Whether it’s giving an old pair of jeans a new lease of life or repainting a coffee table, many have tried their hand at upcycling in recent years as the eco-friendly hobby gains popularity. We’d like to hear from people in the UK who have recently given forgotten objects a makeover, whether you’re an old hand at DIY or have just bought a sewing machine. Why did you start? What does the hobby offer you over buying new items? We’d love to see your photos too. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The former England and Chelsea footballer Frank Lampard has escaped a charge of using a mobile phone while driving, after a case against him was dropped. The 43-year-old, who is also a former Chelsea manager, was filmed behind the wheel of his car in traffic in South Kensington, west London, last April by a cycling campaigner. Lampard pleaded not guilty to the charge after hiring the solicitor Nick Freeman to fight his case. Freeman, also known as Mr Loophole, specialises in defending celebrities in traffic and speeding offences. Lampard denied using his mobile phone while driving his Mercedes. On Monday the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) confirmed the case would be dropped due to lack of evidence. A CPS spokesperson said: “After examining a file of evidence submitted by the Metropolitan police service, we concluded, in accordance with our legal test, there was insufficient evidence to provide a realistic prospect of conviction.” The Dutch YouTuber Mike van Erp – known as CyclingMikey – claimed he spotted Lampard chatting on his phone while holding a cup of coffee and controlling the steering wheel with his wrist. Van Erp, who had been due to appear as a witness at City of London magistrates court, was told last week his presence was no longer required. Speaking to Road.cc, he said: “I think he’s gotten off scot-free as the case was discontinued. A couple of coppers have said the justice system is broken and they are binning cases left and right to reduce the massive backlog.” At the time of the alleged offence Van Erp was quoted in the Evening Standard as saying he was “pretty disgusted” with Lampard’s driving. He said: “I was cycling southbound on Gloucester Road and caught up to queuing traffic in both directions near the Gloucester Arms. I noticed this driver of a black Mercedes 4x4 holding a coffee in his right hand, and a phone in his left. I could see him talking on the phone … whilst resting his right inside wrist on the steering wheel.” Previous footage from Van Erp, who rides with a helmet-mounted GoPro camera, led to the prosecution of the former world champion boxer Chris Eubank after he jumped a red light in Hyde Park in his gold Rolls-Royce convertible last year. And his video of the film director Guy Ritchie, seen driving while using his phone in 2020, led to a six-month driving ban. Speaking after the trial, Van Erp said his video showed Lampard with a coffee and a phone. “I filmed him from the passenger side holding a phone up in his left hand … He had a coffee in his right hand and he was steering either with his wrist or the lower part of his palm. “I then made a mistake, but I only knew that in hindsight, I went back round to the driver’s side to try to get a better shot, but then the traffic cleared and he moved off.” In the video Van Erp can be heard calling Lampard a “dipstick”. He said his video evidence had led to 815 successful driving prosecutions in the past three years. “I accept my mistake in not staying by the passenger window and not getting sufficient evidence,” he said. “I accept that it was a little borderline for what the law requires, but the current mobile phone laws are a bit of a farce which is why they are about to be changed to make it harder to drive while using a phone.”It is hard to imagine humans spending their lives in virtual reality when the experience amounts to waving your arms about in the middle of the lounge with a device the size of a house brick strapped to your face. But this is where humanity is heading, says the philosopher David Chalmers, who argues for embracing the fate. Advances in technology will deliver virtual worlds that rival and then surpass the physical realm. And with limitless, convincing experiences on tap, the material world may lose its allure, he says. Chalmers, an Australian professor of philosophy and neural science at New York University, makes the case to embrace VR in his new book, Reality+. Renowned for articulating “the hard problem” of consciousness – which inspired Tom Stoppard’s play of the same name – Chalmers sees technology reaching the point where virtual and physical are sensorily the same and people live good lives in VR. “A common way of thinking about virtual realities is that they’re somehow fake realities, that what you perceive in VR isn’t real. I think that’s wrong,” he told the Guardian. “The virtual worlds we’re interacting with can be as real as our ordinary physical world. Virtual reality is genuine reality.” It all started, as these things can, with the French philosopher René Descartes. Chalmers was pondering his question of how we can know anything about the external world. Modern philosophy often reframes this as a Matrix-style poser: how can we know we are not in a simulation? To cut to the chase, we can’t, Chalmers says. All of which leads to virtual reality. In the decades ahead, Chalmers suspects we will ditch the clunky headsets for brain-computer interfaces, or BCIs, that allow us to experience virtual worlds with our full suite of senses. With advances in computing – in the next century, perhaps – those worlds would seem as real as the physical world around us. On the point of philosophy, Chalmers argues that even today’s virtual worlds are “real”. A conversation in VR is a real conversation, he says. The objects in the virtual worlds are real too, he asserts, just made of bits instead of quarks and electrons. As virtual worlds become rich and convincing we will build virtual societies, take on virtual jobs, and have motivations, desires and goals that play out in those environments. “Most of the factors that make life meaningful are going to be there in virtual worlds,” he says. “There’s no good reason to think that life in VR will be meaningless or valueless.” But where does this leave the physical world? “In the short term we’re pretty clearly going to be based in physical reality and I certainly wouldn’t recommend abandoning it,” Chalmers says. “But in the longer term, it’s possible to imagine people spending most of their lives inside virtual reality.” The pursuit of the physical may come to seem a novelty or a fetish, he adds. There are plenty of pitfalls to be wary of, he notes. As fulfilling as virtual worlds may become, people will need real food, drink and exercise, and perhaps even the odd glimpse of daylight, to keep their bodies from withering away. The risks may be trivial for decades yet, Chalmers says, but a gradual trend towards virtual living could eventually raise new health issues. Writing in the book, he describes numerous draws that will pull people in to VR. These are worlds in which people can enjoy superhuman powers, possess other bodies, experience new sensations and explore environments with different laws of physics. With almost unlimited space, everyone can have a virtual mansion, or even a virtual planet. And if the physical world becomes dangerously degraded – by environmental collapse, nuclear war or an interminable pandemic – VR could offer a safe haven, he says. But the lure of VR might cause neglect on a global scale, Chalmers concedes. Would climate change and other crises facing the physical world lose their urgency? That would be a disaster, he says: “Physical reality is really important. We’ve got to keep a grounding in it and treat it well.” These are not the only concerns. Virtual worlds are owned by corporations that want a return on their investment. In October, Facebook rebranded as Meta, reflecting its ambition to dominate the “metaverse”, the virtual world it wants people to work and play in. Frances Haugen, the Facebook whistleblower, has raised serious concerns about more intrusive surveillance and data gathering in the metaverse. There is also the risk of psychological damage, she argues: if we are better looking and have better clothes and a nicer home in the metaverse, how will we feel when we leave? “If virtual worlds are controlled by corporations, as they seem to be right now, will that lead to potentially dystopian realities where the corporations are controlling everything in our environments? I think there are obvious reasons to worry about that,” Chalmers says. It is unlikely everyone will turn to VR, and some people, Chalmers says, will still value sheer physicality. “There may be a sense of authenticity in interacting in our original biological form. But it’s hard to see why sheer physicality should make the difference between a meaningful life and a meaningless life,” he writes. “In the long term, virtual worlds may have most of what is good about the nonvirtual world. Given all the ways in which virtual worlds may surpass the nonvirtual world, life in virtual worlds will often be the right life to choose.” • This article was amended on 18 January 2022. An earlier headline described Chalmers as a US philosopher; to clarify, he is an Australian philosopher based in the US.Like their previous cinema and gallery-based collaborations, this latest work by co-directors Joana Hadjithomas and Khalil Joreige (A Perfect Day, I Want to See) tackles the painful legacy of the civil war and ongoing troubles of their homeland Lebanon. But while Memory Box playfully incorporates different media and filmic textures (8mm and 16mm footage, still photographs that turn into mini-animations, and the like) into its story, as did the co-directors’ earlier work, ultimately it is an eminently accessible feature film about three generations living through intense trauma and coming out the other side, mostly intact. That hopeful note resonates with a literal brightness as the last images capture the sun rising over Beirut, the raggedly indomitable city at the centre of the story and is effectively another character here. The action properly starts in the present day in Montreal where teenager Alex (Paloma Vauthier) lives with her mother Maia (Rim Turki) and grandmother Teta (Clemence Sabbagh). One snowy Christmas Eve, a huge box of journals, notebooks, cassette tapes and photographs arrives from France, all memorabilia that Maia sent from Beirut to her friend Liza in Paris while the Lebanese civil war of the 1980s was raging. (Some of the contents belonged originally to Hadjithomas.) Afraid of the painful memories and long submerged secrets that the material might reveal, Alex is forbidden by her grandmother and Maia from looking at the box’s contents. Of course, like one of Bluebeard’s wives in the fairytale, she goes ahead and dives in. Consequently, she learns how the teenage Maia (played by Manal Issa in flashbacks) clashed with her parents, got obsessed with guys and her own looks, partied and experienced joy in a time when not only were there no mobile phones or WhatsApp, but there was a war going on with constant bombings and militia-run checkpoints where people were frequently killed. (You’d almost think that Hadjithomas and Joreige constructed the film as a service to contemporary parents dealing with privileged first-world teens complaining about trivial problems such as poor wifi or revoked car access.) In all seriousness though, this is a film with a deep reservoir of empathy for all its characters. While the oldest generation find themselves racked between the conventional expectations of the past and the gravest traumas of the times, the youngest are just as confused and lost, their pain no less real even if the causes seem less dramatic. Edited with minute attentiveness, the film switches back and forth between time periods adroitly in a way that always moves the story forward, while the outstanding performances from the whole ensemble, especially the watchful Vauthier and the fierce Issa, anchor the film. • Memory Box is released on 21 January in cinemas and on digital platforms.In my neighbourhood, there’s a “dark kitchen” – a warehouse run by a major takeaway platform, housing cooks for eight or nine restaurants. I probably wouldn’t have noticed it, were it not for the dog. He has the tenacity and skills of a truffle hunting pig – but for chicken. He could sniff out a wing buried under a rock encased in nuclear waste. Nine different cuisines, involving new and exciting ways to fancy up poultry, is like a siren going off in his head – complete sensory overload. The delivery guys, waiting outside in a snaking line with their electric bikes, like a scene from John Steinbeck with extra garlic, all say hello to him, and he enters a battle between his primal appetite and, to give him his due, his friendly manners. The appetite always wins. “Must get in the building,” say his straining neck muscles and the eyeballs nearly popping clean out of his head. “No time to lose!” Yesterday, as I was going through this daily wrestle, a man came up and asked what I thought of my dog lead. “Well,” I embarked. “I only bought it because he snapped through the last one, which was made of chain metal, trying to kill a duck. So, sure, this is parachute material, every strand designed to withstand 500kg or whatever. But also he is essentially a Minotaur dressed in a fleece, so who knows how long it can last?” “I only ask,” he replied, “because I make the lead.” “I wish you’d said that to begin with: I would have just said something nice instead of giving you my life story.” “I like to get an honest opinion,” he replied. “Dark kitchens” are also known as “shadow kitchens”, “ghost kitchens” and “cloud kitchens”. Every one of those terms, apart from “cloud”, sounds nefarious – a black-ops scenario where maybe they’re making a chicken wrap, or maybe people are yelling expletives at each other and not allowed to go to the toilet. They weren’t invented for the pandemic, but have predictably boomed, particularly in London, though major platforms have also doubled their sites in Manchester and Leeds. And I’m desperate to know what goes on in them. Kitchens everywhere are famously brutal places. Chefs are generally bad tempered, a fact that, coupled with macho norms and multiple sharp or hot objects, can come off as an imminent threat to everyone else’s safety. Hours are unbelievably long. The command structure is modelled on the French military, so if you seriously displease your superior, he’s allowed to shoot you; or at least, that’s the atmosphere. And everyone behaves as though perfection is a matter of life or death, since to behave any other way – maybe this is just food, and they can live with the odd hair in it? – would lead to chaos. All that, by the way, is just a regular, “light” kitchen, a kitchen with diners sitting five feet away. I’ve been in restaurants with open kitchens and have still seen the chef scream at the underlings and waiters start crying. If you keep all that pressure and discipline but remove the civilising influence of the neutral observer, what would that look like? Is it like an arena scene in Gladiator: fierce solidarity in the teeth of awesome peril? Or the final episode of Breaking Bad: expert cooks in chains, shuffling lifelessly from one hob to another? Or perhaps everyone is much more relaxed, freed from the glare of annoying punters, and it’s more of a carnival? I’m never going to know unless I can get in there, and how can I get in there, when even the delivery guys have to wait outside? Obviously, if the dog got in there, I’d have to bust in to retrieve him. So what I need now is for his lead to break. I need a faulty parachute. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistGOODISON NARK Benevolent owners who aren’t slow in splashing the cash? Tick. A highly decorated manager with Big Cup-winning pedigree? Tick. A swanky, plush new stadium under construction on the local docks? Tick. Joint top of the table or thereabouts after four games of the season? Tickety-tick, tick ... tick! Rewind just four months and life must have seemed pretty boss for your average Evertonian who might have been pootling around Bootle. Like a reverse Mike Ashley, majority shareholder Farhad Moshiri seemed to have the best interests of the club at heart, was happy to hose money on new players and had replaced one heavyweight European manager with another, albeit a man not everyone was prepared to welcome because of his association with Liverpool. Of course that was then and this is now, a day after Agent Rafa’s dismissal following an embarrassing defeat against Norwich. The latest in a long run of largely diabolical performances that has yielded just two league wins from 15 matches, with the team plummeting to 16th in the table, it was the nadir of an already awful season. “Everton Football Club can confirm the departure of Rafael Benítez as first team manager,” harrumphed a short statement issued by the club. “Benítez, who joined Everton in June 2021 has left the club with immediate effect. An update on a permanent replacement will be made in due course.” Short and brutally to the point, the terse announcement made no mention of assorted knack to key players which had blighted Rafa’s time in charge, pointedly failed to thank him for his admittedly feeble efforts and certainly didn’t wish him well for the future. In summary: “Sling it! And don’t let those Goodison gates hit your backside on the way out.” Having picked up his P45, Rafa returned home and fired off a comparatively epic blog in which he pointed his Big Finger Of Blame at a lack of transfer funds, injuries, the impatience of his employers and Uncle Tom Cobley for the almighty mess in which Everton currently find themselves. And while there is plenty of blame for the current shambles to go around, Rafa did not seem prepared to accept any of it. So what now for Everton, who find themselves looking for their seventh boss in six years? Belgium manager Bobby M is the current underwhelming favourite for the gig, despite having previously been fired by the current regime. While Wayne Rooney, Big Dunc and Frank Lampard have also been mentioned. Moshiri is also known to be an ardent admirer of José Mourinho, who could be in line to trouser his latest multi-million payout from Roma any day now. If only to please those of us who are intrigued to see how much gas there might be left in this particular explosion, we implore Everton’s owner to give it to Big Dunc until such time as the Special One becomes available. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Nick Ames is following Cape Verde 0-3 Cameroon in the Africa Cup of Nations right now and join Will Unwin for gong-by-gong updates from the Fifa Best awards at 6pm GMT. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I’ve had a couple of moments when I’ve been up there this season. It was a special moment. I hope we do the nation proud. [Sierra Leone] always rises but our job’s not done” – England one-cap wonder Steven Caulker, who is a new and immediately integral part of the Afcon underdogs’ defence, on how he ended up surging forwards to set up the equalising goal against Ivory Coast that gave them a chance, against all odds, of making the last 16. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your listening gear around the latest Football Weekly podcast. FIVER LETTERS “José Mourinho to Everton will be the next ‘logical’ step in the Premier League’s confirmed belief in Da Vinci’s perpetual motion machine” – Krishna Moorthy. “According to the French Revolutionary Calendar, Sunday was the 26th day of the month of Nivose, the day set aside for the celebration of Tin. I trust that The Fiver clan enjoyed the day” – Richard O’Hagan. “When I was a nipper I enjoyed The Bionic Man on telly, the story of the handsome and athletic Steve Austin, an astronaut who was bashed up when his spaceship crashed. But the government-sanctioned surgery on Austin, and the boffins rebuilt various bits of him with machine parts, transforming him into a cyborg like specimen with superhuman powers. I was a little sceptical, even at my tender age, but it was fun to watch. As a man stricken in years, it’s fun to watch the oil money-sanctioned surgery of Newcastle United, but suddenly even Austin’s transformation is believable” – Lindsay Williams. “With the drinking culture in Downing Street seeming to be as lively and unhealthy as mid-90s Arsenal, I think I may have found something for Arsène Wenger to do (aside from attempting to knack the World Cup and the laws of the game). Some of those cabinet ministers really look like they could benefit from the increase in broccoli intake that Wenger’s appointment would bring” – Neil McGwyre. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Neil McGwyre. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang is returning from the Africa Cup of Nations after doctors detected cardiac lesions following his recovery from Covid. Christian Eriksen could make a return to the Premier League with Brentford, to work with fellow Dane Thomas Frank. Over 80,000 tickets have been sold for El Clásico between Barcelona and Real Madrid in the Women’s Big Cup quarter-final. Fresh from being successful in getting Sunday’s north London derby with Tottenham postponed for lack of numbers, Arsenal have loaned Pablo Marì to Udinese. They are due to play Liverpool in the Rumbelows Cup on Thursday. Real Madrid collected the Spanish Super Duper Pot by beating Athletic Bilbao 2-0 in Saudi Arabia, with Luka Modric, 87, scoring the opener. And Diego Costa, still only 33, is now a free agent after cancelling his contract with Atlético Mineiro. “Thank you so much for being part of my childhood dream of playing in Brazilian football and winning titles,” he roared at the end of a marathon five-month spell. STILL WANT MORE? We have talking points from the Premier League and Women’s Super League for you to get your teeth into. Torino are the Megadeth of Serie A, writes Nicky Bandini. Yann Sommer is saving penalties but he cannot save Borussia Mönchengladbach alone, according to Andy Brassell. Even Bordeaux’s sponsor thinks they are terrible, explains Ligue Urrrrrrn afficionado Eric Devin. Rafa has gone but Everton still have a lot of problems to deal with, argues floating football brain in a jar Jonathan Wilson. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! HE’LL ALWAYS HAVE HIS SALT AND PEPPER SHAKERSWe can’t have clean politics if politics is awash with money from obscure sources. That’s why MPs have today tabled the “Pandora amendments” to the elections bill to stop millions of pounds pouring into British political parties from secretive offshore locations. Thanks to the Guardian’s courageous reporting of the Pandora papers, we now know the staggering scale of generous donors with offshore accounts and a fondness for a Brexiteering Tory party. Take the Chernukhins. Lubov Chernukhin has now donated £2.1m to the Conservative party. Yet the BBC revealed her husband, Vladimir Chernukhin (appointed deputy chairman of Vnesheconombank by Vladimir Putin) received $8m from Suleiman Kerimov, a Russian billionaire who has been sanctioned by the US treasury on the grounds of his associations with the Russian government. The transfer came on 29 April 2016, shortly before the majority of Lubov Chernukhin’s donations to the Conservatives. (She has denied ever receiving money deriving from Kerimov, and says that her Tory donations “have never been tainted by Kremlin or any other influence”.) Then there’s Alexander Temerko, who operated at the top of the Russian arms industry and had connections high up in the Kremlin before moving to the UK in 2005. OpenDemocracy reported that he donated more than £1.2m to the Tories between 2012 and 2019. Next there’s Mohamed Amersi who, with his partner, has given £793,000 to the Conservative party. As the BBC reported, Amersi advised one of the parties involved in “one of Europe’s biggest corruption scandals”, which saw $220m being paid to a Gibraltar-based company that was secretly owned through an offshore company by Gulnara Karimova, the daughter of the then president of Uzbekistan, Islam Karimov. (Amersi has denied any wrongdoing.) The Financial Times reported that Amersi “received $4m from a company he knew to be secretly owned by a powerful Russian who was at the time a senior member of Vladimir Putin’s regime” – Leonid Reiman, then Putin’s telecoms minister. In response, Amersi said he “wasn’t aware” that Reiman owned the company, and he has always maintained that his donation to the Conservatives came from his own UK profits. Meanwhile, some generous donors are good friends with the new Tory chairman, “Bonanza” Ben Elliot, who has promised the wealthy access to Tory politicians in exchange for donations. Right now, Britain is defenceless to stop this tide. Carole Cadwalladr’s investigations helped expose the fact that Arron Banks’s donations to Leave.EU were financed with multimillion-pound loans from his Isle of Man-based firm, Rock Holdings. The National Crime Agency eventually dropped its investigation but failed to explain just how the money arrived in Rock Holdings in the first place. Bluntly, why didn’t it tell us where the cash came from? Surely we have a right to know? The Electoral Commission was so worried by the NCA’s conclusion in the Banks case that it warned the outcome raised concerns about the “apparent weakness” in the law that risks allowing “overseas funds into UK politics”. That’s why a cross-party group of MPs has tabled the “Pandora amendments” to insist that party donations must come from profits made in the UK, and to establish a new call-in regime that allows the Electoral Commission to investigate suspicious donations on national security grounds. The government has just introduced this regime for investments in critical national infrastructure, so why not “investments” in political parties too? When it has been approached with questions about the provenance of certain donations, the Conservative party has said that fundraising is a “legitimate part” of the democratic process, and that all donations have been properly declared to the Electoral Commission. Yet the warnings are loud and clear. Last month, the Chatham House thinktank warned that “Westminster – and the Conservative parliamentary party in particular – may be open to influence from wealthy donors who originate from post-Soviet kleptocracies, and who may retain fealty to these regimes”. Parliament’s intelligence select committee has questioned whether the Electoral Commission has sufficient powers to ensure the security of democratic processes where hostile state threats are involved. “If it [the Electoral Commission] is to tackle foreign interference, then it must be given the necessary legislative powers,” the committee concluded. The time for delay is over. It is now time to act. Liam Byrne is the Labour MP for Birmingham Hodge HillThe police, crime, sentencing and courts bill that has sparked “kill the bill” demonstrations across the country is a “proportionate” response to recent protests such as those by Insulate Britain, the former justice secretary Robert Buckland has said. Protesters took to the streets in cities across the UK at the weekend to rally against the police and crime bill, which is reaching its final stages in parliament and will be considered by the House of Lords on Monday. Sections of the bill have been condemned by human rights activists as an attack on the right to protest, with campaigners arguing that, without changes, the right to peaceful protest could be curbed by legislation. Defending the bill and its amendments, Buckland told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme he believed some of the characterisation of the new powers was misplaced. “What I see from government is reference to proportionate use of power, and that word is vitally important here,” the Conservative MP said. He added that “clearly the engagement of the rights of protesters with the rights of the rest of the public to go about their lawful business is a delicate balance to be struck”. In the light of some recent protests, such as those on the M25 by Insulate Britain protesters, he said: “I think this bill does strike the right balance.” Buckland said it was better to have “delineated powers defined by parliament which allow the police to intervene with the power of arrest to create offences that can be dealt with in the magistrates court that specifically deal with things like gluing yourself to the road or locking yourself on to each other”. But Shami Chakrabarti, the Labour peer and former director of Liberty, told the Today programme that calling the measures “proportionate” contradicted what Amnesty International and other rights groups had said. “Let’s be clear. All of these measures are specifically directed at non-violent protest, making it a criminal offence to breach a condition, a police condition, on a protest whether you knew about it or not,” she said. “That can include shoppers and members of the public who weren’t even part of the protest.” She said the government had, in effect, tabled the equivalent of a new additional bill and dropped it into the police bill, which was what the Lords was to debate on Monday. “That included new offences of attaching yourself, locking on, so vague it could criminalise people with bike locks or who link arms with each other in the street. “Already, and for many years, the police have powers to intervene with obstruction of the highway. They have very broad public order power already, so says Amnesty and everybody else. But under the new measures they would be able to stop and search people without suspicion, not because they feared knife crime or terrorism, but because they fear noise and impact and disruption, which of course is inherent in any peaceful non-violent protest.” The new measures, she said, “give ever broader power to the home secretary and the police to shut down peaceful dissent, voices with which the government does not agree. It’s one law for those with whom the government agrees, and another for everybody else. And these conditions have been compared to Belarus and Russia by Amnesty International.” The former chief constable of Manchester police Sir Peter Fahy said the bill would “further politicise” policing. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s The World at One, Fahy said: “It includes a lot of subjective terms [such as] inconvenience, noise [and] disruption; these are notoriously difficult to define. And if really the ill that the government is trying to deal with is just the level of disruption that some of the public are concerned about, just by putting in more laws and stronger sentences, that won’t actually deter it.” Fahy said police would resist any slide towards a “police state”, feared by some critics of the bill, “because that’s not the British style of policing”. “Police also know that, as we saw in the Sarah Everard vigil, even when they do act within the law and within their powers, if the public and public opinion, and indeed even the home secretary, don’t like it, they will criticise the police and say it’s too harsh,” he said. “I think actually what you’ll find is the police will get more and more criticism but they are not going to use the level of force that they think is not going to be supported by the courts or by public opinion.”ENGLAND Jimmy Anderson His final Ashes series in Australia (surely) was bookended from the sidelines. In his three Tests, he was typically parsimonious but only at his barn-storming best at Melbourne. Blocked out that final over at Sydney. 6 Jonny Bairstow Grabbed his chance, scoring England’s one century of the tour: a gloriously brave and bombastic innings at Sydney. Batted well in the second innings as well to haul England to a draw. 7 Sam Billings The road-trip king and a breath of fresh air. Kept tidily, tiggerishly enthusiastic behind the stumps and made a jaunty 29 in the first innings at Hobart. 5 Stuart Broad Controversially wore the fluorescent bib during the first Test when David Warner scored 94, and at Melbourne. Tireless with the ball in hand and endlessly enthusiastic, if vocal at his frustration with the batting. 7 Rory Burns Posted the highest opening partnership of the tour with Zak Crawley in the final innings, but has little else to cling onto. Torpedoed with the first ball of the series. 2 Jos Buttler Nearly batted England to safety at Adelaide, and took some great catches (though dropped a few sitters). But found increasingly ludicrous ways of getting out. Injury was a sad end to his tour, and possibly his Test career. 4 Zak Crawley Looks a million dollars on song and has gumption. The weaknesses outside off stump remain but a long-term spot is his if he can just learn to be more circumspect. 5 Haseeb Hameed Ran his heart out in the field but, by the end, seemed to have largely forgotten how to score runs. Back to Trent Bridge to lick his wounds and (hopefully) come again. 2 Jack Leach Seems destined to be chronically mishandled by this England setup. Picked for the wrong game and left out for the right one. Grew in confidence at Sydney and left stranded on a hat-trick. 4 Dawid Malan Gave England’s middle-order some stability in two hundred-plus partnerships with Root early on in the series. Fell away towards the end and sadly missed the birth of his first child, born six weeks early. 5 Ollie Pope A tour to forget for England’s most promising young batsman™. Needs to find the right coach and psychologist to help him translate that immense talent into Test runs. Kept brightly when called for. 2 Ollie Robinson An undoubted asset for England, and has the knack of taking wickets, but must get fit quick so he can run in with as much enthusiasm for his third spell as for his first. 5 Joe Root Looked a broken man by the end. Still England’s highest scorer in the series, though that Australian century remains elusive. Must bear some responsibility for tactical errors but hampered throughout by a Spillikins top order. 6 Ben Stokes Came to the tour with no cricket in his back catalogue, and it showed. As stoical as ever but not incisive with the ball. Batted beautifully in Sydney on the counter attack. 4 Chris Woakes Didn’t manage to shake his reputation as a bowler most suited to home conditions. Considerably more successful with the bat than most of the top order and not afraid to have a biff. 4 Mark Wood Justly rewarded at last with 6-37 in Australia’s final innings of the series. Whole-hearted, fiery and England’s leading wicket-taker. His snorter to Usman Khawaja was England’s ball of the Ashes. 8 England’s man of the series: Mark Wood AUSTRALIA Scott Boland Grabbed his chance, doing for Australia what he has been doing for Victoria: hurtling in, hitting the deck, darting it around. England were hypnotised at Melbourne and Boland finished with 18 wickets at 9.55. 10 Alex Carey Won a last-minute call-up after Tim Paine withdrew. Started well but his form dipped towards the end, both with bat and gloves. That final innings at Hobart probably bought him another series. 5 Pat Cummins A series sprinkled with stardust after his sudden elevation. He was the series’ leading wicket-taker and one end of an electric spell of fast bowling that crazy Melbourne evening. 10 Cameron Green The baggy green Botticelli, Green burned with the brightness of the future. Ridiculously talented with both bat and ball and swallow-like at gully. Carefully under-bowled by Cummins. 9 Marcus Harris Has an odd bunny-hop trigger-movement but top scored at Melbourne in a low-scoring thriller. Unlucky to be dropped when he’d still make a composite team of the two sides. 5 Josh Hazlewood Bowled nicely in his one Test before injury ruled him out. England might have thought his absence would make their life easier – they were wrong. 7 Travis Head The series’ leading run-scorer, he sparkled from his 152 in the first Test to the counter-attacking England heart-breaker in the last, sailing through enforced Covid isolation en route. 9 Usman Khawaja Another Australian to grab his chance with both hands, a fairytale comeback with two blistering centuries at Sydney full of why-the-hell-not flourishes. Looked delighted to be back at the grand age of 35. 9 Marnus Labuschagne As quirky as ever and a constant thorn in England’s side. His patient 103 at Adelaide, his first Ashes century, took him past Joe Root as the World’s No 1 batsman. Not to be trusted with DRS decisions. 7 Nathan Lyon Such was Australia’s dominance, and England’s brittleness, that he wasn’t always needed. Still picked up 16 wickets and took a humdinger of a catch to dismiss Stokes at Hobart. 8 Michael Neser Got a chance at last at Adelaide, in the absence of Cummins, and picked up a wicket with just his second ball, as Hameed chipped it to midwicket. Bustled effectively. 6 Jhye Richardson After a tough first-innings, he took a five-fer in the second during a cameo appearance at Adelaide. His ability to skid the ball through caused England plenty of headaches. 7 Steve Smith A quiet series but an important one in his rehabilitation, leading Australia to victory at Adelaide while Cummins was in quarantine. His leg-break to Leach nearly took Australia over the line at Sydney. 6 Mitchell Starc Started the series by crushing England’s hopes in a single ball. Continued in the same vein, ever-threatening, and bowled with searing menace that Melbourne evening. Cricviz’s most threatening opening spell since records started. 9 David Warner Crushed English hopes with 94 at Brisbane but his form dribbled away, finishing with a pair at Hobart. By then, though, the Ashes were a long time won. 7 Australia’s man of the series: Pat CumminsThe Royal Navy is not expected to pursue a controversial Home Office policy of pushing back refugee dinghies towards France once the military is given responsibility for small boat Channel crossings. Navy sources said officers had little interest in carrying out the “pushback” policy put forward by Priti Patel, the home secretary, but which is opposed by trade unions and charities, which argue it is illegal. “I’m not sure pushback would work; it’s not part of our ethics,” a navy source said, arguing that British personnel were trained to respond to mayday calls, to save lives and help tackle crises at sea. As part of “Operation Red Meat” – policies designed to save Boris Johnson’s premiership – a beleaguered No 10 indicated that the navy would soon be given the lead responsibility for dealing with refugees crossing the Channel by boat, stripping the responsibility away from Patel and the Home Office. A naval source said they believed one of the immediate tasks would be to restore safety to the waters around Britain, after 27 people, mostly from the Kurdish region of Iraq, died in November attempting to come to the UK. “We can’t have people drowning in the Channel,” the source added. Options are being prepared for Downing Street by R Adm Mike Utley, the commander of the UK strike force. There are no plans to start deploying warships, which would be seen as disproportionate, and the focus is expected to be on ensuring the existing Home Office Border Force fleet operates more efficiently. A source confirmed reports that Downing Street policy experts had looked into using powerful sonic weapons to turn back the boats. The plan, first reported by Sky News, was to use long-range acoustic devices, such as those used in the US for crowd control, deployed in the Channel. However, the use of sound cannon, which emit noise powerful enough to induce vomiting, was rejected by the Home Office. Patel has endured months of criticism from the Conservative benches over the refugee crossings, which have continued through the winter. Earlier, Whitehall sources had said Patel had been in talks for weeks about the involvement of the military. But defence insiders said Utley had only been working on the plans for about 10 days. The military also recognises that it would be difficult to deter refugees who had reached the stage of wanting to cross the Channel. Reports have claimed that plans are also being drawn up to send people to countries such as Ghana and Rwanda for processing and resettlement – and that the military could also transport people to offshore processing centres, as proposed in the government’s nationality and borders bill, or even operate deportation flights of foreign criminals. So far the controversial pushback tactic has not been used. The Guardian disclosed in November that government lawyers had advised that the odds of successfully defending a challenge in the courts against the lawfulness of plans to send vessels carrying people back to France was “less than 30%”. The Public and Commercial Services Union (PCS), which represents some border and immigration officials, has said it “totally opposes” the policy and threatened strike action. It has also joined the Care4Calais charity to seek a judicial review of the tactic, which it claims is illegal. A government source confirmed that the plans had been discussed and brought forward, and said it would be up to the Ministry of Defence (MoD) to determine operational deployments. “The home secretary called for the military to defend UK territorial waters against illegal migration in August 2020, when the first request for support went into the MoD,” said a Whitehall source. The moves follow a record 28,300 migrants and refugees crossing the Channel to the UK last year, more than three times the 8,400 who crossed in 2020. There is no sign of a decline this year – 581 people have already crossed this month already, more than double the total for January last year. Mark Serwotka, head of the PCS union, said: “Putting the military in charge of operational command of Border Force is a ridiculous gimmick. It is a macho political ploy designed to distract attention from Boris Johnson’s ailing premiership. Our members do not need military oversight to do their jobs.” Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, said: “Using the military to repel [vulnerable people] and seeking to expel them offshore is cruel and inhumane. It’s a desperate move by a government that isn’t able to find solutions that will ensure an orderly, manageable and fair asylum system.” Other military assets, such as British army Watchkeeper surveillance drones, may also be used to better monitor the busy Channel area for dinghies and other small vessels carrying refugees from northern France. The MoD said: “Unacceptable numbers of people continue to make the dangerous Channel crossings, and last November’s tragic deaths serve as the strongest reminder of the need to stop them.” Further details on how to deal with crossings would be made known “in due course”, it added.The treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, marked Martin Luther King Day with a speech acknowledging that the US economy “has never worked fairly for Black Americans or, really, for any American of color”. Interpreting the late civil rights leader’s I Have a Dream speech, Yellen said: “Dr King knew that economic injustice was bound up in the larger injustice he fought against.” In her comments, recorded for delivery at the Rev Al Sharpton’s National Action Network breakfast in Washington, Yellen noted the financial metaphors the Rev Martin Luther King Jr used in his address, delivered on 28 August 1963, on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington DC. Monday would have been the 93rd birthday of King, who was just 39 when he was assassinated in 1968 while helping sanitation workers strike for better pay and workplace safety in Memphis, Tennessee. King, Yellen noted, had referred to the guarantees in the Declaration of Independence as “a promise that all men, yes, Black men as well as white men, would be guaranteed the unalienable rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness”. “It is obvious today that America has defaulted on this promissory note insofar as her citizens of color are concerned,” King said. Later in his address, the civil rights leader used the metaphor of a bad check. “In a sense we’ve come to our nation’s capital to cash a check,” he said. “Instead of honoring this sacred obligation, America has given the Negro people a bad check, a check which has come back marked ‘insufficient funds’.” King’s metaphor, an accusation in blunt economic terms, Yellen said, showed that he “knew that economic injustice was bound up in the larger injustice”. Yellen added that the Biden administration was working to change that, “to ensure that neither the figurative bank of justice, nor any literal economic institution, fails to work for people of color”. In her remarks, Yellen noted the steps the Biden administration had taken to address economic inequities, including building equity into the American Rescue Plan so that communities of color would get pandemic relief, and injecting $9bn into community development financial institutions and minority depository institutions. “There is still much more work Treasury needs to do to narrow the racial wealth divide,” she said.Five years ago the world felt a very different place. Pandemics belonged to disaster movies, the UK was reeling from the divisive Brexit vote but, with Theresa May newly installed as prime minister, the hope was that she might succeed in a soft Brexit and, in London, Simon Rattle’s imminent arrival as the London Symphony Orchestra’s chief conductor was eagerly anticipated and along with it the city’s transformative new Centre for Music. Hamburg’s Elbphilharmonie opened in January 2017 with a glittering gala attended by celebrities and dignitaries. The spectacular concert hall was praised for its bold design, its superb acoustics and its “exceptionally exceptional exceptionalness”. But in London the hope – back then – was that the city’s own new concert hall would one day also be a world-leading arts venue to compete with Hamburg’s. January 2022 and our world has been reshaped by Covid. Brexit was indeed “got done”; Simon Rattle came, saw, but didn’t conquer, and London’s Centre for Music – the “Tate Modern of classical music” has been quietly axed. Meanwhile, in Hamburg the Elbphilharmonie is celebrating its fifth anniversary with a week-long festival – plans much scaled back due to Covid restrictions, but with visiting orchestras including our own LSO, plus Daniel Barenboim and the Staatskapelle Berlin, and the actual anniversary date celebrated by a concert of exclusively contemporary music, it is ambitious and confident, and a remarkable achievement given the strictures of the country’s 2G+ rules. When the building opened it was mired in controversy. More than six years late, it was many hundreds of millions of euros over budget – costs had risen tenfold, taking the final bill to €866m, of which €789m came from the city. None denied its architectural splendours, but had its long and agonising birth ensured that it was toxic, an eye-wateringly expensive white elephant funded by public money, programming classical music concerts for an elite; or would Hamburgers take it to their hearts and learn to love this modernist marvel perched on the banks of the Elbe? The answer seems to be a resounding vote for the latter. With “Elphi”, as it is affectionately known, the city has a new centre of gravity. More than three million concert-goers to date have visited; concert audiences in the city have tripled and subscription concert-series subscribers have quadrupled. And, 80% of these audiences are from Hamburg itself. Meanwhile, it’s estimated that by spring of this year, 15 million will have visited the Plaza, the viewing platform 37 metres above ground level. “It has become a symbol of the city,” says Alan Gilbert, the US-born principal conductor of the NDR Elbphilharmonie, the hall’s resident orchestra. “People may never set foot inside the walls of the concert hall or care about the prestigious visiting orchestras for whom the city is now a must-stop on their itineraries, but they can still feel that it is something about which the city can feel proud.” As well as most of the world’s top orchestras and soloists, there have been concerts by stars from the wider musical world including Solange, the National, Rufus and Martha Wainwright, Caetano Veloso, and – in surely one of the most spectacular concert locations ever – techno marching band Meute performed 110 metres up, on the roof (one of many concerts available to watch on YouTube). And what then of the future? The gala concert that celebrated the anniversary featured four works by living composers, the prior evening’s concert also was weighted towards contemporary music, with Jörg Widmann sharing the bill with Beethoven. Few concert halls anywhere in the world would have the confidence to programme such an evening, let alone find every seat filled. But there’s plenty of work to be done still. Does a concert of contemporary music in 2022 that features only white male composers and a week in which every concert is conducted by a male conductor really represent a future-looking organisation? Gilbert acknowledges there’s room for improvement. “How to make sure we show enough representation of female composers and composers of colour … and not having enough female conductors is a huge factor in our conversations about programming,” he says. “It’s a new area and we have a long way to go. It’s about balance. We need to keep our advocacy of composers who have been important and add a new dimension to the way we think about things.” The building’s environmental credentials, too, do not make for comfortable reading in 2022, but, unlike the programming, very little can be done about that. “The hall was planned in 2004-06, at a time when energy use and environmental questions were not so important. It’s not up to standards that it would be had it been planned 10 years later,” admits Christoph Lieben-Seutter, the venue’s general and artistic director. “Obviously we do everything we can do with how we use resources, recycling garbage, and using only green energy,” he adds. An initiative in place since the launch offsets emissions (via non-profit organisation atmosfair) of air travel of visiting artists and staff business trips. “But yes, the building itself could be greener, let’s put it that way. We can’t change the glass facade – one of the features of the building.” Indeed, the dazzling curved glass facade that catches the reflections of the sky, the water and the city lights does make this one of the architectural marvels of the 21st century. Will the city get their money back? This seems unlikely, but the success of the project is not measurable in economic terms. “The idea that you have to justify such expenditure by showing the economic impact is fundamentally misguided,” says Gilbert. “But … I think it’s ultimately measurable that this has brought a new vitality into not just the cultural scene but the city itself. People are not talking so much now about the cost overruns because Hamburg has an icon.” • This article was amended on 18 January 2022 to refer to people from Hamburg as Hamburgers, not Hamburgians. • Stream the 11 January anniversary concert (featuring John Adams, Thomas Ades and Esa-Pekka Salonen) here. The Hamburg international music festival begins on 28 April.Amazon and Visa appear to have agreed an 11th-hour resolution to their bitter dispute after the online retailer told customers they can continue using Visa credit cards on the site. In November, Amazon told customers that from 19 January it would stop accepting payments made with UK-issued Visa credit cards. At the time, Amazon blamed its decision on “the high fees Visa charges for processing credit card transactions”. Since then the two companies have been engaged in what has been described as a “game of corporate chicken”. However, on Monday morning, Amazon started sending affected customers emails telling them they would be able to continue to use their Visa credit cards to pay for items, and for Amazon Prime. “The expected change regarding the use of Visa credit cards on Amazon.co.uk will no longer take place on 19 January. We are working closely with Visa on a potential solution that will enable customers to continue using their Visa credit cards on Amazon.co.uk,” the email stated. “Should we make any changes related to Visa credit cards, we will give you advance notice. Until then, you can continue to use Visa credit cards, debit cards, Mastercard, American Express, and Eurocard as you do today.” Almost 90% of Britons shop at Amazon, and its analysts have estimated Amazon Prime membership in the UK to be about 21 million. Last month, it was claimed that Amazon faced losing nearly £1.4bn from UK shoppers had Visa credit cards been banned from the site. However, Visa too would have lost a huge chunk of revenue as customers would have been forced to use other cards. It now seems that the crisis talks that are thought to have happened over the weekend have borne fruit, and that a holding deal appears to have been put in place, while a longer-term solution is worked on. Had the ban gone ahead, it would have hugely inconvenienced millions of people who use a Visa credit card issued by providers including Barclaycard. Amazon Prime would have lost hundreds of thousands of subscribers as payments lapsed. A Visa spokesperson said: “Amazon customers can continue to use Visa cards on Amazon.co.uk after January 19 while we work closely together to reach an agreement.”Last week, my younger neighbour brought me a copy of a Mary Stewart novel from 1962 that she had found in a charity shop. Never having heard of her, she had thoroughly enjoyed the romantic novel. On opening it, I was transported back to the 1950s and 60s, when my family shared the latest Mary Stewart and Georgette Heyer books. They are treasured, calming influences in these troubled times. It’s now John le Carré downstairs and romantic novels upstairs (Why we’re falling in love with romance novels all over again, 16 January). Jean Jackson Seer Green, Buckinghamshire • In the 1960s, a fleet of private buses called the Gypsy Queen was based in our mining village of Langley Park, and served the area around Durham city (Letters, 14 January). My father told us that they were named in honour of the racehorse whose prize money funded the enterprise. The company motto, displayed on the front of every bus, was Non sibi sed omnibus (Not for one but for all). Malcolm Abbs London • If my energy company sent me a decent pair of wool socks in a good colour I’d be delighted (E.ON says sorry for sending socks to customers with advice to keep warm, 144 January). But cheap, white, petrochemical-based polyester with a tacky logo is another matter. Just a waste of energy, in fact. Judith Martin Winchester, Hampshire • The “tearless” onion has been here for a long time (Report, 11 January). It’s known as a shallot and can be used very well instead of onions in most recipes. Neil Angrave London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In response to the letter by David Green (12 January) and the subsequent one from a mother regarding her unvaccinated autistic son (13 January), I feel both have made very understandable points and it is clear that frustration is the enemy here. We have known about the dangers of misinformation for years, and these are now being felt keenly by the huge numbers choosing not to be vaccinated. Emmanuel Macron’s approach of making life more difficult for the unvaccinated (Report, 4 January) makes my heart sink. Surely that will only feed the misinformation beast and validate the screams of “don’t trust the government”. There is great power in hindsight, of course, but it is apparent that governments had ample warning that misinformation would be a problem for vaccine uptake. It seems that misinformation has been dumped in the “too difficult, with insufficient political gain” box, and we are reaping the consequences. My father-in-law is unvaccinated by choice. I do not think he should be punished, nor do I think he deserves much sympathy. I simply wish that governments would offer a sensible and coherent strategy for tackling misinformation and mitigating its effects. Name and address supplied • Comparisons between Covid and health conditions due to poor lifestyle choices are flawed. Poor lifestyle choices do not, in the main, carry the risk of infecting and possibly killing others. It is this that makes vaccine opposition dangerous and why anti-vaxxers (except those with valid medical reasons) should face restrictions with regard to social and work situations while the pandemic continues. It’s their choice – infect yourself if you must, but don’t infect others. Dave Green Northampton • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As I read Polly Toynbee’s article on the government’s intention to end the BBC’s licence fee (The BBC must defend itself with all its might against this mortal threat, 16 January), I felt a sense of despair rarely experienced in my 70-plus years on this earth. Once again, this government is continuing along the path taken by so many corrupt and failing states by taking away yet another fundamental pillar that helps create a strong democratic society – access to a fair, independent and balanced news media prepared to inform, educate and challenge. This is just one aspect of the government’s wider agenda designed to restrict all that is essential for a robust and healthy democracy. The list is extensive: cronyism through the awarding of contracts without due process; legislation restricting the democratic right to peaceful protest; manipulating voting processes and constituency boundaries for party political gain; the prorogation of parliament to avoid scrutiny and debate; interfering with and undermining the authority of those implementing judicial and disciplinary processes. The BBC, with all its faults and failings, is one of this country’s glittering achievements – respected and valued worldwide. If we allow its voice to be diminished, the standing and reputation of this country will itself be greatly diminished. Peter Riddle Wirksworth, Derbyshire • If the licence fee goes, the BBC will be reduced to a rump broadcaster on the lines of public broadcasting in the US. Every month, all radio and TV stations will spend several days asking for donations to keep going. Radio 3 and Radio 4 will disappear as functioning entities. Radio 2 might just about survive. Local radio will disappear, with the possible exception in extremely large cities. News will be reduced to a skeleton operation reliant on press agencies. Educational broadcasting and children’s television programmes will disappear. All the science provision will dissolve. Documentaries will vanish. There will be no room to encourage new writing or music. Social information activities will cease. The BBC is not a streaming service. All the big platforms do one thing only, and often do it well. But they have no obligations to provide factual news, research, or programmes that examine in detail social issues, eg File on 4. The Tories loathe the BBC and they have always wanted to get rid of it. Abolishing the licence fee will achieve that. Philip Clayton Edgware, London • What should the BBC do next? Take the threat seriously – how? Play for the highest stakes possible. Namely, it should call the government’s bluff by mothballing its ridiculous “editorial balance” principle and start exposing, via a variety of genres, how the Tories have worked tirelessly to destroy the UK’s democratic institutions, one by one, in pursuit of the alignment of the country’s fortunes to the wilder shores of US republicanism. Dr Ian Kenway Symi, Greece • The Conservative methodology of covertly privatising our great institutions while pretending the opposite is well established: reduce spending such that services suffer, and then the public-funding model is obviously faulty and only the profit-making sector can rescue it. We’ve seen this with the railways (look where that got us), it’s happening to the NHS, and now it’s proposed with the BBC. As Jim Waterson points out (Report, 16 January), “The BBC has already made substantial cost savings … the public should prepare for the BBC to provide less high-end drama and sports coverage … This could in turn erode support for the BBC if the public no longer feel they are receiving value for money from the licence fee.” There we have it: goodbye to the BBC. Dr Richard Carter Putney, London • For many people, the BBC is as important to this country as the NHS. It is a source of honesty and integrity that is sadly lacking in politicians. The action of this government is going to come back to bite it. It should by now be fully aware that the voting public are not mugs. They will see the plans for what they are: outright political vindictiveness and a cheap smokescreen to cover their leader. Colin Barlow Tarporley, Cheshire • So “the days of the elderly being threatened with prison and bailiffs knocking on doors are over”. Those days only started when this government ended funding for free licences for the over-75s. Geoffrey Wheeler Coventry • Given the Conservative party’s apparent inability to understand for what and for whom the BBC exists, isn’t it time to consider making parliament a subscription service? Graham McCann Cambridge • So the “culture” secretary, Nadine Dorries, is freezing the BBC licence fee for two years, which will mean significant cuts before the service is eliminated. We could crowdfund a licence fee top-up for the next two years, in time for a new, properly cultured government to save our national broadcaster. Who’s in? Rina Picciotto London • This article was amended on 18 January 2022. An earlier version credited a three-paragraph letter to Dr Richard Carter when the first paragraph was actually a separate letter from Dr Ian Kenway. The latter has now been credited correctly. • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I had yet to release an album when I was invited to play the Bendigo leg of Groovin the Moo festival in May 2017. Up until point, the biggest shows I had played had been to about 400 people in Melbourne. Montaigne was on the festival lineup and she was unwell so they shuffled everyone around. Amy Shark – who was riding the wave of Adore and having a real moment – got bumped from the big tent to the main stage and they upgraded me and my band from the fucken car park or something to the big tent. It all happened quickly, so the likelihood that the information was disseminated to the entire crowd was very unlikely. We got to the gig and just before we came on I saw the tent had like 7,000 people in it. I thought: “Fuck. All these people are here to see Amy Shark and she’s not going to come on stage. It’s going to be me!” I walked on and the first thing I said was: “I’m really sorry, I’m not Amy Shark, but my name’s Alex Lahey and we’re going to play a really good show for you.” There were a few boos. Up until then, I had always played small rooms and I felt really comfortable in that domain, so it wasn’t until my mouth opened and we started performing the first song that I was like: “Holy shit, I have enormous stage fright.” I Love You Like a Brother was the opener and there’s not much room to breathe in that song. I was trying to suck in as much air as I could and keep my balance. My knees went really weak – they turned to jelly. I had that sensation where you’re simultaneously really cold and sweating. There were these big LED screens behind the stage but we hadn’t prepared anything for them, so they put up stock images of flames the entire time – it looked like some kind of Tool show with this white girl singing indie rock. I felt really dizzy and funky. It was so out of any reality I had considered – staring down the barrel of 7,000 people in front of me with flames on this screen behind me. It was like a runaway train. Once my legs stopped shaking I was trying to do my best Bruce Springsteen. He’s the ultimate arena big-crowd rock’n’roll dude. Whenever I think: “How do you capture that audience in those massive situations?” he’s the guy. I was thinking: “This is a beautiful accident and it might never happen again, so just have a great time – be in the moment and enjoy it.” The second-last song we played was You Don’t Think You Like People Like Me. It had made the Triple J Hottest 100 that year and when I saw people singing along, that’s when the “I have to win you over” mentality left and I could just enjoy the show. When the adrenaline kicks in, you let it take you away and you respond to that. I had this half-hour window where I had these people who hadn’t come to see me, but – and this was the thing that baffled me – they all stayed. I was playing a white Fender Mustang and at the end of the gig I threw my guitar to my stage tech – it was one of those rock’n’roll things I had always wanted to do. There’s a great photo where the guitar is in mid-air and going to him. It was a classic Bruce move. When we got invited back to do the entire Groovin the Moo festival tour the following year I did the same guitar trick but I didn’t throw it far enough and it just slammed straight to the ground. That guitar has now done its dash. That 2017 Groovin the Moo show was me simultaneously living out a fantasy and trying to figure out how to do it. It was the breakthrough moment – a real zero-to-hero experience. Alex Lahey’s latest single Spike the Punch is out now. See here for her upcoming tour datesImagine in November 2019 you looked into a crystal ball and foresaw a global pandemic that we would still be grappling two years later. Would have you then thought it would be a good time to buy or sell a house? You might have thought economic pandemonium and the shuttering of borders to overseas travellers would signal bad news for the housing market and thus it would be a good time to sell. After all in November 2019, the market was pretty weak and house prices were barely growing. So maybe you decided to grab the money before a crash and laugh all the way to the bank. If you did, you clearly forgot the mantra of Australia’s political class – the housing market must not falter. And so two years later in November 2021, the value of new mortgages taken out was 64% higher than it had been two years earlier: Click here if the graph does not display The raft of economic stimulus measures from the record low interest rates to the homebuilder program have propelled a surge in mortgages being taken out: If the graph does not display click here While there had been a bit of a slowing in the growth of new mortgages during the lockdown in NSW and Victoria, November saw a strong pick up of 6.9% across the nation, led by 9% in NSW and 7.9% in Victoria: If the graph does not display click here It all suggests that house prices will continue to grow strongly at least for the first half of this year. While thankfully the growth of mortgages is not at the nutty levels observed in the middle of 2020 when the value of new mortgages rose by as much as 160% over the previous year’s levels, the current growth suggests the annual rise in property prices will remain around 15%-20% for some time: If the graph does not display click here But fortunately, we have lower interest rates, right? Well … for now. As I noted last week the market very much expects interest rates to rise this year (I must admit, I am less bullish). But even still, the lowering of interest rates has not improved affordability by as much as you might expect. Across the nation the size of the average mortgage has grown strongly during the pandemic. Among the eastern states, the average new mortgage has grown between 22% and 25% since November 2019, while in Tasmania it has increased 31%: If the graph does not display click here That massive increase is not enough to overcome the drop in interest rates. In NSW, the average mortgage in November was $769,459 – just over $156,000 more than was the case two years earlier. Had you taken out a 30-year mortgage in November 2019 worth $613,334, paying the then average discounted mortgage rate of 4.15%, you would have been paying $2,981 a month in repayments. By contrast if you had taken out a $769,459 loan in November last year at a rate of 3.45% then your repayments would be $3,434 a month – $453 more: If the graph does not display click here This is the issue of housing affordability. It’s all very well to talk up low interest rates, but if the principle has increased so much as to negate the falling rates, then you are not better off. It’s always worth remembering that falling interest rates help most those who already have a loan. Those who took out a loan in Sydney 10 years ago have absolutely benefited from falling rates – their repayments are about $1,000 less – while the increase in house prices has meant new entrants are less well off: If the graph does not display click here And crucially, those who have taken out loans in the past two years will not benefit from rates falling – this is as low as they will ever get. For first-homebuyers the news is not as bad. Overwhelmingly the growth in mortgage size has come from those likely selling their house and buying a new one: If the graph does not display click here But even here the average first-homebuyer mortgage in NSW has risen 16% ($82,362) since November 2019. This has meant paying an extra $173 a month on average compared to a first-homebuyer who took out a loan two years ago. And remember that is $173 extra. The average monthly repayments in NSW on a first-homebuyer loan paying the discount mortgage rate of 3.45% are $2,557 – or nearly $31,000 a year. So yes, low interest rates make affordability better than it would have been with higher rates. But those low rates and the fiscal measures in turn increase prices and thus affect mortgage sizes. For new homebuyers it seems they always get hit either way. Greg Jericho writes on economics for Guardian AustraliaEvery time I leave the house, the refrain – phone, wallet, keys, mask – rattles around my brain while I search my bag for the essentials. Evidence that, despite how strange it felt to wear a mask way back in 2019, when we were worried about bushfire smoke inhalation, face masks have become firmly entrenched in our daily lives. Masks are proven to reduce the risk of Covid-19 transmission and help keep us safe at supermarkets and in between our table and the bathroom at restaurants, but they do need to be handled with specific care to remain effective. Bag it up Most of us are quick to remove our masks when we sit down at a cafe, but Raina MacIntyre, a professor of global biosecurity at the University of New South Wales says you should wash or sanitise your hands before you touch your mask, and only handle it by the straps or ear loops. When you’re not using your mask, rather than shoving it in your pocket or leaving it loose in your bag, put it in a ziplock or paper bag. If you have some disinfectant handy, you can give it a light spray before putting it away. Cloth no longer cuts it Although the “no touching” advice applies to both cloth and disposable masks, MacIntyre says that while cloth masks were fine for other variants, they “really do not cut it against Omicron”. This is because the Omicron variant is more transmissible, so a mask that fits and filters well provides much better protection. MacIntyre says it’s best to use P2 or N95 masks, or if these aren’t available, a blue surgical mask. In this video, occupational hygienist Kate Cole explains how to ensure you’re wearing your mask properly. When to throw a mask out According to MacIntyre, there are two factors that determine when a mask should be thrown away. The first is obvious, if a mask is “visibly damp or soiled” throw it out. The other factor is the length of time you’ve worn the mask, which MacIntyre says shouldn’t be more than eight to 10 hours. Although this should be considered “a rough guide”, she says, that can be doubled in the case of “extreme shortages”. How to dispose of a mask It should come as no surprise that disposable face masks are an environmental hazard. According to Dr Mohammad Saberian, a researcher from RMIT University, 6.8bn disposable masks are used across the globe each day. He says since disposable face masks are mainly made of non-biodegradable plastics, they could take 450 years to break down. The good news is, Saberian and his colleagues at RMIT have shown how disposable face masks could be recycled into road-making material. They suggest that once masks have been decontaminated they could be shredded and mixed with building rubble. But Saberian says, “The main hurdle to recycling face masks and waste PPE is the lack of appropriate facilities and equipment in waste recycling facilities.” Face masks in Australia are put in the rubbish bin, collected with household waste and sent to landfill. Saberian says designated bins for face masks or waste PPE should be implemented, at least for busy locations like hospitals, aged care facilities and shopping centres. But MacIntyre says for now, you should make sure you dispose of masks in the rubbish bin: “Please do not litter or leave used masks lying around.” Caring for cloth masks What about all the cloth masks we’ve begrudgingly collected? They are still better than wearing nothing, and need to be machine washed at 60C after each day’s use. That means if you are wearing cloth masks daily, you’ll need to have several on rotation. The founder of Maison Modulare, Chrys Wong, suggests machine washing “on a gentle cycle with like colours and like size articles” then using a tumble dryer, ironing or steaming the mask afterward, to provide further sterilisation. As for straps, “unfortunately, once the strap is detached from the mask itself, it’s very difficult to sew back,” she says. If you’re not handy enough with a needle and thread to unpick and resew new elastic yourself, you should take masks to your local dry cleaner or tailor to have the elastic replaced.The shortage of rapid antigen tests for consumers is being exacerbated by state and federal governments and large corporates placing mammoth orders for the kits, causing stock to be diverted from online retailers and pharmacies. Australia is in the middle of a huge Omicron wave after state and federal governments pivoted from a policy of Covid suppression to one of “living with the virus”, causing a surge in demand for rapid antigen testing kits. Prof Trent Twomey, the national president of the Pharmacy Guild, said his members were struggling to secure stock and many had had orders delayed by their suppliers. However, he said anecdotal reports from his members that stock was being requisitioned by governments had proved to be unsubstantiated. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, denied on Monday the commonwealth was requisitioning supplies of rapid antigen tests, as the Health Act allows. “It is a plain lie,” Hunt said of the allegations running rife on Twitter. “I have written to suppliers to say that was not the Australian government’s position.” But Twomey said requests for big orders, worth millions, from governments – both state and federal – have been hard for suppliers to ignore and there are numerous reports of retailers finding their stock unavailable, despite having paid for it in full and having confirmed delivery dates. Last week, the commonwealth announced $62m worth of orders for the tests under the “extreme urgency and unforeseen circumstances” provision of commonwealth purchasing rules. This appeared to coincide with several online retailers and pharmacies being told their supplies were delayed. Twomey said the pressure was also coming from states and territories, which were ordering rapid antigen tests for use in their testing sites for key workers, as well as from large companies ordering them to keep their workforces functioning in the latest Omicron wave. The NSW government announced it had secured 50m tests so far and had a further 15m being delivered in the next seven days. It said these would be used to keep essential government services, including schools, open, as well as to provide tests for seriously ill patients. “When we have gone and asked governments – state and federal – they tell us none of them has used [their requisitioning powers],” Twomey said. “What’s happening is that its much easier for suppliers to deal with one customer who wants 100,000 tests than 1,000. So what we are seeing is manufacturers [and suppliers] preferencing larger clients over smaller clients.” “Sometimes they are corporate Australia and sometimes they are indeed sovereign governments,” he said Twomey said that unlike normal supply chains, where big players get discounts, the shortage of supply meant the big players were paying at or near the price that small customers were paying, making it highly attractive for suppliers to preference the big players. “Usually suppliers like to have a balance on large and small clients and make money on the small sale orders,” he said. “But right now demand is so outstripping supply the big guys are paying the same price.” Community pharmacies have agreed with the federal government to supply 10 free rapid antigen tests to concession holders from 24 January. Twomey warned last week there was a major hurdle ahead to source adequate supplies for concession holders. At the same time, community pharmacists are working to source supplies of rapid antigen tests for private sales. “This is a huge logistical exercise, at short notice. Pharmacists are moving heaven and earth to source and stock adequate supplies of RATs,” Twomey said. The federal government said last year that it had a national stockpile of 70m rapid antigen tests, but these are not the same as the ones sold in supermarkets and pharmacies for use by consumers. The stockpile is composed of “point of care tests” which require administration by a professional and come in bulk. They have been used predominantly in testing sites for frontline workers. The Morrison government appears not to have foreseen the huge surge in demand for consumer-administered tests as a result of a policy pivot towards “living with the virus”. This may explain why the it was forced to use its urgency purchasing mechanism to source consumer rapid antigen tests. The health department has been approached for comment.Some small businesses could be wiped out without immediate government help due to the Omicron outbreak, industry figures say, with hairdressers reporting up to 60% staff absenteeism. The chief executive of the Australian Hairdressing Council, Sandy Chong, said seven of the 13 staff at her salon in the New South Wales city of Newcastle had recently tested positive for the virus, swelling sick leave payments at a time when wary clients were staying away. “Paying for the personal leave is such a stress for every small business owner,” Chong said. She has operated her salon for 36 years and never previously encountered such a squeeze. Turnover in the fortnight prior to Christmas was “just terrible” – down half on a normal year – while revenue declined two-thirds for the first week of 2022. Chong said hairdressers in her national organisation were reporting between 20 and 60% absenteeism because staff had to work in close proximity to potentially infected customers. “One of our members in Queensland has 40 staff, and she had all of them off except six. So she had to close down three salons,” Chong said. “Western Australia members are … absolutely panicking as to what’s going to happen when their borders lift.” Hairdressers were not among the industries deemed last week by the national cabinet to be essential. As such, staff who had close contact with a Covid case were not granted a shorter isolation period before returning to work. In Victoria, a mandate requiring hairdressers to be at least double vaccination was also making it harder for salons and other businesses, Chong said. Signs that companies are under strain are mounting. A survey of 2,000 members over three days earlier this month by the lobby group Business NSW found 40% “don’t have enough cashflow for the next three months”. “Short-term targeted support for those businesses and staff that are highly impacted is a must,” Business NSW’s chief executive, Daniel Hunter, said. “Unlike previous surveys throughout 2021, where business owners felt the next quarter would get better, that isn’t the case this time as there are no government support packages in place.” Small firms are more exposed to staff shortages than bigger ones because “they don’t have the luxury of moving workers from one cafe, say, to another one”, the head of the Council of Small Business Organisations Australia, Alexi Boyd, said. Boyd said governments needed to develop targeted assistance rather than broad programs such as jobkeeper. “The support needs to evolve as the virus ebbs and flows,” she said. The chief executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Andrew McKellar, said businesses were “facing a triple blow of acute staff shortages due to isolation requirements, a supply chain crunch resulting in higher costs and a sharp drop in consumer activity”. “One crucial measure that will boost business conditions is the provision of free and widely accessible rapid antigen tests to businesses, particularly small business, to ensure staff and customers can safely return to the workplace,” McKellar said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning For Kylie Clift, the past eight months have been “very tricky” for her Jim Jam Music business that offers music classes for infants to schoolchildren in the Hornsby region of northern Sydney. Parents were either putting off having children or moving their families away from Sydney leaving the company with “very minimal new business”, Clift said. The Omicron wave had further sapped demand from loyal customers. “Parents are keeping [the children] very close to them and so they haven’t been getting out and about – and that’s made a big impact on our business,” she said. “Our phones are dead.” The lack of government help – unlike during formal Covid lockdowns – means her 16-year-old business may not survive. “It’s been really hard because not all businesses can bounce back fully from all this.” The NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, who is also the local MP for Hornsby, is preparing a range of support packages, announcing a $40m-plus program on Monday to aid live events. “There is no doubt we are facing an unprecedented challenge at the moment and it is having a significant impact on our economy,” Kean said. “But we expect this downturn to be short-lived as this current Omicron outbreak reaches its peak and case numbers begin to subside. “Towards the end of last year we saw NSW post a strong economic response to re-opening, and we are confident that the NSW economy will bounce back better after Omicron as it did with Delta.” Labor’s NSW shadow treasurer, Daniel Mookhey, said the results of the Business NSW survey were “hair-raising”. “Imagine the jobs we will lose if nearly half of NSW businesses run out of cash in four months’ time,” Mookhey said. “Businesses should not blame the [NSW premier Dominic] Perrottet government for Omicron. But they should hold him to account for the poor state of preparation. “RAT test remain in short supply. The rules around close-contact are confusing. And vital programs to help businesses have criteria that are laughably out-of-date.” Chong said many businesses relied on the October to December period to get them through the first quarter of the following year. With Covid savaging the typically lucrative time of the year, 2022 was off to a grim start for many. “Many of the salons don’t have any cash that could get them through more than one or two weeks,” Chong said, adding the daily uncertainty of not knowing whether staff or customers would turn up left salons under “extreme stress”.A general practitioner in Victoria responsible for triaging Covid-positive patients and referring them to appropriate health services has said Australia “must now have one of the worst Covid responses in the world” as clinics are overwhelmed. The doctor, who cannot be named due to fear of repercussions from his employer, said: “Australia has utterly squandered any gains we made during the pandemic … We are now seeing the sort of mess and chaos here that we saw in the UK at the start of Covid.” The doctor’s role is to assess Covid-positive cases in the community and refer them to either community health services or GPs to support their care at home. In some cases he may assess they require an ambulance. He said those patients who required GP care and prescriptions struggled to get a GP appointment due to staff shortages and clinics being fully booked, and paramedics were often so under pressure they could not take patients he believed required hospital treatment. “There should be a dedicated pot of money given to assessment teams like mine so that we can just look after all the Covid patients ourselves, because while we have power to refer, we don’t have power to prescribe medications or administer care in their home,” he said. “This should be funded by federal and state governments, and adequately resourced to look after community care, because we desperately need to do something to take pressure off the GPs.” The managing director of SIA medical centres in Victoria, Grace Sia, said all eight of her GP clinics were overwhelmed and that this was taking a particular toll on admin staff. At one point, clinic receptionists were fielding an average of 400 calls an hour from the community, Sia said. Demand is being exacerbated by staff shortages with GPs, clinic nurses and receptionists in isolation due to Covid. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Our admin and reception staff are the ones who have to deal with everyone’s stressors, including from the doctors and the patients,” Sia said. “Patients will often be angry and abusive because their calls aren’t being answered or they can’t get an appointment. “And when the government announces a new policy, we find out at the same time as the patients do, so we have no time to prepare. Patients then call us to find out what’s going on, as we are still trying to work out the detail ourselves. Everyone is burned out from this.” The president of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners, Dr Karen Price, said GPs are under “enormous pressure” as Covid cases increased by the tens of thousands daily. “It is not business as usual,” she said. “Practices are having to triage care … some patients may need to wait to get an appointment. General practice is also facing workforce shortages, like many other sectors, as practice teams are being exposed to Covid-19 outside the workplace.” Price said she “cautiously welcomed” the government’s decision to allow asymptomatic close contacts who test negative to continue work to ease some of the staffing pressure on practices. “However, staff and patient safety must not be compromised,” she said. “We believe there needs to be flexibility for workers to make decisions they are comfortable with in terms of when they return to work, depending on their personal circumstances. And all such workers should undergo routine testing, wear PPE and comply with public health directives.” Dr Magdalena Simonis, a Melbourne GP, said at times her clinic was running with just 50% of its usual staff due to Covid. She said it was “unbelievable” that GP clinics did not have access to free rapid antigen tests for their staff and patients. “We’re not preventing unvaccinated people from entering the practice of course, because it defeats the purpose of having people come in for vaccination or to have the counselling around vaccination,” Simonis said. “So we’re seeing unvaccinated people and yet we do not have access to rapid antigen tests. It would help us if we were to screen patients who might have had contact and might be in a high risk situation, which might pose a risk to our staff, and ourselves as GPs. We’re in a consulting room usually with no windows, that are closed rooms, and though we wear masks, that doesn’t mean our risk is zero.” Simonis warned that if GPs and reception staff continued to get sick with Covid or to suffer burnout, it would have repercussions for the hospital system. “We always have been the gatekeepers to the tertiary health system,” she said. “If we are becoming unwell, and we can’t keep up with the load and we can’t manage patient expectations, then they will end up in hospitals. When GPs fall, the whole system breaks down.” Do you know more? melissa.davey@theguardian.comMost regular bills we pay are negotiable, but many of us don’t realise it and end up paying the “loyalty tax”. That tax refers to the higher prices paid by loyal customers. Often applied to banking products, this is also true for other regular bills we pay. Providers normally have enticing sign-up deals to poach new customers. Meanwhile, existing customers end up paying higher prices, hence termed the loyalty tax. What can you do about it? Negotiate! Most of your regular bills, such as phone, electricity or gas, are up for negotiation. Here’s how to do it in three steps. 1. Do your research First, you need to compare prices on what you need. Look around for the best deals. Once you’ve found a better deal for what you need, get a quote via email. This will be useful in step 2. Be aware, however, that some comparison websites may recommend certain products in exchange for a commission. These are normally labelled “sponsored” or “ad”. 2. Contact your provider Now that you know what’s out there, hop on a call with your provider. Here’s what to say: “I’ve been a customer for __________ years. I’m looking to reduce my __________ bill. I’m currently paying __________. However, __________ is offering me __________. Can you beat it? Otherwise, I have to consider switching.” 3. Get a better deal (or switch!) Ask for the new offer in writing. You can think about it and give them an answer later. If they can’t offer you a better deal, it may be worth leaving. Remember, when you’re paying something regularly, a small saving per month accumulates to hundreds of dollars saved every year. There are a few things to keep in mind before you attempt to renegotiate a bill. First, always speak to someone who has the authority to negotiate. If you do switch, make note of any introductory offers and when they expire. And finally, repeat process every few years to avoid the loyalty tax! Mariam Mohammed is co-founder of MoneyGirlThe federal government has been accused of making a “disgraceful” attempt to cast secrecy over a case relating to Australia’s negotiations with Timor-Leste in the years prior to the controversial bugging operation revealed by Witness K and Bernard Collaery. Last year, independent senator Rex Patrick challenged a decision not to release archived cabinet documents setting out Australia’s strategy for bartering with its impoverished ally on the Timor Sea maritime boundary in the early 2000s. The negotiations were crucial to Timor-Leste, because the resources in the Timor Sea could help lift it out of poverty, but it was later revealed Australia had bugged the offices of the fledgling nation’s government to gain an upper hand. Cabinet documents such as those sought by Patrick are typically made public after 20 years. But records about the Timor Sea negotiations have been withheld, initially because of the purported harm they could cause to relations with “the current government of a foreign country”. Patrick is fighting in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for the unredacted release of the documents, seeking a cabinet submission outlining Australia’s negotiating strategy, dated 29 August 2000, and a related minute, dated 4 September 2000. But the government has indicated it will seek to have attorney-general Michaelia Cash use extraordinary powers to shroud at least part of the case in secrecy on the grounds that the information could harm relations with another country. Patrick told Guardian Australia the move was “disgraceful”. He said the damage to international relations had already been done by Australia’s spying on Timor-Leste, later revealed by former intelligence officer Witness K and his lawyer Collaery. “This is a shameful episode in Australian diplomacy in which the then Australian government spied and acted in bad faith in an attempt to steal the oil and gas resources of a newly independent and impoverished neighbour,” Patrick said. “Australia’s relations with Timor would now be much better served by a policy of transparency, acknowledgement of past wrongs and a genuine apology, not by more dubious legal manoeuvres to suppress the truth.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A spokesman for Cash said the attorney-general was yet to receive a formal request to intervene using its powers to suppress information, contained in section 36 of the AAT Act. “Where proceedings, including AAT proceedings, involve sensitive information, the Commonwealth’s position is that proceedings should be open to the extent possible,” the spokesman said. The National Archives of Australia, which has responsibility for releasing old cabinet records, said it could not comment while the matter was before the tribunal. Patrick said the publication of the decades-old documents was no risk to Australia’s relations with Timor-Leste. “After all, the damage was done there by the Howard government’s spying activities and the current government’s persecution of Witness K and former Timor-Leste legal adviser Bernard Collaery,” he said. The cabinet papers are from one year after Timor-Leste’s 1999 independence referendum, but before its formal independence on 20 May 2002. Patrick, after asking for an internal review of the decision to withhold the documents, was given a heavily redacted version of the cabinet minute. All that can be surmised from the document is that a submission to cabinet about the Timor Sea negotiations was made. He is seeking full access to the document. The rationale for withholding the documents has shifted. After initially citing potential harm to international relations, the government now says the redacted content could cause “damage to the security, defence or international relations of the commonwealth” and that disclosure could be used by “organisations or individuals of national security interest to take counter measures against security operations”. Timor-Leste expert professor Clinton Fernandes, who works with the University of New South Wales, believes the documents will show Australia knew Timor-Leste was desperate for money following the destruction of its infrastructure by Indonesia. The prosecution of Collaery for disclosing protected intelligence information is continuing before the ACT supreme court. He is planning to fight the allegations at trial.More than 830,000, or around one in nine, Australian women suffer from endometriosis, a condition that can cause debilitating pain during the menstrual cycle as well as during ovulation, sex, urination and bowel movements. Other symptoms include inflammation, bloating, heavy bleeding and fatigue, and it can affect fertility. The pain and discomfort can lead women to restrict exercise but this can create other chronic health problems, says accredited exercise physiologist Dr Angela Spence from Curtin University. Physical activity can also have myriad benefits. “Regular exercise is associated with reduced risk of developing endometriosis,” she explains, and can also directly help reduce the inflammation associated with the condition. Other potential benefits include pain management, improved mental health and mitigation of side effects from commonly prescribed medications. Spence notes that more research is needed to give conclusive support for the role of exercise in managing endometriosis. But considering the benefits, experts have several general recommendations – with some provisos. “Women should be encouraged to be active and maintain routine activity,” says Spence, “but this should be progressed gradually as tolerance improves, ideally under the direction of an exercise specialist.” The move: the Jacobsen method A progressive muscle relaxation technique called the Jacobsen method has been found to improve quality of life and reduce anxiety and depression in women with endometriosis, reports Emma Wise, a pelvic health physiotherapist. “This involves contracting and relaxing the major muscles of the body, one by one, as a form of mental and physical relaxation,” she explains. “It can be done easily at home in 30 to 40 minutes.” Start by relaxing and contracting the right hand, forearm, upper arm, and then left side, in that order. Move to the face, neck, chest, shoulder and upper back, and then the stomach, right thigh, calf and foot, followed by the left thigh, calf and foot. A specific focus on pelvic floor muscle training can improve range and relaxation of those muscles and help with pain associated with endometriosis, says Wise, adding that a specialised physiotherapist can help with this. “It is common for people with pelvic pain, including endometriosis, to have decreased tone of their pelvic floor muscles,” she explains. “This can further contribute to pelvic pain and other symptoms such as bladder and bowel issues [and] pain with sex.” For strengthening the pelvic floor and glutes, accredited exercise physiologist Brittany Cogger recommends clams or lying leg raises, sit to stands and glute bridging with resistance band. The class: pilates or yoga Pilates or yoga classes can help to release muscles that are tensed against the pain, writes Cogger. Indeed, Wise notes that women with endometriosis who took part in a study exploring Hatha-style yoga found improved quality of life and pain relief. This involved movements focussing on relaxation, breathing and posture exercises performed twice a week for eight weeks. The activity: stretching Exercises based on Pilates and yoga principles can help release tensed muscles, according to Cogger, as well as stretches including seated glute stretch, seated hip flexor stretch and a wall side-bend stretch. She explains that lengthening and strengthening the pelvic floor, abdominal wall and hip flexor muscles are important for relaxing them before embarking on exercise. In this regard, Spence recommends walking or any other type of low-impact aerobic exercise that you enjoy, such as swimming or bike riding. The hard pass: high-impact exercises Vigorous activity can worsen symptoms and result in flare-ups for some women and exacerbate cramping and fatigue, advises Wise. Specifically, it might be prudent to avoid high-impact exercises such as running and burpees, according to Cogger, as well as sit-ups and crunches.Australian writer and democracy activist Dr Yang Hengjun’s health is failing as he approaches three years imprisoned in China, say friends who fear he may not survive his incarceration. Wednesday is the third anniversary of Yang’s arrest at Guangzhou airport on allegations of espionage on behalf of an unnamed foreign country. He maintains his innocence. “Sometimes I’m pessimistic and sometimes I’m optimistic,” he said in a dictated statement from prison, made before he was blindfolded and led back to his cell. “I’m confident I didn’t do what they said I did. I know this, my lawyer knows this, and I think the judge knows this. According to Chinese law, I’m not guilty. But they treat me like dirt here and they tortured me.” Despite hundreds of interrogations, and, in his words, “torture” at the hands of China’s ministry of state security, Yang says he has not confessed to anything alleged against him, a fact that appears to have further delayed his judgment and sentencing under China’s confession-based legal system. His sentencing is now due by 9 April. Yang, 54, faced a single-day trial in May, held in secret, after more than two years in detention. He spoke briefly in his own defence, telling the court he was “100% innocent” and submitted about 100 pages of evidence and testimony to support his case. Yang, and the Australian government, reject the allegations against him. Australia’s ambassador to China has said his imprisonment amounts to “arbitrary detention”. Yang’s family, friends, and supporters say they are extremely concerned about his deteriorating health and argue he must be released on bail for medical treatment and returned to Australia. However, there appears little chance of his release ahead of sentencing, which has been repeatedly delayed. China has consistently said Yang’s detention and trial had been conducted in accordance with the law and accused Australia of “gross interference” in its advocacy on behalf of Yang. “Chinese judicial authorities handle the case strictly in accordance with law and fully protect the lawful rights of the relevant person,” a spokesperson said ahead of the trial. “The Australian side should respect China’s judicial sovereignty and refrain from interfering in any form in Chinese judicial authorities’ lawful handling of the case.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In his latest message from prison, Yang said: “I want the Chinese government to open my case and publish it. To provide details to the world, the Australian government, and the country. We should apply to open the case, and you can see for yourself. “They said it’s about espionage. I hope it’s just about Chinese judicial corruption.” Yang has been prevented from sending letters to lawyers, family and friends, or receiving them. He has access to one state-run television channel and some pre-approved books. He lives and sleeps in a crowded room with no sunlight, lights on all night, a communal open toilet, a hard floor and little room to move around or stretch. Yang’s health has deteriorated seriously in prison. He has severe problems with gout, high uric acid, high blood pressure, impaired vision and dizzy spells. One recent account, from late in 2021, reported: “Ongoing fatigue meant he was only able to exercise for short periods. Further, because of his dizzy spells, he sometimes wasn’t able to walk and had to, at times, just stand in place during his one hour of activity outdoors”. Blood tests have shown rapidly rising levels of creatinine, raising his risk of kidney failure. Friends and family say his worsening health problems are not being adequately treated. “We are concerned Yang is being systematically deprived of proper medical treatment,” a close friend and supporter said. “We know he does not trust the medication administered to him and, unfortunately, he has no reason to. Yang must not be left to die through medical neglect and mistreatment, like so many other writers and artists and public intellectuals who are passionately committed to a better future for the Chinese people, such as [Nobel laureate] Liu Xiaobo.” Prof Chongyi Feng, Yang’s PhD supervisor, said Yang was previously healthy, “but he has deteriorated greatly, and he is not being properly treated”. “We are very worried about him.” The Australia director at Human Rights Watch, Elaine Pearson, said conditions in China’s detention facilities and prisons were poor, with only rudimentary health care. “We are very concerned that Yang’s detention has exacerbated his medical problems and that the treatment in prison is inadequate. The Chinese government should release him unconditionally immediately.” Pearson said there was a “long list of human rights defenders” who have died in Chinese custody or shortly after being released. “A prison sentence should not be a death sentence in China. The Australian government should be doing everything in their power to persuade the Chinese authorities to release Yang Hengjun, as well as Cheng Lei and others who are arbitrarily detained.” Australia’s foreign minister, Marise Payne, said the federal government was concerned about numerous delays to the verdict following Yang’s trial. “Neither Dr Yang nor the Australian government have been provided with details as to the charges against him or of the investigation, reinforcing our view that this constitutes the arbitrary detention of an Australian citizen,” Payne said in a statement. “We therefore call for Dr Yang’s immediate release and his return to Australia.” Payne said the government would continue to advocate for Yang’s interests and wellbeing. “Australia is also extremely concerned about Dr Yang’s health. We call on Chinese authorities to meet their obligations to ensure that all necessary treatment for his physical and mental health is provided.” Yang, whose legal name is Yang Jun, was born in Hubei in central China. He was formerly a diplomat for China’s ministry of foreign affairs, and an agent for the secretive ministry of state security, before working in the private sector in Hong Kong and moving to Australia, then to the US, where he was a visiting scholar at Columbia University. A writer of spy novels, he has been a popular blogger, political commentator and agitator for democratic reforms in China for more than a decade. He describes himself as a “democracy peddler”. Yang, who became an Australian citizen in 2002, flew into Guangzhou with his family in January 2019. His wife and child were able to enter China but authorities escorted Yang from the plane into detention. He has not been free since.Sky News sought to justify misleading Covid commentary then-host Alan Jones put to air, saying it was balanced by coverage of the daily Covid press conferences, according to a letter sent to the broadcasting regulator. Prior to axing his show at the end of 2020, Sky News had long defended Jones’s Covid commentary, which contributed to the removal of several videos from YouTube along with a week-long ban from the platform, and included a series of errors and apologies. In July, Sky News removed from its website and corrected a broadcast of Jones’s show in which MP Craig Kelly wrongly claimed people who were vaccinated were more likely to die in the UK’s Delta wave than unvaccinated people. In August, the deputy chair and CEO of the Australian Communications and Media Authority (Acma), Creina Chapman, sent a letter to Sky News CEO, Paul Whittaker, which Guardian Australia obtained under freedom of information. In it, she noted that Sky News had taken steps to correct errors Jones had made in a timely fashion, but said more needed to be done. “Timely correction of errors is important. However, they do not stand instead of effective editorial control over programming before it goes to air where reasonable steps could have been taken to identify an error prior to broadcast,” she wrote. “Arguably, this is even more important at a time where accurate public health messaging is vital and where latter corrective action can create more confusion about the facts for audiences.” Chapman wrote that Acma was considering whether the commercial and broadcast codes of practice needed an overhaul, and that she needed reassurance from Whittaker about “measures Sky is taking to prevent recurrence of recent issues prior to broadcast”. In a response the following day, Whittaker noted Sky News had never been found in breach of the subscription and commercial TV codes of practice for over ten years and there was “no evidence” Sky News was breaching existing regulations or that the codes were failing. Whittaker pointed to the fact that since March 2020, Sky News had sought to cover every news conference of the prime minister, state premiers and chief ministers regarding Covid, either live or near to live. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It is not possible to give an exact number of hours of such coverage, although a conservative estimate would be at least two hours a day since the first lock down began in March 2020 and at least one hour per day Saturdays and Sundays. It should be noted on some days, [Australia News Channel] has covered up to five hours of news conferences live,” he said. He went on to list experts such as the Australian Medical Association, various epidemiologists, and top health officials who were interviewed on the channel, and said there were differing views in terms of the response to the outbreak, and the differences “are unquestionably subjects of public interest”. “There has been criticism and robust debate on these matters of public interest published widely, including on Sky News Australia,” he said. Jones was axed from the network a little over three months after the letter was sent. The documents obtained under freedom of information reveal that as of late last year Acma had received 42 Covid-related complaints about Sky News, with 19 regarding Jones, and seven of those related to the Alan Jones broadcast Sky News removed from its website and corrected. Most of these complaints were made after ABC’s Media Watch program aired a segment about the removal in July. The day after she wrote to Sky News, Chapman also wrote to Google seeking advice on the company’s misinformation policy and whether any of the videos it had removed from YouTube had also been broadcast on the Sky News’ TV channel. In response, Google’s head of government affairs and public policy in Australia, Lucinda Longcraft, confirmed 20 videos had been removed, but could not say whether the videos had first aired on Sky News. “We would not be able to speak to any alternative delivery channels used by YouTube partners, however we understand that Sky News’ most common practice is to upload videos on to YouTube that had been broadcast on their owned and operated broadcasting channels,” she said. The removed videos seen by Guardian Australia last year had all been clipped from Sky News’ broadcast. Jones has been on a break after launching his streaming show late last year. The last full episode aired on 22 December, with the audience sliding from 116,000 views of the first episode on Facebook, down to 18,000 for the most recent.A man who was forced to hand over his phone and passcode to Australian Border Force after returning to Sydney from holiday has labelled the tactic “an absolute gross violation of privacy”, as tech advocates call for transparency and stronger privacy protections for people’s devices as they enter the country. Software developer James and his partner returned from a 10-day holiday in Fiji earlier this month and were stopped by border force officials at Sydney airport. They were taken aside, and after emptying their suitcases, an official asked them to write their phone passcodes on a piece of paper, before taking their phones into another room. It was half an hour before their phones were returned, and they were allowed to leave. James initially posted about his ordeal on Reddit. “We weren’t informed why they wanted to look at the phones. We were told nothing,” he told Guardian Australia. “Who knows what they’re taking out of it? With your phone and your passcode they have everything, access to your entire email history, saved passwords, banking, Medicare, myGov. There’s just so much scope.” James said he has no idea what officials looked at, whether a copy of any of the data was made, where it would be stored and who would have access to it. “It’s an absolute gross violation of privacy.” Under the Customs Act, ABF officers can force people to hand over their passcodes to allow a phone search, as part of their powers to examine people’s belongings at the border, including documents and photos on mobile phones. A spokesperson for ABF did not respond to specific questions about James’ case, nor questions on how often the power is used or where the data is stored. The spokesperson said people can be questioned and their phone searched “if they suspect the person may be of interest for immigration, customs, biosecurity, health, law-enforcement or national security reasons”. “The ABF exercises these powers in order to protect the Australian community from harm and deliver upon its mission to protect Australia’s border and enable legitimate travel and trade. Information seized from passengers phones has contributed to the success of many domestic law enforcement operations targeting illegal activities,” the spokesperson said. “If an individual refuses to comply with a request for an examination of their electronic device, they may be referred for further law enforcement action.” Within Australia’s borders, there are more hurdles for law enforcement to access devices, including needing a warrant before people can be compelled to unlock their phones. In 2016, Nine newspapers reported a man sued ABF after text messages were sent and then deleted from his phone by an official while they had possession of his phone at the border in 2014. A freedom of information request in 2016 revealed the department had apologised to the man in 2015, and had determined the counter-terrorism unit officer breached ABF’s code of conduct. Electronic Frontiers Australia chair Justin Warren said it is impossible to determine how common such searches of phones are because the department doesn’t release any data on it – unlike data on warrants obtained under other domestic surveillance laws. “There is no transparency, and the authorities prefer it that way. Anecdotally, it seems to happen quite a lot,” Warren said, adding it showed the need for stronger privacy rights in Australia. “This is just another example of how few rights Australians actually have. We need a Bill of Rights in Australia to prevent abuses like this, and real consequences for abuse when it happens.” Samantha Floreani, program lead at Digital Rights Watch, agreed. “This is a prime example of the kind of privacy violations that can occur when you don’t have fundamental human rights,” she said. “A federal charter of human rights is long overdue in Australia. “It is completely unreasonable that people should be subject to such an invasion of privacy without so much as an explanation.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Warren advised people flying into Australia not to have anything on their device that they don’t want authorities accessing, and to ensure their device is encrypted with a strong passcode. “Once they take your device out of your sight, you should assume it’s completely compromised and they have a copy of everything that was on it, and act accordingly,” he said. Warren stressed that people in such a situation should also seek legal advice. James said the incident made him rethink what he would do next time he travels out of Australia. “I think what I’ll just do next time is as we fly into Sydney, I’ll just press the factory reset button on the phone and when they pull me up again, I’ll be handing them a fresh clean factory reset.”Woolworths has suspended supplies from a South Australia meatworks that was given state government approval to operate while some staff were Covid positive. Brad Banducci, chief executive of the supermarket giant, decided to halt taking product from the Teys Australia abattoir near Naracoorte after a telephone hook-up on Sunday with Michelle O’Neil, president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. Banducci, along with chief reputation officer Christian Bennett and senior human rights officer Laura McManus, sought to defuse a public row over the use of Covid-infected workers at the meatworks. The ACTU said the exemption from the SA government was apparently unique in Australia and set a dangerous precedent given the risks of affecting other staff. Teys operated for several days after at least 140 of its nearly 400 staff tested positive for Covid, before closing on Thursday. It resumed slaughtering cattle on Monday and its main de-boning and other meat processing will restart on Tuesday, an employee told Guardian Australia anonymously, because he was not authorised to comment publicly. The worker, though, said they believed that Woolworths’ decision to suspend taking meat from the Naracoorte site was “a very good thing” because in their opinion the company had not taken adequate care of the safety of the plant’s workforce of 385 people. “All of us are very worried,” the staffer said. In a statement sent to the Guardian over the weekend, a spokesperson for Teys said “the health and safety of Teys Australia’s people always comes first”, and the company was working hard to deal with the “constantly evolving challenges of the pandemic and resulting food security”. “In South Australia from [last] Monday, no team member on site will have tested positive within the last seven days,” the spokesperson said, adding that any staff in critical roles who tested positive were approved by SA Health to return to work if they didn’t have symptoms and had isolated for seven days. “Contrary to misleading claims made in the public domain, no worker has been, or will be, forced to work if they are unwell,” the official said. SA Health has been conducting the PCR testing of staff. Of those turning up to work on Monday, two of the 100-plus staff were positive, the Guardian has learned. More of the 385 employees are due to return to work on Tuesday, with those who have isolated for at least seven days after testing positive kept about 40 metres from other employees. However, the anonymous staffer said some people were returning to work without isolating, including at least one person who had tested positive only a day earlier, and some still had symptoms, including coughing and sore throats. Workers were also given little additional protection and used the same toilets, with Covid-positive staff identified by yellow hair nets worn over their white hard hats, he said. Some workers had become separated from their families, with partners of meatworkers avoiding their homes in order to reduce the risk of becoming infected, the staffer said. A Woolworths spokesperson said it had “suspended all supply through Teys’ South Australian facility while we work with Teys, SA Health and Safework SA to understand the protocols currently in place for their team and operations”. “We were not involved in the decision approved by SA Health to introduce exceptional temporary Covid measures at the site last week,” the spokesperson said. “We expect all of our suppliers to adhere to the Covid safety protocols set by their relevant state authorities.” Matt Journeaux, acting federal secretary of the Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union, alleged that Teys last week “forced their workers to keep turning up for work even though they were infected with Covid” – something the company denies. “This week, Teys is refusing to even talk to its workforce,” Journeaux said. “Workers are scared and they are worried about being forced to return to work in dangerous conditions.” The company said only about 5-8% of its staff were unionised and that SA Health, primary industry, WorkSafe and the police were overseeing its handling of the operations. Teys remains hopeful of winning back Woolworths’ business, which involves processing cattle supplied by the supermarket chain, “once the storm blows over”.Good news doesn’t get any more in-your-face than this. One thousand fin whales, one of the world’s biggest animals, were seen last week swimming in the same seas in which they were driven to near-extinction last century due to whaling. It’s like humans never happened. This vast assembly was spread over a five-mile-wide area between the South Orkney islands and the Antarctic Peninsula. A single whale is stupendous; imagine 1,000 of them, their misty forest of spouts, as tall as pine trees, the plosive sound of their blows, their hot breath condensing in the icy air. Their sharp dorsal fins and steel-grey bodies slide through the waves like a whale ballet, choreographed at the extreme south of our planet. The sight has left whale scientists slack-jawed and frankly green-eyed in envy of Conor Ryan, who observed it from the polar cruiser, National Geographic Endurance. Messaging from the ship on a tricky connection, Ryan, an experienced zoologist and photographer, says this may be “one of the largest aggregations of fin whales ever documented”. His estimate of 1,000 animals is a conservative one, he says. “We were about 15 miles north of Coronation Island,” Ryan reports, with “four large krill fishing vessels working the same area”. The vessels’ presence makes clear the reason for this party. The whales were feeding on a grand scale, sucking up tonnes of tiny shrimps. Fin whales are surprisingly slender, serpentine creatures when you see them underwater, and so long that they seem to take for ever to swim past. Like blue, humpback and minke whales, they’re baleen whales, distinguished by food-filtering keratinous plates in lieu of teeth. Unlike toothed whales, such as sperm whales and killer whales, they are not usually seen as social animals. In Moby-Dick Herman Melville classifies the fin whale as “not gregarious … very shy; always going solitary … the banished and unconquerable Cain of his race”. Factor in their tremendous size – at up to 27m long, only just short of the blue whale’s 33m – and you come close to appreciating the astonishing intensity of this eruption of marine life. So, is it really good news? In this same ocean, at least two million whales were slaughtered in the past century. Given that we now know fin whales can live for up to 140 years, the effects of that cull are still being felt in their culture. It may be that our assumption that fin whales aren’t “social” animals actually stems from the fact that they amended their behaviour to evade the whalers, as sperm whales did in the 19th century. Scientists suspect that baleen whales also learned not to gather in large groups to stay one step ahead of the hunters. Only now, perhaps, are they returning to old foraging grounds. Ryan delights in calling himself a “whale nerd”; he and his best friend, Peter Wilson, were just 14 years old when they published their first peer-reviewed scientific paper on killer whales in 2001. When he gets home from this trip, he’ll be writing another paper. Despite his 20 years’ experience at sea, Ryan has never seen anything like this. “Words fail me,” he says. “I have seen maybe 100 fins here before in previous years. Thousands of chinstrap penguins, petrels, and albatrosses, too … It was unusually calm weather,” he adds, “and unusually good visibility.” If Ryan considers himself blessed, then so should we. Whales still face many threats, mostly from us. And we would do well to remember that the protests that saved the whales in the 1970s and 80s will be outlawed if the new police and crime bill passes into law. In a world constrained by woe and threats to democracy (it’s a good job whales don’t have to apply for the right to assemble), 1,000 fin whales can’t help but lift our hearts. They might even convince us that, as another species of (supposedly) sentient mammal, we still stand a chance of getting through “all of this”. So long as we stick together and send up a few protest spouts of our own. Philip Hoare is the author of several books, including Leviathan, The Sea Inside and Albert and the WhaleCampaigners have called for the end of the “scattered” approach to gender-based violence in Ireland after the murder of 23-year-old Ashling Murphy. Irish police are still hunting for the killer of the primary school teacher, who was strangled on a canal path near the town of Tullamore while out jogging on Wednesday afternoon. The murder has convulsed the nation with an outpouring of anger and shock in Ireland and beyond, with tens of thousands of people attending vigils in Dublin, Cork, Belfast, London and New York over the weekend. Her funeral will take place on Tuesday. Schools around the country have been asked to observe a minute’s silence by the main teaching unions. There has been a chorus of calls for more action by the government and an end to “turf wars” between justice, children’s, health and other departments over who is responsible for which part of services for victims of domestic, sexual and gender-based violence. Over the weekend there were heartbreaking scenes as Ashling’s devastated parents, Kathleen and Raymond, her sister, Amy, brother, Cathal, and boyfriend, Ryan, joined a vigil near the location of the killing. The Garda Síochána are still waiting to speak to an individual who presented to a Dublin hospital with unexplained injuries, some of which were believed to be self-inflicted and serious. The minister for justice, Helen McEntee, said a new strategy to tackle domestic, sexual and gender-based violence will be published by March, promising a “zero-tolerance” approach to violence against women. Mary McDermott, chief executive officer at Safe Ireland, which campaigns for women and children’s safety, said a joined-up approach was long overdue, with “goodwill” needed at the children’s and other departments as they needed to yield control of parts of their portfolio to deliver a centralised ministry. “Refuge and support services are under [the department of] children and the rest of the responsibility, which we know requires a whole-of-government response, is scattered across the rest of government departments.” While there have been repeated calls for centralisation since a government taskforce on the issues in 1997, McDermott said it was time for law makers to stop treating “domestic, sexual and gender based violence” as an “amorphous mass”. “Until we really sit down and stop all the blaming, name it accurately and bring it front and centre into government, with a ministerial responsibility and proper resources, we’re going nowhere,” she said. She said the problem needed to be treated as a matter of urgency and given the same weight as the climate crisis, with a “high level unit” to tackle the cross-departmental issues. The sensitivity of the issue of gender violence was highlighted over the weekend when one RTE presenter was warned in a text to her radio show to refrain from making remarks that could be construed as “anti-men”. McDermott said one of the “most debilitating” things about the campaign for the safety of women was the “false equivalence” that men were also victims of violence by women. On Sunday night, organisers of an online vigil said they would complain to Zoom after man a attempted to disrupt the event by exposing himself and appearing to masturbate on camera. According to the Irish Times, the organisers reported the incident to Zoom and requested information from the platform about the account used by the man.Downing Street has said Boris and Carrie Johnson followed Covid guidance when the prime minister was “commuting” from Chequers to No 10 during the first lockdown in 2020 – but declined to answer further questions, including whether the pair held social events. It emerged last week that the prime minister and his then-fiancee travelled between No 10 and the spacious Buckinghamshire mansion between 16 and 27 March 2020, around the start of the first lockdown. On 16 March, the government advised the public to avoid all non-essential travel, and on 22 March, three days before a full lockdown was ordered, specified that essential travel “does not include visits to second homes”. However, the Tortoise website reported that Johnson and his partner relocated to Chequers during this period, after which the prime minister continued to travel to Downing Street from Chequers to work for several days. Johnson’s official spokesperson insisted on Monday that they had not broken the rules, saying they “acted in accordance with both the guidance and subsequent legislation at all times”. “At the time as you know, Mrs Johnson was heavily pregnant, in a vulnerable category, and advised to minimise social contacts. So in line with clinical guidance and to minimise the risk to her, they were based at Chequers during that period, with the prime minister commuting to Downing Street to work,” he said. He said their decision to move was because of the specific nature of No 10, which “unusually, is both a private residence and an office for hundreds of people.” The spokesperson pointed out that by the time the guidance against travelling to second homes came in on 22 March, “the prime minister and his wife were already based in Chequers, acting in line with clinical guidance”. He declined to answer further questions, however, including whether parties or social events were held at Chequers while the pair were there. It has been reported that Carrie Johnson hosted a baby shower for a group of friends on 14 March 2020. By that time a minister, Nadine Dorries, had been diagnosed with Covid. Johnson isolated alone in his Downing Street flat after testing positive for Covid on 27 March, eventually being taken into St Thomas’ hospital and spending time in intensive care. He then returned to Chequers to convalesce. Johnson’s compliance with the strict restrictions in place in the first lockdown has come under intense scrutiny in recent days, since he apologised for attending a “bring your own booze” gathering, telling MPs he believed it was a “work event”. Johnson appears poised to blame a “culture” of drinking in No 10 for a series of rule-breaking parties, including two held on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral. But the prime minister’s critics say he played a key role in encouraging lockdown-busting behaviour.When the former Downing Street pollster James Johnson ran a focus group on “partygate” in the red wall seat of Bolton North East, the feedback wasn’t exactly encouraging for No 10. Some of the disparaging comments from those voters who backed the Tories for the first time in 2019 included: “I think he’s completely lost everyone’s trust”, “he needs to resign” and “I don’t really see how he can carry on”. When people were asked whether they would vote for Boris Johnson now, not a single person put their hand up. That reaction won’t come as much of a surprise to Tory MPs in Westminster after a weekend in their constituencies. While the prime minister and his team have tried to win over the parliamentary party with regular trips to the tearoom and “Operation Red Meat”, which aims to please the base with rightwing policies, the charm offensive is yet to work on the grassroots. “It’s bleak,” says one loyalist MP. The problem is it is not the usual suspects. Instead, “it’s our core base”, according to someone on the government payroll. New revelations on Friday that No 10 staff were partying on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral have driven many MPs to distraction. As one points out, members of their associations often belong to other community organisations and take an extremely dim view of lax attitudes to the rules. “There is something almost impressive about managing to piss off absolutely every group of society,” observes a former adviser. In the face of criticism from even usually supportive newspapers, MPs are discovering new coping mechanisms. One senior Tory had a media blackout at the weekend – the complaints from his constituents were enough. Yet for all the anger, it’s still unclear how Johnson would actually go. MPs fall roughly into two camps: those who want him out before the local elections and those who think he ought to be given until then to turn things around. The group most eager to see the back of the prime minister is made up of those who have council seats up for grabs in May. Candidates are talking of dropping out and are warning of electoral oblivion. In order to avoid this fate, they argue that a new leader is required at the national level. They are backed by longtime Johnson critics, Scottish Tories and increasingly MPs in Liberal Democrat/Tory marginals. Given the Liberal Democrats managed to overturn chunky Conservative majorities in the Chesham and Amersham and North Shropshire byelections, this group don’t feel as though they need to wait until May. However, many MPs believe Johnson will cling on until then – bar no new damaging disclosures. First, the next Tory leadership contest will not be a tidy affair; there is no unity candidate. The two frontrunners, Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss, have their supporters – but also ample critics. Already a “Stop Truss” contingent is forming – MPs keen to either keep Johnson in place to avoid this fate or to work to stop the foreign secretary reaching the membership in any contest. Given she is a grassroots favourite, they view it as too risky to have her in the final two. With potential candidates being tipped to run including the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, former defence minister Penny Mordaunt, the chair of the foreign affairs select committee, Tom Tugendhat, and former health secretary Jeremy Hunt, the contest is already looking rather crowded. “To get to 54 letters and then start and complete a leadership contest between now and April is overly ambitious,” says a member of the government. There are also self-serving reasons ministers are keen to put off a contest. The mantra “he who wields the knife never wears the crown” is weighing heavily on contenders. Such a move could lead to a backlash among Johnson loyalists and make an entry in a leadership contest more difficult. “A lot of colleagues want him to take us into the local elections and let the public vote on him,” says someone on the payroll. “It’s a neater way of doing things.” Another MP argues that those activists who support Johnson need to see proof that he is no longer an electoral asset. But that calculation could change. While the fact there is no obvious successor is helping Johnson stay in position, things could get so bad that MPs ultimately decide it’s best to get rid of the problem then work on the solution afterwards. While Downing Street aides are optimistic he will survive Sue Gray’s report, MPs will be carefully studying his reaction. Johnson’s falling poll ratings suggest many voters have already made up their minds – any more denying reality or making excuses will feed into the very complaints that were raised in that Bolton focus group. The issue for the prime minister is that the partygate crisis is not yet a Conservative-wide scandal, it’s a Boris Johnson scandal. If MPs conclude they need to move fast in order to stop it contaminating the whole Tory brand permanently, he will be out sooner rather than later – even if the question of who will succeed him remains up in the air. Katy Balls is the Spectator’s deputy political editor Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereHe was nowhere and he was everywhere. Etched into the pavement and lingering in the air, each fragile fragment of an atmosphere carrying resentment and relief and quite a bit in between. Melbourne Park is the home of Novak Djokovic’s hubris, the venue at which he won his very first grand slam and has enjoyed the most success of his career to date. His psyche – that controversial soul of his – is seared into the seats at Rod Laver Arena, where he has lifted nine singles trophies but will not chase a 10th this year. Now it feels he has been cast as Voldemort, the Dark Lord who must not be named – at least by pretty much every player who is not Serbian. Naomi Osaka was the first invited to offer her two cents: “Do you believe Djokovic should be playing at the Australian Open this year?” a journalist asked after her opening-round win over Colombia’s Camila Osorio. “Is my opinion going to help anything?” she replied. The media pressed on. But what did other players think of the situation? “Yeah, I’ll kind of pass on that,” she said. “Thanks, though.” Gaël Monfils simply would not be drawn. Rafael Nadal, the only former champion left in the draw, was a little more expansive. “I think the situation has been a mess,” he said after overwhelming the American Marcos Giron – a statement win in his own campaign to reach a record 21 grand slam titles. “He’s not the only one that probably did bad things in that case. There are more [parties] responsible in this terrible situation we’ve faced over the last two weeks, but he’s one of those responsible.” And then: “I don’t want to talk any more about that.” The Serbian competitors, though, were in the mood for a roasting. Dusan Lajovic, who saw off Marton Fucsovics in five sets, said: “The way they treated him was terribly wrong.” Laslo Djere, who was knocked out by Denis Shapovalov, lamented a “true catastrophic situation. To tell you the truth,” he said, “I think not just Serbians, I think the whole world saw it and they probably will have a new or different opinion about Australia.” Miomir Kecmanovic, meanwhile, got busy exacting retribution on behalf of his fellow countryman. “I think it wasn’t handled well and things could have gone so much smoother and better for everybody,” the 77th-ranked 22-year-old said. “It’s definitely terrible that they had to kick him out like that. We said that we’re going to give everything we have, try to avenge him in a way, and make him proud.” Some 24 hours ago Kecmanovic was still scheduled to play his opening match against Djokovic under lights on Rod Laver. In the absence of his box-office opponent, he was relegated to 1573 Arena in the afternoon sun and in front of significantly fewer spectators. A grand total of 104 punters watched him close out the third set against Djokovic’s replacement in the draw, Salvatore Caruso. The Italian had dubbed himself “the most famous lucky loser in the world”. Kecmanovic must have felt at least a little lucky too, having advanced to the second round largely because he faced the world No 150 instead of the world No 1. Serbian supporters were few and far between on Monday, a stark contrast to the scenes outside Carlton’s Park Hotel where Djokovic was held ahead of his failed court challenge to have his cancelled visa reinstated for a second time. But there were two men clapping enthusiastically after each point at one end of the court. Up the other end was a group of five, who let out the odd chant and earned a post-match handshake from Kecmanovic for their efforts. Less than three hours later Alexander Zverev and Daniel Altmaier were slogging out an all-German contest in his original slot. They entertained a complimentary centre-court crowd. There were no boos or unsavoury commentary; he-who-must-not-be-named was not present. It was in stark contrast to last year’s final. In the minutes after Djokovic beat Daniil Medvedev to the 2021 title the crowd booed during the presentation ceremony, set off by the Tennis Australia president’s mention of Covid-19 vaccines. Victoria had already endured one of the world’s most gruelling lockdowns and just emerged from a snap second (there have now been six) and vaccination was a hot topic. Djokovic had been a divisive talking point too, having contracted the virus seven months prior at his unsanctioned Adria Tour, featuring a now infamous dance party. The event was branded a super-spreader and curtailed while he had subsequently drawn criticism for sending Tennis Australia some pre-tournament suggestions on how they might improve conditions for the mass of players in hotel quarantine. Monday’s atmosphere was cordial but it was also heavy with the remnants of a story that will not go away, the irritating butt of a cigarette that cannot be disposed of because no one can locate a bin. “I hope that in the future he [Djokovic] will be the best tennis player in history,” Lajovic said. “And that this will be only looked at as a setback on his path to be the best tennis player to ever play the sport. This is my opinion, and I don’t think there is more to add to it.”The House of Lords commissioner for standards has launched an investigation into the Conservative peer Michelle Mone, relating to the PPE company awarded £203m government contracts via the “VIP lane” after she referred it to the Cabinet Office in May 2020. The investigation follows a complaint by the Labour peer George Foulkes on 6 January, after the Guardian reported that leaked files appear to suggest Lady Mone and her husband, the Isle of Man-based financier Douglas Barrowman, were secretly involved in the company, PPE Medpro. Foulkes asked the commissioners to investigate whether Mone may have breached the Lords code of conduct by failing to declare an interest in the company, and by lobbying for it to be awarded government contracts. The commissioner confirmed that the investigation would be for “alleged involvement in procuring contracts for PPE Medpro, leading to potential breaches” of three provisions of the Lords code, which cover the requirement that peers publicly register “all relevant interests”, and prohibit them from lobbying for a company or a person in which a peer “has a financial interest”. The commissioner also stated that Mone would be investigated under the more general provisions of the code’s paragraph 9, which includes that peers “should always act on their personal honour”; must never accept “any financial inducement as an incentive or reward for exercising parliamentary influence”; and “must not seek to profit from membership of the house by accepting or agreeing to accept payment or other incentive or reward in return for providing parliamentary advice or services.” Mone, appointed a Conservative peer by David Cameron in 2015 after selling an 80% stake in her Ultimo lingerie company, has consistently denied any “role or function” in the company, and her lawyers have said she is “not connected to PPE Medpro in any capacity”. The possible sanctions for a peer found to have breached the code of conduct, which are determined by the conduct committee, range from merely having to correct a breach, to the most serious penalty of expulsion from the Lords. PPE Medpro was awarded an £80.85m contract in May 2020 to supply face masks, followed by a £122m contract in June 2020 to supply 25m surgical gowns. Barrowman has also denied being an investor, and his lawyers have said he “was not personally involved in working for PPEM in relation to PPE contracts”. In December 2020 lawyers for Barrowman and the company also told the Guardian that: “Neither [Barrowman] nor anybody involved with PPEM approached any MPs, peers, government officials, ministers, NHS staff or other health professionals as part of making the approach to the government to offer to supply PPE.” The sole registered owner of the UK-registered company is Anthony Page, who works for Barrowman’s family office at his Isle of Man financial services firm Knox Group. In November 2021, following a freedom of information request pursued by the Good Law Project, the government disclosed that Mone had originally referred PPE Medpro to the Cabinet Office, contacting the office of minister Theodore Agnew, her fellow Conservative peer who was responsible for procurement during the Covid pandemic. More recently the government confirmed that Mone made that referral on 7 May 2020, five days before PPE Medpro was even incorporated. Agnew’s office referred PPE Medpro to the “VIP lane” for politically connected firms, which gave companies a 10 times greater chance of being awarded a contract. The VIP lane was ruled unlawful last week in the high court following a challenge by the Good Law Project. The Guardian reported on 6 January that leaked files appear to suggest both Mone and Barrowman were involved in the business of PPE Medpro. One person closely involved in PPE Medpro claimed Barrowman was “part of the financial consortium that backed” the company and was even involved in initial conversations with the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC). The leaked files appear to suggest that the UK company is effectively a subsidiary of another company named PPE Medpro Ltd, registered in the Isle of Man a day earlier. Barrowman appeared to have been personally involved in setting up agreements for the Isle of Man company with a London importing company, Loudwater Trade and Finance, which would source and supply the PPE. In one of the agreements, PPE Medpro (Isle of Man) stated that it would use its “extensive network to seek to secure rolling forward order contracts with the NHS and other government bodies within the British Isles”. From the two contracts, to supply millions of face masks and surgical gowns, the Guardian understands that PPE Medpro may have made in excess of £40m gross profits. The company declined to say whether that figure was accurate. Mone’s representatives have said she had no interest in PPE Medpro, and denied any wrongdoing. “The reason why no interest in PPE Medpro appears in Baroness Mone’s register of interests is because no such interest exists,” her lawyer said in December 2020. Barrowman’s lawyers have said the Guardian’s reporting amounted to “clutching at straws” and was “largely incorrect”. Mone’s lawyers said the Guardian’s reporting was “grounded entirely on supposition and speculation and not based on accuracy”, adding: “She is under no obligation to say anything to you.” In a statement, Mone said: “I completely refute these allegations. I was asked to help at a time of national emergency. I declared all necessary interests and have done nothing wrong. I will cooperate fully with any investigation.” Foulkes told the Guardian: “I welcome the decision of the commissioner to investigate what appears to be breaches of the code of conduct by Baroness Mone under three provisions dealing with failure to register interests and paid lobbying.”My friend Barrie Hesketh, who has died aged 91, was an actor, writer and artist who in 1966 co-founded the Mull Little theatre on the Isle of Mull in the Inner Hebrides. Barrie and his then wife, Marianne, had moved to Mull in 1963 with their three young sons, and were running their home as a guest house. The after-dinner entertainment the couple provided proved popular and, as demand grew, they set about transforming the adjacent cowshed into a small theatre. For their two-person productions, Barrie found inventive ways to adapt classics. Repertoire included plays by Shakespeare, Chekhov, Strindberg and Shaw, specially commissioned contemporary work by the Scottish writer Iain Crichton Smith, and original material written by the Heskeths. The couple took their productions on tour, across Britain and Europe. Barrie was born in Erdington, Birmingham, the only child of Doris (nee Sutcliffe) and Donald Hesketh, but grew up in the Peak District, where his father ran the village shop in Flash, outside Buxton. Barrie attended Buxton college, excelling in art, then trained as an actor at Central School of Speech and Drama, in London. There, Barrie met fellow student Marianne Richards, and they married in 1954, a year after graduation. His career began in weekly rep, with Caryl Jenner Touring Productions and Manchester Library Theatre Company, and as an actor and presenter for Granada and ABC TV. In 1960 he accepted a position with the Scottish Community Drama Association, in the course of which a visit to Mull inspired the family’s relocation. Among the audience on Mull one evening was the senior tutor at Churchill College, Cambridge, who was so impressed that he invited the couple to spend a term doing whatever they chose to enrich college life. I was an undergraduate there when they arrived in 1979. As a director Barrie was creative, playful, and generous with us, his student cast and crew. In 1983, the Heskeths were both appointed MBE. Following Marianne’s death from cancer in 1984, Barrie was again invited to Churchill College. It was then that he met Philippa Comber, a psychologist and the college counsellor, who became his partner. Having directed a final season on Mull, Barrie left the island in 1986 and joined Philippa in East Anglia. His focus shifted to writing: the autobiographical Taking Off (1997); a collection of unpublished essays, An Actor’s Take on the Psychology of Shakespeare; and plays including a monologue, The New Prometheus (1987), which he performed in New York, Berlin and Cambridge. Barrie and Philippa settled in Manchester in 1999. Communicating his love of Shakespeare, Barrie directed young actors at Altrincham Club theatre during 2003 and lectured in 2016 at Royal Central School of Speech and Drama, in London. A talented and prolific painter, he was still at work in his 80s. When Parkinson’s disease and an associated dementia made daily life increasingly difficult, Barrie moved to a care home in Cheshire in 2018. There, in 2020, he and Philippa married. Barrie is survived by Philippa, his sons, Richard, Nicholas and James, seven grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.Moderna is aiming to launch a single booster vaccination that will protect against both Covid-19 and flu within two years, its chief executive has said. Stéphane Bancel said that the combined vaccine – which will protect against Covid-19, influenza and RSV, a common respiratory virus – could be available before the winter infectious season in 2023. “Our goal is to be able to have a single annual booster so that we don’t have compliance issues where people don’t want to get two to three shots a winter,” he said at a panel session at the World Economic Forum in Davos. “The best-case scenario would be the fall of 2023.” Last year, the NHS moved to reassure the public that getting jabs for flu and Covid at the same time did not affect the body’s immune response. The UK government has been encouraging the public to get a third dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, especially those in more vulnerable groups such as older demographics or those with weakened immune systems. Its efforts include launching a nationwide mobile text message campaign on Boxing Day. Bancel has previously said that people may need a fourth shot of a vaccine this autumn as protection from booster shots declines over the coming months. This month, Israel became the first country in the world to offer a fourth dose of the coronavirus vaccine to people aged 60 and over. The US president’s chief medical adviser, Anthony Fauci, also speaking at Davos on Monday, said there was no evidence that repeat booster disease would overwhelm the immune system. “Giving boosters at different times, there is really no evidence that’s going to hinder” immune response, he said. Fauci said the goal should be a booster that induces a response against multiple potential variants. Bancel also said Moderna’s vaccine candidate specifically targeting the Omicron variant of coronavirus has almost finished being developed and will enter clinical development imminently. The US drug company expects to be able to share data with regulatory authorities around March, he added. “The vaccine is being finished,” he said. “It should be in the clinic in the coming weeks. We are hoping in the March timeframe to be able to have data to share with regulators to figure out next steps.” This month, Darius Hughes, the UK chief executive of Moderna, said it would be a “stretch” for a combined flu and Covid vaccine to be available by winter 2023. “Our number one priority for 2022, after getting the right Covid vaccine for the Omicron variant, is to try to really drive forward our flu and RSV programmes to see if we can get a combination, single-dose respiratory vaccine,” he said. “The benefit for the NHS, and all the vaccination services, and ultimately patients, we think, is going to be huge.”And that will do from me! Thanks a lot for your company. The hosts march on, even if this wasn’t their finest-ever hour, and will play their last-16 tie a week today. Cape Verde can feel optimistic of joining them but must wait til everyone’s done in the group stage, because two third-place sides won’t make it. See you again tomorrow, I hope, because we’ll have Senegal v Malawi especially for you. Cameroon win the group, Burkina Faso come second – their 1-1 draw with Ethiopia is confirmed – and Cape Verde get third place! With four points they are likely to go through ... but a lot of these groups are very tight so they’ll be waiting a few days to know for sure. 90+2 min: Cape Verde must now hold on from a corner. It’s cleared but N’Jie sees a shot deflected *just* wide and it’s a nervy time here – that is until Vozinha punches the next flag kick away before going down, and probably secures them the result. 90+1 min: Fortes concedes a very, very dangerous free-kick right on the left edge of the box now, though, as we enter three minutes of added time. It’s on the wire for Cape Verde here. Anguissa steps up ... and strikes the wall, follow-up pinging behind after being deflected twice. 90 min: Aboubakar tries to contrive a winner but his backheel can’t find a teammate. Cameroon do win another corner shortly afterwards but Cape Verde, so resilient here, survive. 87 min: Cape Verde defend a corner well and edge closer to their target. We’ll now see two more Cameroon subs – Mbaizo and Jean Onana on for Gouet and Fai. Too many subs breaks, it’s tedious. 86 min: Diney appears to be on his feet and walking round the pitch to the bench, so no huge issue there it seems. 84 min: Still 1-1 in Bafoussam, where Ethiopia need a goal and Burkina Faso need not to concede. The latter seem reasonably comfortable just now. 83 min: Diney goes off on a stretcher and Fortes comes on. Hopefully it’s not serious. 82 min: Anguissa is booked for a foul on Diney, who is in pain. It’s all just a bit scrappy and fragmented now. The number of permitted subs doesn’t help in this kind of game, where neither side really needs to force the issue. 79 min: Cape Verde do send in a free-kick from the right now, forcing Moukoudi to defend awkwardly, but the clock is ticking down nicely for them. 78 min: Here are those subs ... Nenass on for Monteiro and Furtado replacing Santos. 77 min: Cape Verde have all but given up attacking now they have their point in view but they’ll make some subs soon. N’Jie almost gets away in the box but is snuffed out. 74 min: He seems OK. On we go ... so can anyone in either of these 1-1 games score a winner? 73 min: Vozinha, a 35-year-old mainstay in goal, goes down awkwardly after taking a deep cross and needs treatment. 71 min: Immediately an N’Jie corner is volleyed at the back post by ... I think ... Ngadjui and Vozinha parries well. 70 min: A familiar face arrives for Cameroon now – N’Jie, the ex-Spurs star, replaces Ekambi. And here’s another, Stoke old boy Choupo-Moting on for Ngamadeu. Seems Cameroon want the win after all. 68 min: A Lea Siliki corner comes to nothing. Cameroon have stepped things up a bit. 67 min: Semedo off and Joao Paulo on for Cape Verde. 66 min: Ooooh, Aboubakar misses a sitter! The first cross is cleared away; the second, better delivery is parried by Vozinha ... straight to the feet of the previously unerring striker, who spoons over! 65 min: Cameroon have barely offered a thing going forward in this half though. The pace has gone right down and I’m not overly surprised. Diney is booked for a foul on Anguissa though, and the hosts can send a free-kick in. 63 min: A bit of flashy stuff from Anguissa down by the left corner flag pleases the crowd, but doesn’t really go anywhere. 62 min: Here is Lea Siliki, on for Kunde. 61 min: We will soon see another name from the English leagues, Middlesbrough’s James Lea Siliki, come on for Cameroon. 58 min: Will the sides shake hands on this now? Four points gives Cape Verde a great chance of going through, whatever happens elsewhere, while three really doesn’t. And seven wins the group for Cameroon. 56 min: Big surprise, on the face of things, that the Olympiacos forward Rodrigues didn’t start this game. That was such a smart, deft finish. AND WE GET IT! Wow. It’s the substitute, Rodrigues, who flicks home sublimely with his heel after Monteiro gets away down the right and squares on the half-volley. Well, well. In the space of a minute this group has sprung back to life. 52 min: It’s 1-1 in Bafoussam as Kebede converts the spot kick! This group isn’t done and dusted just yet, although we need another goal for at least one of Ethiopia and Cape Verde to change things definitively. 50 min: A defensive mix-up forces Vozinha to react desperately to thwart Ekambi ... and that Ethiopia penalty has, meanwhile, been given. 49 min: Cameroon win a corner down on the right, but it’s defended well enough. Pico then nicks the second ball away. In Bafoussam there’s a long VAR check for an Ethiopia penalty ... 47 min: Monteiro almost sends Tavares clear, and should, but messes up his pass. 46 min: Kunde shoots over from range almost immediately. We eventually get started after some confusion – Rodrigues, a Cape Verde forward who has come on as a sub for Lisandro Semedo, took some time to come down the tunnel and held things up. Can Cape Verde find a way back and make this interesting? They’ll need a tad more guile. But Cameroon do have a defensive error in them and we’ve seen signs of that even today. The Fiver has landed! In Bafoussam, Burkina Faso lead Ethiopia 1-0 at the break and will finish second as we stand. A foul and yellow card for Fai brings one more free-kick from Cape Verde, near the left byline, and another big defensive block from the hosts – then the whistle. Aboubakar’s fifth goal of the tournament puts Cameroon, who haven’t been firing on all cylinders, well in the box seat to top this group. Cape Verde showed some life after going behind but haven’t had a lot beyond set pieces. If they can’t find a leveller they will face a very anxious wait to see if they’ll play in the knock-outs. 44 min: Cape Verde have come back quite well, and Anguissa is again rash in conceding a free-kick on the left. It almost leads to a goal! After Cameroon fail to clear, the ball is chipped back in from the right and Onana misses it, only being bailed out by Moukoudi as a Cape Verde attacked prepares to knock it in! Onana does rather better in grabbing the resulting corner. 42 min: And now a wild Anguissa backpass concedes a cheap corner. Can Cape Verde strike straight back thanks to this gift? Nope, it’s hacked away. 41 min: Cape Verde need to go for a goal now, and they come close-ish when Lisandro Semedo glances a free-kick wide. Clinical! Ngamaleu puts in a deep free-kick from the right, Moukoudi challenges for it with a defender, and the ball drops for Aboubakar, 15 yards out, to lash a superb low finish beyond Vozinha! 38 min: Aboubakar chases a long pass from Onana but Pico, a rock so far, intervenes. Meanwhile, Ethiopia are pushing for an equaliser in Bafoussam and have just been denied – not for the first time – by a fine save. 37 min: It wasn’t, because the set piece is sloppy. 36 min: Fai concedes a messy foul on the far touchline and Cape Verde can take their time over a free-kick, which they most certainly do. It brings a corner, so the wait may have been worth it. 34 min: Aboubakar shows great strength to wriggle around Pico and whips in a low shot that Vozinha tips wide. That’s good work from all parties. Cape Verde deal with the corner. 32 min: Kunde goes for goal, 20 yards out and a bit to the left, but it’s into the wall. A follow-up is then blocked too. 30 min: As things stand this group would finish in exactly the order expected – Cameroon, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Ethiopia. Now Cameroon speed things up with some lovely passing from the back and the dyed red-headed Patrick concedes a very dangerous-looking free-kick with a foul on Ngamaleu ... 27 min: Cape Verde win their first corner, but they don’t do a lot with it. 25 min: Burkina Faso have scored against Ethiopia! They lead 1-0 with a lob from Cyrille Bayala. They can’t come above Cameroon but would definitely come above Cape Verde with three points, so a win sees them home. 24 min: Pico bashes clear as Cameroon look to work space on the right. 22 min: The game stops briefly for Santos to sort his laces out. Cape Verde are quite happy for things not to move too quickly. 20 min: Cameroon try to build again but it’s a really solid, compact defensive bloc from Cape Verde now. This is panning out as expected – not a particularly open watch but a tactically interesting one. 17 min: Aboubakar flashes a snap-shot not too far past the angle, with Vozinha diving desperately. 16 min: In further solidification, Cape Verde are now playing with a back three and wing-backs. 15 min: A defensive mistake by Ngadjui almost lets Cape Verde in but he’s bailed out by Tolo. Cape Verde have settled things down a bit. It’ll be interested to see how this game pans out if it’s level after, say, an hour because a point would suit everyone quite well. 12 min: I’ve just watched Ethiopia, who play some really stunning technical football but are often bested physically, come very close to scoring against Burkina Faso ... before almost gifting them an opener at the other end. Goalless there too but looks an entertaining start. 10 min: Cameroon are one of the few teams in this tournament that actively play a pressing game and it’s working so far, they’re smothering their visitors. Yes, and none of these countries have been embarrassed. Gambia should be through to the knock-outs and Sierra Leone &amp; Equatorial Guinea could be among those joining them! 7 min: Good chance for Cameroon as sloppy passing from Stopira is cut out by Ngamaleu, who has Aboubakar free to his left, but Pico – as Lopes is known, and will be known from hereon in this MBM – defends superbly. The corner comes to little. 6 min: Anguissa almost pushes for the right byline but is crowded out. Cape Verde’s defending has been messy but effective so far. 5 min: Cameroon are controlling these opening moments. They have played at a nice tempo, befitting of a host nation, in their games so far. I think Cape Verde, who are no slouches, will be looking to dig in and counter if and when they can. 2 min: Formation news – for all the fancy shapes I laid out at the top of the show, it looks like both sides have gone 4-4-2 to begin with. Ekambi is up top alongside Aboubakar for Cameroon in a potent duo that have six goals between them so far. Cameroon win an early corner but Moukoudi heads it well over. Cameroon are in yellow shirts and green shorts, Cape Verde all in white. The hosts kick us off and go from right to left! It’s still nice and loud in there though. I’ve put Burkina Faso v Ethiopia, the group’s other deciding game, on my phone so if my eyes hold out I’ll keep you apprised of that. The teams are on the pitch and hollering the anthems! As in their first two group games, Cameroon get to play in the capital city Yaounde. And as in the second of those, it’s far from full in there – fans need to vaccinated and negative Covid-19 tested to enter and, in what is a damning indictment on the way the world works, only 2.5% of Cameroonians have had two jabs. Are you watching AFCON and how are you enjoying it? Email me and tell me more. Premier League stars on show today: none. The best I can give you are ex-Fulham midfielder Andre-Frank Zambo Anguissa, now at Napoli, and – probably more interestingly – the Shamrock Rovers centre-back Roberto Lopes. In a cracking story, the Dublin-born Lopes was originally sounded out for a call-up via LinkedIn but let it slide for nine months. Eventually he was advised that it wasn’t a prank, and here we are today! Cape Verde (3-4-2-1): Vozinha; Diney, Lopes, Stopira; Fortes, Andrade, Santos, Tavares; L Semedo, Monteiro; W Semedo. Cameroon (4-1-4-1): Onana; Fai, Moukoudi, Ngadeu-Ngadjui, Tolo; Gouet; Ngamaleu, Kunde, Anguissa, Ekambi; Aboubakar. This AFCON has caught light, hasn’t it? I’ll grant you it had a fairly sluggish start, particularly for newbies who might have found the lack of goals slow going, but we’ve got a tournament on our hands now! Once the jeopardy kicked in, things started opening up – and yesterday was a wild, dramatic and surprising a group stage night as you’ll see anywhere. I’m heading out there on Thursday and cannot wait, so hands up to a vested interest in things continuing similarly. The jeopardy is watered down in this, the host nation Cameroon’s third game, to a small extent: they’re already through, with two wins in two and some feisty attacking football into the bargain. The remaining question for them is whether they’ll finish first or second: a point would secure the former. As a side note – should they finish second their last-16 tie would, as things stand, be played in Limbe, an area where there has been some trouble due to the Anglophone crisis in Cameroon, and I daresay the authorities would like to avoid that. For Cape Verde, who tend to be competent and organised but not flashy, the equation is trickier. They would end up in the top two with a win and a point, which would leave them with four, should mean they go through with the best third-placed teams. Defeat would mean they remain third but it’s likely only one or two, at most, teams that finish on three points will go through – they may have to wait until as late as Thursday to find out. We’ll know far more very soon – get your tweets and emails in, and away we go!My friend Iain Smith, who has died of a stroke aged 82, was a historian specialising in British colonial history who spent 37 years at the University of Warwick. He combined liberal broad-mindedness and boundless curiosity with an active spirit. Iain was born in Hull to Alexander Smith, a dentist, and his wife, Amy (nee Cheetham). Attending Bootham school, York, he took on board and retained its Quaker values of service for the rest of his life. He served on the board of governors of another Quaker school, Leighton Park, Reading, for many years. He studied history at Edinburgh University, graduating in 1962, then went to Kenya to teach at a Quaker school for 18 months. After a Fulbright scholarship in Wisconsin, he returned to the UK to take a doctorate at Oxford University, finishing in 1969, and then joined the history department at Warwick University, where – interrupted only to run the Vienna Quaker Centre for a year in the 1970s – he remained until retirement. One of Iain’s popular courses was on the history of South Africa from 1885 to 1910. He also wrote a book on the subject, The Origins of the South African War, 1899-1902 (1996), which was praised for objectivity by both English- and Afrikaans-speaking scholars. Other publications included a monograph on Henry Morton Stanley’s last venture, The Emin Pasha Relief Expedition, 1886-1890 (1972), and, in two volumes The Siege of Mafeking (2001). From 1980 to 1995 he was on the council of the Historical Association. One of Iain’s last projects (2003-2007), together with South African historians and funded by the Wellcome Trust, was to create a database for future research on disease and mortality in concentration camps in the South African War. Over the course of his academic career he carried out a wide range of visiting lectureships or fellowships, in Cape Town, Pretoria, Helsinki, Tbilisi (Georgia), Mansfield College, Oxford, and (for the British Council) China. He retired in 2006 as emeritus reader. Iain was warm and enthusiastic and had the ability to state his views plainly without arousing rancour, a rare gift. He was also an outstanding teacher whose concern for his own students often extended well after their time at Warwick. In 1968 Iain married Teresa Halikowska, a Polish student of English whom he met at Oxford. Together they made their home in Leamington Spa a haven for lovers of literature, music and discussion. A music lover, he became chair of the Leamington Music Society. He was also a keen gardener and a lively participant in the weekly meetings of the Solihull Poetry Society. He continued well into retirement to write academic reviews. Teresa died last year. He is survived by their children, Stefan, Milena and Adrian.Police will take no action against trans rights activists who posted a photograph of JK Rowling’s home online. The author had contacted police in Scotland in November after the tweet, which showed her Edinburgh house and revealed the address. The image showed activists standing outside the property with placards carrying slogans such as “trans liberation now”. However, Police Scotland said on Monday that no criminality had been established following inquiries. Rowling had said the photo made her a victim of “doxxing” – the act of publishing private personal information about an individual or organisation, usually online, to enable others to take action. “I have to assume [they] thought doxxing me would intimidate me out of speaking up for women’s sex-based rights,” she tweeted in response to the activists at the time. “They should have reflected on the fact that I’ve now received so many death threats I could paper the house with them, and I haven’t stopped speaking out. “Perhaps, and I’m just throwing this out there, the best way to prove your movement isn’t a threat to women, is to stop stalking, harassing and threatening us.” The campaigners deleted the photo the day after it was posted. They said the decision was made after they received “serious and threatening transphobic messages”. In 2020, Rowling sparked controversy after taking issue with a headline on an online article discussing “people who menstruate” and said: “I’m sure there used to be a word for those people. Someone help me out. Wumben? Wimpund? Woomud?” Critics accused her of being transphobic, an allegation Rowling strongly denies. After she published a lengthy essay explaining the development of her critical stance in sex and gender debates, the lead actors of the Potter film franchise, Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson and Rupert Grint, all made public their support for transgender rights.Russia has begun moving troops to Ukraine’s northern neighbour Belarus for joint military exercises, in a move likely to increase fears in the west that Moscow is preparing for an invasion. The joint military exercises, named United Resolve, are to take place as Russia also musters forces along Ukraine’s eastern border, threatening a potential invasion that could unleash the largest conflict in Europe for decades. Social media videos from Belarus appeared to show artillery and other military vehicles arriving on flatbed carriages owned by the Russian state railway company, and Alexander Volfovich, the head of Belarus’s security council, said in a briefing that troops were already arriving before exercises scheduled for February. Some military analysts have suggested Russia could send its forces through Belarus in the case of a broad invasion, effectively stretching out Ukraine’s defences by taking advantage of the two countries’ nearly 700-mile border. Others believe Belarus would not play a serious role in the conflict if Russia were to launch an attack on Ukraine. The Belarusian leader, Alexander Lukashenko, has responded to international pressure and isolation by strengthening ties with Russia, giving vocal support for Putin’s military buildup as he receives diplomatic and economic support from the Kremlin to battle western sanctions. He has also abandoned his country’s supposedly neutral stance on the Ukraine conflict and publicly endorsed Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea. The exercises are to be held in the west of Belarus, near the borders of Nato members Poland and Lithuania, and its southern flank with Ukraine, Lukashenko said. “Set an exact date and let us know, so we aren’t blamed for massing some troops here out of the blue as if we are preparing to go to war,” he told top military officials. Reports from Russia have also shown more military equipment, including tanks and short-range ballistic missiles, being transported across the country toward Ukraine within the last week. The German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, said before a meeting with her Russian counterpart on Tuesday that she hoped the tensions could be resolved by diplomacy but if not Moscow would pay a “high price” for aggressive acts toward Ukraine. No concrete troop numbers or timeframe have been named for the joint Russia-Belarus exercises, which Putin announced during a summit with Lukashenko in late December. Lukashenko said on Monday that the exact dates in February were still being determined. He said during the briefing that the exercises were needed because of the presence of Nato forces in neighbouring Poland and the Baltic states, as well as Ukraine’s deployment of troops to the border in response to the migrant crisis that he helped create last year. “Why are we and Russia being reproached for holding manoeuvres, exercises and so forth when you’ve come from far away?” said Lukashenko in heated remarks in which he said western countries had stationed nearly 30,000 troops near his country’s borders. “There are some hot-heads calling for war. We hear these statements.” He also echoed aggressive Kremlin rhetoric that may be used to justify a military intervention in Ukraine, claiming that Kyiv was preparing battalions of “radical nationalists”. A Ukrainian official called the remarks manipulative and “part of an information war”. Volfovich said the exercises would involve Belarusian and Russian soldiers training to repel air and land attacks, neutralise enemy saboteurs and practise other manoeuvres. He also played down the significance of their timing, saying that there was “nothing extraordinary” in them because they were announced late last year, according to a report in the state-run Belta news agency. There are signs, however, that Belarus has taken a more active role in its support of Russia in its ongoing conflict with Ukraine and the west. Kyiv initially said it believed a hacking team tied to Belarusian state intelligence may have played a role in a major cyber-attack on government websites late last week, and Russian nuclear-capable bombers have recently flown over western Belarus. Lukashenko has strengthened ties with Putin since 2020, when he launched a bloody crackdown on protests sparked by vote-rigging during presidential elections. He was driven further into international isolation after he grounded a RyanAir flight in order to arrest a critic of his government and helped manufacture a migrant crisis on EU borders, prompting a humanitarian emergency. Belarus adopted an ostensibly neutral position in 2014 and avoided recognising Russia’s annexation of Crimea, but the dynamic has changed considerably as the country has relied more on Russian diplomatic and material support in the last two years.A former charity worker who worked with released prisoners was stabbed to death by an ex-inmate she had begun a relationship with, a jury has heard. Michaela Hall, 49, was stabbed through the eye by Lee Kendall, 42, in a bedroom of her house in the Cornish village of Mount Hawke, Truro crown court was told. The court heard that Hall, a mother of two, was the victim of a number of assaults before she was killed, but declined to pursue prosecutions against Kendall. Jurors were told that on the night of the alleged murder, Hall was talking to a friend in Gran Canaria, who heard her screaming as if she was in a “movie” and shouting: “Lee, stop Lee, get off me.” The friend managed to alert the UK authorities and police went to the house three times over the next 24 hours but did not see any sign of a disturbance and did not force an entry. Hall’s father, Peter, finally got a spare key from the landlord and found her body in the bedroom. Jo Martin QC, prosecuting, said Hall had given up her job as an air cabin crew member to move to Cornwall, where her family lived. She had worked for two charities who helped prisoners when they were released from jail. But Martin said: “Sadly, Michaela’s personality type was unsuited for the role. She got too involved and got too close. She genuinely wanted to help, but she could not recognise the importance of professional boundaries.” She was assigned as support worker to Kendall, who had a drug problem, and picked him up from prison when he was freed in March 2019. But a month later she lost her post because it was discovered she had started a relationship with Kendall, who moved into her home. Martin said they had a “complex relationship” and Hall tried to help and save him. But she added: “It wasn’t long before the violence started. She was seen with black eyes on numerous times, but refused to get help. Violence was a routine feature of the relationship.” The police were called on a number of occasions. Kendall admitted some attacks, and was given a three-year community order by a judge. But at the end of May 2021, Kendall allegedly carried out the fatal attack. Martin told the jury: “He killed her by stabbing her through the eye with a knife. There is no doubt that he did kill Michaela Hall.” She said that after he was arrested, Kendall claimed Hall had lunged at him with a knife and she accidentally sustained a stab wound to the eye during the struggle. A postmortem revealed she had other facial and neck wounds consistent with manual strangulation – and Kendall’s DNA was found on her neck. The cause of death was recorded as a stab wound to the eye socket and brain, with other injuries also present. Kendall denies murder and his trial continues.Anthony Martial’s hopes of leaving Old Trafford on loan this month could rest on whether Manchester United are willing to pay a portion of the France striker’s wages, with Sevilla, Juventus and Barcelona all having shown an interest. Martial, who denied United manager Ralf Rangnick’s suggestion that he had refused to be part of the squad for Saturday’s trip to Aston Villa, has made no secret of his desire to leave seven years after joining from Monaco in a deal that made him the most expensive teenager in history. United are believed to want his £150,000-a-week salary covered in full, plus a loan fee. While Tottenham and Newcastle have already made approaches to sign the 26-year-old on loan until the end of the season, it is understood that Martial has no interest in joining another Premier League club on a short-term deal and would prefer to move abroad. Sevilla’s loan bid that would have involved the Spanish club paying half of Martial’s wages was rejected at the end of December and they are believed to be unwilling to cover his entire salary. Juventus have also expressed an interest in signing the player who has made only two Premier League starts this season, while Barcelona are believed to have made initial enquiries as they decide whether to sign another forward. Rangnick, the interim United manager, named only eight substitutes for the 2-2 draw at Villa Park and claimed that Martial’s absence from the travelling party was the player’s choice. “He [Martial] didn’t want to be in the squad,” Rangnick said. “He would have been in the squad normally. He didn’t want to be and that’s the reason why he wasn’t with us.” Martial hit back in a post on his Instagram story on Saturday evening. “I will never refuse to play a match for Man United,” the forward wrote. “I’ve been here for seven years and I never disrespected, and will never disrespect, the club and the fans.”Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, has signalled the government does not have an alternative funding model for the BBC in mind as it commits to a review of the licence fee. (See 4.59pm.) In a statement to MPs, she also hinted she may have gone further than intended when she said yesterday the licence fee was definitely being abandoned. Today she just said she could not see the review allowing it to continue. (See 5.23pm.) The BBC has described the parallel announcement that the licence fee will be frozen for two years as “disappointing”. (See 5.17pm.) Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former chief adviser, says he is prepared to give evidence on oath proving Boris Johnson has been lying about the party held in Downing Street on 20 May 2020. (See 6.08pm.) There is “massive anger” among grassroots Conservative party supporters over the Downing Street parties scandal, the head of a leading group has said as its survey found 40% thought Boris Johnson should resign. Downing Street has said Boris and Carrie Johnson followed Covid guidance when the prime minister was “commuting” from Chequers to No 10 during the first lockdown in 2020 – but declined to answer further questions, including whether the pair held social events. Nadhim Zahawi has denied the government is rushing out a series of policy ideas in an attempt to save Boris Johnson, arguing that the prime minister is safe in his job despite a string of Downing Street parties during lockdowns. Dominic Cummings, Boris Johnson’s former chief adviser, was the first person to publicly reveal the fact that a drinks party took place at Downing Street on 20 May 2020. Boris Johnson attended and it was this that propelled partygate - already deeply damaging - into territory where it seems quite likely to be career-ending. In an update this afternoon to a post on his Substack blog, Cummings says that he personally was one of the people who warned Johnson that the proposed party was a mistake. This is what he says, writing about 20 May 2020, which he says was a “pivotal day” at No 10 because big arguments were taking place about how it was run. Amid discussion over the future of the cabinet secretary and PPS himself, which had been going on for days, I said to the PM something like: Martin’s [Martin Reynolds, Boris Johnson’s PPS] invited the building to a drinks party, this is what I’m talking about, you’ve got to grip this madhouse. The PM waved it aside. I had told him repeatedly the PPS should be replaced, as had other competent officials who knew the whole structure needed a huge upgrade in personnel and management. ‘He’s MY guy, I don’t want you replacing him with YOUR person.’ (Yes, this says a lot.) No 10 again denied this morning that Johnson did receive any warnings of this nature. (See 1.13pm.) Cummings says he and other witnesses would “swear under oath” Johnson is lying. He writes: The events of 20 May alone, never mind the string of other events, mean the PM lied to parliament about parties. Not only me but other eyewitnesses who discussed this at the time would swear under oath this is what happened. Sonia Khan, who worked as an adviser in Downing Street when David Cameron and Theresa May were in office, told the World at One today that there was a drinking culture in the building. She said drinks were often used as a means of thanking people for working long hours. She said: Usually these drinking sessions are sandwiched between pieces of work, so it feels like a very, very routine thing. Drinks could start at lunch time, they could start a little bit later in the day - different teams do things very differently - but the idea of mini fridges or having drinks underneath your table wasn’t uncommon. This prompted this tweet from Dominic Cummings, for whom no vendetta is too minor to keep pursuing. Khan was sacked by Cummings, who had her escorted out of Downing Street by the police. She subsequently received a payoff after claiming unfair dismissal. Chris Bryant (Lab) says £159 a year is a lot of money to his constituents. But he accuses Dorries of “crocodile tears” over this. If she was really worried about the cost of living, the government would not be putting up national insurance, which will cost his constituents almost exactly the same amount, he says. He accuses the government of dismantling one of the great British treasures. Catherine McKinnell (Lab) asks for an assurance that Dorries is not seeking to undermine a great British institution just to save the PM’s skin. “I’m not,” Dorries replies. Asked again about her tweet yesterday, Dorries says when she posted the message on Instagram she said this was “likely to be” the last licence fee annnouncement, not that it would definitely be the last one (as her tweet said). She says she cannot see how it will continue. Dorries says she understands the importance of BBC World Service because she ran a school in Africa for a year, and used to listen to it then. Kevan Jones (Lab) asks if the cabinet signed off on this, or if it was announced in a rush. Dorries says the cabinet has signed off on this. She says she is legally obliged to make the announcement as early as possible, to give the BBC time to prepare. The BBC says the licence fee freeze is “disappointing” and will impact on programming. In a statement its chairman, Richard Sharp, and its director general, Tim Davie, said: A freeze in the first two years of this settlement means the BBC will now have to absorb inflation. That is disappointing - not just for licence fee payers, but also for the cultural industries who rely on the BBC for the important work they do across the UK. The BBC’s income for UK services is already 30% lower in real terms than it was 10 years ago. We will set out the implications of the settlement later, before the end of the financial year, but it will necessitate tougher choices which will impact licence fee-payers. Valerie Vaz (Lab) asks Dorries if she agrees that 43p per day is value for money for the BBC. Dorries says, if working families cannot afford the licence fee, they would not agree. For some people it is difficult to pay, she says. John Redwood (Con) says non-payment of the licence fee should be decriminalised. Dorries says this is being kept under review. But she questions whether it is right for people to be made to pay the licence fee under threat of prosecution. John Whittingdale (Con), the former culture secretary, says although more and more young people say they do not watch the BBC, we will still need public service broadcasting. He says the debate about a future funding model should be about, not undermining it, but ensuring it can survive. Dorries agrees that the question is not whether or not to have a BBC; it is how to fund it. Here is the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport’s news release about Dorries’s announcement. Lloyd Russell-Moyle (Lab) says it was “reckless” of Dorries yesterday to say, in her tweet, the licence fee will definitely go when the government does not have an alternative model. Dorries says the government has a lot of time to think about this. In response to further questions on this, she says it is not for her to decide what the alternative model should be. Damian Green (Con), the former first secretary of state, says the licence fee is something that “may not work in theory, but works really well in practice”. He asks if the government has a strong alternative model in mind. If it doesn’t, it should keep the licence fee for the next charter period (from 2028 to 2038). Dorries says the government has six years to find one. The Royal Navy is not expected to pursue a controversial Home Office policy of pushing back refugee dinghies towards France once the military is given responsibility for small boat Channel crossings, my colleagues Rajeev Syal and Dan Sabbagh report. Julian Knight (Con), chair of the Commons culture committee, welcomes the announcement. He says the licence fee represents a significant cost for some people, and he says the funding model should be reviewed. Dorries she she expects the select committee will provide an important contribution on alternative funding models. John Nicolson, the SNP’s culture spokesman, says the licence fee cost 43p per day. If Nadine Dorries thinks that is expensive, then imagine how people will cope with the cost of a Netflix-style subscription. He says the Tory right hate the BBC. They want it to cover Boris Johnson with “fawning adultation”, as the printed press does. Dorries is responding to Powell. She says she does not accept Labour’s claim that £159 is a small amount of money. To say that is a “disgrace”, she claims. She says it is a “significant sum” for some people. And it is regressive (because the rich pay the same amount as the poor). She challenges Powell to say if Labour backs freezing the licence fee. As Powell shakes her head, Dorries says she takes that as confirmation they don’t. Lucy Powell, the shadow culture secretary, is responding to Dorries. She describes Dorries as the top “teacher’s pet” in the cabinet. She was first to tweet support for the PM last week, first to do a broadcast round on his behalf, and is now the first to throw up a distraction from the leadership crisis. She mocks the idea that this is about addressing the cost of living crisis. If the government were worried about the cost of living, they would be doing something about energy bills, not about the £159 annual licence fee. She says this is Operation Red Meat, designed to stop the PM being “dead meat”. She says impartiality is important. But by linking the funding settlement to impartiality in her statement, the government sounds “more like a tinpot dictatorship than a health democracy”. UPDATE: Powell said: [Dorries] was the first cabinet minister to tweet support for the prime minister, she was the first to volunteer to do a broadcast round, and now she has been the first to throw up a distraction and finding someone else to blame for the prime minister’s disintegrating leadership: the BBC’s reporting, of course. The government claims this is all about the cost-of-living crisis. I mean, pull the other one. What is it about the £13.57 a month that marks it out for such immediate and special attention to address the cost of living over the £1,200 increase in energy and household bills, or the £3,000-a-year tax increase that her government has imposed? Is the licence fee really at the heart of the cost-of-living crisis? Or is this really about their long-standing vendetta against the BBC? She won’t stop until her cultural vandalism has destroyed everything that is great about Britain. Vandalism is exactly what it is to tweet on Sunday, with no notice, no discussion or thought, the end of the unique funding of the BBC altogether without any clue as to what will replace it. Dorries says she also needs to look to the future. She says 97% of homes have superfast broadband. A family can be watching five different movies in five different rooms. Over 65% of British households have access to the fastest broadband on the planet. So it is time to ask if the licence fee is still the right longterm funding model for the BBC. A review will start shortly, she says. She says she wants the BBC to continue to thrive. But this is 2022, not 1922 (the year of the BBC’s creation). Dorries says she wants the BBC to do more “to address issues around impartiality and groupthink”. In the last few months, I’ve made it clear that the BBC needs to address issues around impartiality and group think. We will shortly begin the mid-term review of the BBC’s charter which will consider the overall governance and regulation of the BBC, and a key part of that review will look at whether the BBC’s action plan on impartiality has in fact materially contributed to improving the internal governance of the organisation. Dorries says she has to make a licence fee recommendation under legislation. She and her predecessor have held meetings with the BBC on this, she says. She has to consider the level of funding it needs. She says the PM has called the BBC a great institution. S4C also plays a critical role, she says. However, in deciding on a settlement, she had to be realistic about the economic situation facing households. The global cost of living is rising, she says, and the government is committed to supporting families. She says she had to think very carefully about increasing the licence fee. She says she did not want to expose people to the threat of bailiffs. In the end they decided they could not expose people to higher costs. It is not reasonable to ask for “just a little more” every year. Dorries confirms BBC licence fee will be frozen for two years. After that it will rise in line with inflation for four years. The BBC wanted the licence fee to rise to £180, she says. But she said under this plan it will remain at £159 until April 2024. She also says S4C will get an extra £7.5m from 2022 for digital services. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, starts by rebuking Nadine Dorries for tweeting about this announcement yesterday, and for the fact that it was briefed to the papers. If it was a leak, and Dorries was only responding on Twitter because she felt she had too, there should be a leak inquiry, he says. Dorries starts by apologising. She says she refused media bids yesterday and for today. Earlier, during Home Office questions, Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, asked Priti Patel why she wanted the police to enforce Covid rules in 2020, but defended Boris Johnson last week after he confirmed he had broken them. Cooper identified the contrast on Twitter last week. And today she said: How on Earth can [Patel] defend the prime minister, who has publicly admitted breaking the rules? She isn’t even waiting for the Sue Gray report ... Tens of thousands of fines were given out in the months when Downing Street was holding parties and she told the police to enforce those rules, but now she’s defending someone who has admitted breaking them. The home secretary’s job is to uphold the rule of law. Does she realise how damaging it is to public trust and to trust in the police to be undermining the rule of law now? In response Patel said the police and courts are independent of government before suggesting Labour was seeking to “pre-judge, pressure, smear, slander” rather than “let everyone get on and do the work that’s required”. Although the Times splashed on its story about the government’s latest plan to deploy the military to stop people crossing the Channel in small boats, and to offshore the processing of asylum applicants (see 11.07am), Simon Nixon, the paper’s chief leader writer, reckons the proposals are nonsense. In the Commons Barry Gardiner, the former Labour shadow cabinet minister who accepted funding for his office worth more than £500,000 from Christine Lee, asked if MPs would get more help so they could be warned if money offered to them was tainted. Patel said the government would do all it could to protect the integrity of our democracy. Responding for Labour, Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said she condemned in the strongest terms China’s attempt to intefere in the British political process. She asked when the government would fully implement the recommendations from the intelligence and security committee’s report into Russian interference in British politics. And she asked when the government would respond to the Committee on Standards in Public Life’s report calling for loopholes allowing foreign money to fund politics in this country to be closed. In response, Patel said the government had responded to the ISC report at the time. In her Commons statement Patel said she was “utterly appalled” by the activities of Christine Lee. She said Lee was working to make the the UK political landscape “favourable to the Chinese authorities’ agenda”. She said strong safeguards were already in place, but she said new legislation would make it harder for malign states to carry out such activities. Priti Patel, the home secretary, is making her statement now. It is about foreign interference in UK politics, she says. (So it is not primarily about Channel crossings either. It was simply billed in advance as a security update.) Her statement is primarily about the Christine Lee case, which has been embarrassing to Labour. Our report on it is here. She has not finished yet, but she does not seem to talking about Russian interference with Brexit, which Boris Johnson’s government has shown no interest in investigating. There is “massive anger” among grassroots Conservative party supporters over the Downing Street parties scandal, the head of a leading group has said as its survey found 40% thought Boris Johnson should resign, the Guardian reports. Our story is here. Patel has just told MPs that she spoke to her US opposite number before Home Office questions started about the Texas synagogue seige, which led to Malik Faisal Akram, a 44-year-old Briton, being shot dead by the FBI as it ended. She said the UK authorities were working with the FBI and a great deal of intelligence sharing was taking place. Two teenagers have been arrested in Manchester in connection with the case. Earlier during Home Office questions in the Commons Stuart McDonald, the SNP’s spokesperson, said deploying the navy against refugees and asylum seekers would be “inhumane” and abuse of the military. He said: The home secretary has quite a nerve to talk about political gimmicks given that she’s the first person to be sent out to the despatch box to further Operation Red Meat, because the proposals leaked out over the weekend have absolutely nothing to do with saving lives, everything to do with saving the prime minister’s career and her own political career. The home secretary sending in the Royal Navy against small boats full of refugees and asylum seekers is pathetic, it’s inhumane and an abuse of the Royal Navy, and her grubby shopping around for places to offshore asylum seekers an outrageous and dangerous big white elephant. So instead of ripping up the refugee convention and locking up refugees, why doesn’t the Home Office start working with UNHCR and others to live up to our humanitarian obligations under it? In response, Priti Patel, the home secretary, said: [McDonald] needs to understand local migration challenges, actually, the international exploitation of human lives and human beings that take place, because clearly he has no recommendations or answers. His local authorities across Scotland refused to house people that have come to our country. Quite frankly I’ll take no lectures from him and he can carry on with his political gimmicks, but actually their lack of policy says a great deal. The Labour shadow Home Office minister Holly Lynch also criticised the proposal. She said: We have been here before. In 2019, the government brought in the Navy to patrol the Channel. Patrols ended after around six weeks and cost 780,000 without a single boat having been intercepted. Can the home secretary explain how today’s proposals will be any different to 2019 and prevent lives from being lost at sea? Patel told her: I think the British public will also support the government that we should do everything possible to protect our borders and that is why a blended approach is absolutely vital. In the Commons Priti Patel, the home secretary, has just confirmed that the Home Office has commissioned the Ministry of Defence as a “crucial operational partner” to protect the Channel against illegal immigration. She said she would be saying more in her statement later (and so it won’t be focused on the Texas synagogue seige, as I speculated earlier). Sinn Féin has accused the UK government of changing the rules on “double jobbing” for Northern Irish parliamentarians (see 10.49am) to help the DUP. Michelle O’Neill, the Sinn Féin leader in Northern Ireland and deputy first minister, said: They’re interfering to serve only the DUP. They are interfering to prop up the DUP in the election campaign. This is the very same DUP that are threatening the stability of politics ... The British government have rewarded them over the weekend by propping them up in terms of giving Jeffrey Donaldson an each-way bet. The Scottish Conservatives have called on Nicola Sturgeon to remove most coronavirus restrictions, with the exception of face coverings, PA Media reports. PA says: Ahead of the first minister’s Covid update tomorrow, where a decision is expected on current restrictions on hospitality and leisure venues, Tory leader Douglas Ross has asked her to go further. As well as an end to restrictions currently on businesses, that put a cap of 100 on indoor standing events and 200 on seated events, enforce table service for alcohol-selling businesses and mandate social distancing between groups, the Tories are looking for the first minister to announce the scrapping of the vaccine passport scheme along with guidance on household mixing and social distancing. The Tory plea, which would see changes come into effect from 31 January, also calls for mask wearing in schools to be dropped and work from home guidance to be dropped, while self-isolation would be “gradually phased out” over a period of months. Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, told Radio 4’s the World at One that Labour would support any “sensible” measures to save lives in the Channel. But she cast doubt on the sincerity and viability of government plans to put the military in charge. (See 11.07am.) She told the programme: More action is needed to deal with the dangerous boat crossings that are putting lives at risk. In particular, I mean serious hard work with France on stopping the criminal gangs and preventing the crossings in the first place. So look, we would support any sensible measures that could save lives in the Channel. But there’s two problems with this. First is the timing of it, where it is a briefing to the Times which government sources are themselves admitting is part of what they describe as Operation Save Big Dog and being about saving the prime minister’s skin rather than a serious approach to the problem. The second is we don’t really know very much about this, but we do know they have used the navy before, three years ago. At that point, they had two navy vessels that didn’t intercept any boats, and that was stopped. So we don’t know what would be different this time round and we do need to actually have some more proper, serious information about this, rather than the kind of briefings that we’ve got instead. And here is a summary of the main points from the Downing Street lobby briefing. No 10 firmly denied widespread reports that Boris Johnson was warned in advance by colleagues that holding a party on 20 May 2020 would be a mistake. (See 1.13pm.) The PM’s spokesman defended Boris Johnson’s decision to commute between Chequers and No 10 between 16 and 27 March 2020, when guidance said people should not travel for non-essential reasons. These trips were revealed by the website Tortoise on Friday, after Downing Street dodged questions on them for more than a year. The spokesman said: At the time, as you know, Mrs Johnson was heavily pregnant and had been placed in a vulnerable category and advised to minimise social contacts, so in line with clinical guidance and to minimise the risk to her they were based at Chequers during that period, with the prime minister commuting to Downing Street to work. On 16 March 2020 Johnson told the public to stop all unnecessary travel. The spokesman said the guidance on not travelling to second homes did not come in until March 22, “at which point the prime minister and his wife were already based in Chequers, acting in line with clinical guidance”. Asked why the PM’s wife could not stay in Downing Street during this period, the spokesman said: The guidance [to] all pregnant women and anyone in a vulnerable category was to minimise social contact as much as possible. It is argued that, because No 10 is a home and a workplace, Chequers was a better place to minimise social contacts. But it has been reported that the PM’s wife, Carrie, held a baby shower at Chequers on 14 March. Asked if Johnson and his wife had any non-work visitors while staying at Chequers, the spokesman replied: Well, they were acting in accordance with the guidance and any subsequent legislation at all times. So beyond that, I don’t have any more to add. The spokesman said he “couldn’t put a timescale on” when Sue Gray will publish her report on partying at No 10. He also refused to deny reports that Johnson has been interviewed by Gray. The spokesman said the government was committed to reviewing the BBC’s funding model in 2027, when the current licence fee settlement ends. He would not confirm Nadine Dorries’s claim that the licence fee would definitely be replaced then. He said: We have said that we will keep the licence fee until the end of the current charter period in 2027 but ahead of that point we will review how the BBC is funded. Yesterday Dorries, the culture secretary, went further, saying the licence fee would go after 2027. The spokesman denied claims that the licence fee announcement was an attempt to distract attention from Johnson’s leadership difficulties. (See 10.26am.) Asked about these claims, the spokesman said: “The government’s commitment to BBC reform is long standing.” The spokesman would not deny reports that the military will be put in charge of trying to stop people crossing the Channel in small boats. (See 11.07am). Asked about this story, the spokesman said: It’s right that we pursue all options to prevent illegal crossings, to protect life at sea. The UK armed forces already work closely with Border Force in these operations, given their expertise and experience in maritime operations. But beyond that I’m not going to get into speculation about further discussions we may or may not have on how we improve our response. And the spokesman did not deny that Ghana and Rwanda have been asked if they will host offshore processing centres for people coming to the UK who want to claim asylum. (See 11.07am). But he could not confirm the story either. “It’s obviously not helpful to talk about ongoing discussions we have with individual countries,” he said. The spokesman said there were “encouraging signs” in the data ahead of the forthcoming decision on whether Covid restrictions for England can be lifted on 26 January. The spokesman said Johnson, Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, and Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, are continuing to discuss what can be done to ease the burden on householders facing rising fuel costs. But no announcement is expected this week. The spokesman said he had not heard Johnson refer to himself as “big dog”, and he said he had not heard staff use the term either. The No 10 effort to save Johnson has been nicknamed “Operation Save Big Dog”, but No 10 says the phrase does not come from them. At the Downing Street lobby briefing No 10 again denied that Boris Johnson was warned in advance of the party in the garden on 20 May 2020 that the event should not go ahead because it would break Covid rules. The invitation to around 100 staff was sent out by Johnson’s own principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds. In his column in the Sunday Times yesterday (paywall) Dominic Lawson said at least two people told Johnson in advance it was a bad idea. Lawson wrote: Last week I spoke to a former Downing Street official who said at least two people had told the PM, after seeing the emailed invitation from his principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, that this was “a party” and should be immediately cancelled. I was told that Johnson’s dismissive response was to say they were “overreacting” and to praise Reynolds as “my loyal labrador”. I then asked someone who has known the PM for decades what could have made him take such an approach (other than natural hospitality and affability). His immediate answer was: “It’s because deep down he obviously thought the regulations were ridiculous – so why should he observe them? Asked about the claim, the spokesperson said: “I think we made it clear yesterday that wasn’t accurate.” When it was pointed out that other journalists, such as the Mail on Sunday’s Dan Hodges, had also heard the same story, the spokesperson again said it was not accurate. Asked if something not being accurate was the same as something not being true, the spokesperson said: We made it clear over the weekend that it is untrue to say that the prime minister was told or warned ahead of that [that the event should not go ahead]. Here is the tweet from Hodges. My colleague Heather Stewart has also spoken to a former Downing Street staffer who said they knew of at least one colleague who had warned Johnson personally about the “bring your own booze” event on 20 May. Asked whether the prime minister knew about the party before it took place, the former insider replied: “Yes.” I will post more from the briefing shortly. There will be two statements in the Commons today after 3.30pm, Labour says. Priti Patel, the home secretary, will make one on security (presumably the implications of the Texas synagogue seige), and then Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, will make a statement on the BBC. MPs will consider the remaining stages of the elections bill this afternoon. Ahead of the debate, the Electoral Reform Society has produced a new briefing on the bill (pdf), which it says will damage democracy. This is from Jess Garland, the ERS’s director of policy and research. Ministers have attempted to dodge scrutiny over key parts of this bill and the result is a dangerous mix of proposals that risk shutting voters out of our democracy and weaking the integrity of our elections. From plans to shut voters out from the ballot box for lacking the right ID, to minsters’ power grab over our independent elections watchdog, this bill stands to damage democracy. Opposition to the bill is widespread and growing, with MPs from all parties now calling on the government to stop and re-think their plans for changing election law. It’s time for the government to listen. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has this morning announced the winners of the ScotWind offshore wind leasing auction. The Scottish government says the 17 projects selected represent “the world’s first commercial scale opportunity for floating offshore wind”. Floating offshore wind means wind turbines not fixed to the seabed, which can operate in deeper waters. Chris Stark, chief executive of the UK’s Climate Change Commitee, has welcomed the announcement. In interviews this morning Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, failed to deny reports that the government wants to put the military in charge of stopping people crossing the Channel on small boats. Asked about these reports, he replied: It is a good idea that there is a single command and control, and that includes not just naval vessels but all other vessels including Border Force, so that you actually have a co-ordinated operation in terms of the small boats. A really important idea is the legislation that Priti Patel [the home secretary] has put through parliament to allow us to have a much better way of dealing with illegal migration because there are legal routes for migration. You know, I’m the son of immigrants. The Times says this morning that the military will be put in charge of the Channel under one of several policy initiatives being promoted by the government in the hope that they will appeal to Tory voters, and shore up support for the PM. In their story (paywall) Steven Swinford and Matt Dathan report: Plans are also being drawn up to send migrants to countries such as Ghana and Rwanda for processing and resettlement in a move to tackle the small boats crisis. The prime minister will give the Royal Navy “primacy” over all government vessels in the Channel this month in one of a series of populist announcements as he faces pressure to quit over Downing Street parties. A rear admiral will have the power to direct Border Force, coastguard, fisheries protection and customs and excise to carry out surveillance or intercept those crossing the Channel. Yesterday the Sunday Times said pushing out populist policies like this, and replacing the BBC licence fee, were part of what it dubbed an “Operation Red Meat” strategy intended to protect the prime minister. In his interviews this morning Zahawi said he did not accept this account. He said “government doesn’t operate like that” and that these policies were being implemented because they were in the Tory manifesto. At the end of last week the government announced that it plans to relax the “double jobbing” ban for Northern Ireland parliamentarians, to allow someone elected as an MP to sit in the Northern Ireland assembly at the same time. The new system would only apply until 2024, and someone serving as an MP and an MLA (member of the legislative assembly) would not get two salaries. This will allow Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the DUP leader and MP, to stand for the assembly in the May elections without having to give up his Westminster seat. This morning Donaldson told the BBC’s Good Morning Ulster programme that this would be good for unionism. He said that if the law is changed as the government proposed, he would consider whether to stand for election to the assembly. He told the programme: I think there is a case to be made at this particular time in the current circumstances of Northern Ireland. It is important for unionism to have a strong voice in the parliament of the United Kingdom. Donaldson also said it was wrong to claim that all eight DUP MPs would stand for election to the assembly. The other four main Northern Ireland parties represented in the power-sharing Northern Ireland executive - Sinn Féin, the SDLP, the UUP and the Alliance party - have all opposed the proposed change. Lucy Powell, the shadow culture secretary, said this morning that the government proposal to end the licence fee in 2027 would mean “the end of the BBC as we know it”. She also said the announcement, that was briefed to the Mail on Sunday and then confirmed by Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, in a tweet, was an attempt by the government to distract attention from the Boris Johnson leadership crisis. She told Times Radio: Let’s not get away from the fact that this so-called announcement, which was on Twitter yesterday, which is effectively the end of the BBC as we know it, a huge policy announcement, is nothing more than a really obvious, pathetic distraction from a prime minister and a government who has run out of road and whose leadership is hanging by a thread. And she told the Today programme: Let’s not pretend that this is anything other than it is, which is a pretty obvious dead cat strategy from the government to distract from the totally disastrous leadership context that the prime minister is facing at the moment. Powell also said that althought the licence fee was not perfect - “you would not necessarily start with it if we didn’t have it now” - it was a cheap way of funding quality broadcasting. Starmer says he knows Sue Gray, the civil servant doing the partygate inquiry. He says he respects her. But he says he is sure that her report will only establish the facts. It is not for her to decide whether or not the law was broken, he says. Q: So the Sue Gray report will not be the end of this? No, says Starmer. He says he thinks the public have already made their mind up. There is anger at the PM, and ridicule too. Once the public is now longer laughing with you, but at you, you are in a bad place as prime minister. Starmer says he has not spoken to Barry Gardiner, the Labour former shadow cabinet minister, about the fact that he took £500,000 in funding for his office from a woman now exposed as a Chinese spy. He says Gardiner has done nothing wrong. Q: Would you ever favour renationalsing the energy companies? Starmer says he is not in favour of top-down nationalisation. But he says there other ways of looking at their ownership. (This will be seen by many as a betrayal of a promise he made when he was running for the Labour leadership. He issued 10 pledges, one of which was his backing for “common ownership” of energy companies. Starmer argues that common ownership is not the same as nationalisation.) Ferrari asks about the news that Gary Neville has joined the Labour party. Starmer says he has spoken to Neville. Gary thought I wasn’t being strong enough. He thought we should have voted against the government restrictions in the tier system. I didn’t. I didn’t agree with the tier system but it was all or nothing in those days. If you didn’t vote for the restrictions, then there were no restrictions and I didn’t think that was the right thing. He thought differently and we had an exchange. He says he likes arguments. He is not one of those leaders who only wants to hear people who agree with him, he says. Q: Would you like Neville to be a Labour candidate? Starmer says he would like to see him go as far in the party as he wants. Q: Do you feel threatened by reports that Jeremy Corbyn will start his own party? Starmer says he does not know if that is true. But he does not feel threatened by it. The vast majority of Labour supporters want to see a Labour government. When he took over, he thought it was important to ensure the party did not blame the electorate for its defeat. Now he has to show the party is fit for office. Q: Would you rather fight Boris Johnson at the next election, wounded by this scandal, or an invigorated Tory party under Rishi Sunak or Liz Truss? Starmer says he will fight whoever the Tory leader is, and he does not really care. But he says he does not think Johnson remaining as PM is in the national interest. Q: Why won’t you back decriminalising cannabis use? Starmer says he looked at many drug cases when he was head of the CPS. He has seen the damage drugs do. He does not support changing the law. Q: Do you support the London mayor’s plan to decriminalise minor cannabis offences? Starmer says the police have always had discretion in how they apply drugs laws. He says he will look at the results of Sadiq Khan’s pilot scheme. But he is not in favour of changing the law. Keir Starmer is holding his LBC phone-in now. Nick Ferrari is presenting. There first question is about the Daily Mail splash. The caller says what Starmer did was “the same” as what Boris Johnson did. Starmer says the picture shows him in a constituency office in the north before the May elections last year. He was working with Labour staff. They stopped for a meal and then carried on working. There was no party, he says. The picture of me was in a constituency office up in the north-east, it was I think, three or four days before the May elections, so we’re really busy. I was with my team going across the country from place to place. We’re in the office, working in the office and we stopped for a takeaway, and then we carried on working and that is the long and the short of it. There was no breach of the rules. There was no party. And there was absolutely no comparison with the prime minister. Q: But you broke restrictions, which said you should not mix with other people? Starmer says the restrictions allowed people to work. He says restaurants were closed at the time. The hotel was not serving food. They needed to eat. Starmer says he had about six people with him. He was in Durham. Q: What is the difference between that and the No 10 event that was photographed? Starmer says that photograph showed a group including the PM’s wife. And there was a trestle table set up, with a large number of people there. Q: Why don’t you apologise? Starmer says he was working. He did not break any rules. He was working in the office We didn’t break any rules, we were working in the office and we stopped for a takeaway. We did nothing wrong ... There comes a point where the Tories try to take everyone into the gutter with them. The caller claims Starmer has misled the country. You don’t need beer at a work meeting, he claims. Starmer says he disagrees. There has been “industrial-scale partying” at No 10, he says. Good morning. Is Boris Johnson safe in his job? You would not have thought so reading the weekend papers (here is Toby Helm’s assessment of what is likely to happen next in the Observer) but this morning Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, claimed that he is. Zahawi implied that Johnson deserved credit for his apology, and for his judgment on “big decisions” in the past. But, in an interview on the Today programme, it took the presenter, Nick Robinson, three goes to get Zahawi to say Johnson was safe. It wasn’t the strongest vote of confidence ever. Here is how the exchange went. Here is how the exchange went. NR: Do you believe that Boris Johnson is safe in his job? NZ: I think Boris Johnson has done the right thing to apologise. NR: Is he safe in his job? NZ: I think the prime minister on the big, big decisions – if you look at what he did on Brexit, on vaccines, on Omicron pre-Christmas, on the economy being the most open economy in Europe – has called it right. But he’s human. NR: Is he safe in his job? NZ: Yes, he is because he’s human and we make mistakes and actually he came to the despatch box and apologised and said he will we absolutely submit himself to parliament when [the Sue Gray investigation] is concluded. Robinson also tried three times to get Zahawi to say whether or not he thought Johnson was capable of changing the way he operated, but Zahawi dodged the question each time. This was probably wise; Johnson is 57, and his modus operandi has been rackety and chaotic all his adult life. Any significant change in how he operates that seems unlikely. The interview was also notable for Zahawi saying that Keir Starmer should apologise for having a drink with Labour staff when they were working last year. The Tories, with help from the Daily Mail, are trying to suggest this amounts to equivalence with partygate, but, as my colleague Peter Walker reports, it sounded as if even Zahawi could tell this was not really a runner. Here is the agenda for the day. 9am: Keir Starmer hosts his ‘Call Keir’ LBC phone-in. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 2.30pm: Priti Patel, the home secretary, takes questions in the Commons. After 3.30pm: MPs debate the remaining stages of the elections bill. There will be some UK Covid coverage here, but for further coronavirus coverage, do read out global live blog. It’s here. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comTime to wrap up. China’s economy has posted its slowest growth in 18 months, prompting the People’s Bank of China to cut a key lending rate for the first time since the early months of the pandemic. GDP in China expanded by 4% year-on-year in the last quarter of 2021, taking the shine off 8.1% growth in the whole year. Economists said that the domestic economy was suffering from the ongoing pandemic, and the credit crunch in its property sector, with retail spending weakening in December. The World Economic Forum’s virtual Davos has begun, after the Annual Meeting was delayed due to the pandemic. China’s Xi Jinping warned that inflation was a growing risk, and expressed fears of economic pain if advanced economies hiked interest rates. If major economies slam on the brakes or take a U-turn in the monetary policies, there would be serious negative spillovers.” President Xi also warned of disastrous consequences from a Cold War mentality, at a time when tensions are rising with the West over Tiawan, and threats to national security. India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, called for global action on tackling cryptocurrency problems, along with supply chain issues, climate, and inflation. UN secretary-general António Guterres said that inequality over vaccine rollouts, and an unfair global financial system, was hurting the recovery. Anthony Fauci, chief medical advisor to President Biden, warned virtual Davos that disinformation spread through social media is undermining the battle against Covid-19. The online-only event also heard that Moderna hopes to rollout a combined vaccine for flu and Covid-19 by autumn 2023. Oxfam reported that the 10 richest men in the world have seen their global wealth double to $1.5tn (£1.01tn) since the start of the global pandemic following a surge in share and property prices that has widened the gap between rich and poor. In the City, the FTSE 100 closed at a two-year high.... .. but Unilever slumped by 7% after seeing its £50bn approach to buy GSK’s consumer healthcare operation rejected. The chairman of Credit Suisse, António Horta-Osório, has resigned after the Swiss bank found that he had broken Covid-19 quarantine laws, with attendance at the Wimbledon tennis tournament thought to be among the allegations. Here are the other main stories today: Goodnight. GW Back at virtual Davos, UN secretary-general António Guterres has challenged business leaders to: Drive equity and fairness Reform the global financial system Support real climate action In a special address, Guterres warns that: The world is emerging from depths of a paralysing economic crisis, but the recovery remains fragile and uneven, amid the lingering pandemic, persistent labour market challenges, ongoing supply chain disruption, rising inflation and looming debt traps, and the geopolitical divide. He warns that global vaccination rates are falling behind the UN’s targets (which will increase the risk of new variants), saying: Vaccination rates in high-income countries are, shamefully, seven times higher than in African countries. We need vaccine equity now. Guterres adds we must prepare for the next pandemic by improving early warning and rapid response plans, strengthening the World Health Organisation, and bolstering local primary healthcare. Guterres warns that the global financial system should be reformed to work for all countries. At this critical moment we are setting in stone a lopsided recovery. Eight out of 10 recovery dollars are being spend in advanced economies, he says, meaning developing countries are at a huge disadvantage, as they experience their slowest growth in a generation. Emerging economies are suffering higher interest rates and soaring energy and food bills, Guterres says, calling for urgent reforms on debt restructuring And on the climate emergency, Guterres warns that global emissions are set to soar over levels that would keep global warming within 1.5 degrees: The UK’s blue-chip share index has closed at its highest levels since January 2020, as China’s move to stimulate its slowing economy boosted markets. The FTSE 100 index ended the day 68 points higher at 7611 points, up 0.9% today, as it continues to recover from the shock of the pandemic. It has now gained 3% since the start of this year, after finally recovering its losses since the February 2020 crash. Housebuilder Taylor Wimpey ended the day as the top riser, up 4.2%, after reporting a strong order book for this year and confirming it plans a share buyback plan. GlaxoSmithKline closed 4% higher, after rejecting a £50bn offer for its consumer healthcare arm from Unilever -- which fell 7% after its failed bid raised questions over its strategy. Copper producer Antofagasta (+4.2%), commercial property developer Land Securities (+3.2%), pharmaceuticals group AstraZeneca (+2.6%), and consumer goods maker Reckitt Benckiser (+3.2%) were also in the risers. China’s move to ease monetary policy today, as growth slowed in the last quarter of 2021, gave markets a lift. David Madden, analyst at Equiti Capital, says: Stocks in Europe are up on the session as The People’s Bank of China cut the borrowing cost on 700-billion-yuan worth of one-year medium-term lending facility loans to 2.85%. The move by the Chinese central bank comes as it was confirmed the Chinese economy expanded by 4% in the last quarter of 2021, which was a drop off from the 4.9% growth registered in the preceding three months. It was the weakest quarterly growth reading in 18 months. Countries around the world are largely experiencing a cooling in their growth as the post pandemic boom is running out of steam, but it is worth noting that China was already moving down a gear before the pandemic struck. The latest retail sales data from China were disappointing too as the report came in at 1.7% - the lowest in 15 months – it speaks to dwindling consumer appetite. The FTSE 100 traded above 7600 for the first time in nearly two years. The London market is enjoying a broad rally as banks, construction, energy, pharma and tobacco stocks are up on the day. It is a similar situation in the eurozone as the DAX and the CAC are showing solid gains too. The New York Stock Exchange remains closed today as the US celebrates Martin Luther King Day. Volatility is low as many Americans are on holiday. The world’s 20 top performing hedge fund managers earned a record $65.4bn ($48bn) profit for their clients in 2021 after bets placed on rising stock markets paid off. The biggest winner was TCI, the fund run by British billionaire Sir Chris Hohn, which made a gain of $9.5bn last year, according to the annual rankings by LCH Investments. TCI, which manages about $44bn of assets and is known in the City and on Wall Street as one of the most aggressive activist investors, made a gain of 23.3% in 2021. TCI, which stands for the Children’s Investment fund, has made total gains of $36.5bn since it was set up in 2003. Hohn, a philanthropist and climate crisis activist, paid himself $152m last year, less than a third of the $475m he received the previous year. He has pumped more than £4bn into his personal children’s charity and in recent years has taken on a second cause: the climate crisis, promising to use TCI’s $44bn of investments to “force change on companies who refuse to take their environmental emissions seriously”. Hohn is the single biggest individual donor to Extinction Rebellion (XR), which has staged high-profile climate protests around the world. “Humanity is aggressively destroying the world with climate change and there is an urgent need for us all to wake up to this fact,” he said when he was revealed as XR’s main funder. India’s PM Narendra Modi went on to call for a collective global approach to issues facing the world - including supply chain disruption, inflation, and climate change. He also singles out cryptocurrency as another area where collective, synchronised action is needed, telling the Davos Agenda that: Given the sort of technology this is based on, decisions taken by any one country are not going to be enough to resolve challenges related to it. We need to adopt a uniform approach to it. Late last year, it emerged that India was preparing a bill to regulate cryptocurrencies, which could ban the use of cryptocurrencies as a method of payment in India, and also allow the country’s central bank to launch an official digital currency. Modi also calls on democratic nations to reform the world’s multinational organisations, so they are better suited to tackling today’s challenges. Given the global landscape today, the question that also arises, is whether multilateral organisations are able to address the new world order, and new challenges. When these institutions were created, the situation was quite different. Today, circumstances have changed, they are very different. India’s prime minister Narendra Modi says it is the best time to invest in India, and that the country has given the world a ‘bouquet of hope’. In a special address to the World Economic Forum, Modi says India wants to become a trusted partner to the world in global supply chains, and is in talks with many countries to agree free trade deals. Modi cites India’s commitment to deep economic reforms, and the $1.3trn it is investing in digital connectivity infrastructure. He also points to its pharmaceuticals industry which produced many vaccine doses to fight the pandemic, describing India as ‘pharmacy to the world’, and also its growth in start-ups. Moderna’s chief executive has predicted that a combined booster shot for Covid-19 and flu could be available, in some countries, by the autumn of 2023. Stéphane Bancel told the panel session at the World Economic Forum’s Davos Agenda that his company is aiming to create a single annual booster. Bancel explained that: “Our goal is to be able to have a single annual booster so that we don’t have compliance issues where people don’t want to get two to three shots a winter,” Instead, they would get one dose which included “a booster for corona, and a booster for flu and RSV (Respiratory syncytial virus) to make sure that people get their vaccines”, Bancel explained. Q: So how close are we to a vaccine that offers protection against Covid-19 and also flu? The ‘best case scenario’ is that this combined vaccine would be available in the “fall of ‘23”, Bancel replied. He cautions that it wouldn’t be available in all countries, but could be available in some countries. Germany wants to respect jointly agreed fiscal rules as this helps to control inflation, its new finance minister Christian Lindner said on Monday. Lindner added he expected the “real debate” about the European Union’s fiscal rules (which cover tax and spending) to start in June, Reuters reports: Speaking to reporters in Brussels before his first Eurogroup meeting with counterparts from other euro zone member states, Lindner said that the fiscal rules of the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact had proven its flexibility during the crisis. “But now it’s the time to build up fiscal buffers again, we need resilience not only in the private sector, but also in the public sector,” Lindner said. “That’s why I’m very much in favour of reducing sovereign debt.” Back in the markets, European equities are holding their early gains. The pan-European Stoxx 600, which has made a jittery start to 2022, is up 0.6% today. The UK’s FTSE 100 is still on track for a new two-year closing high, up 52 points at 7595 points - and has gained around 2.8% so far this year. GlaxoSmithKline has eased back in London, but is still leading the risers (+3.3%) after rebuffing Unileve’s £50bn approach to buy its consumer healthcare arm. Unilever is still sliding, down 7%, at the bottom of the FTSE 100 leaderboard. Today’s investor reaction demonstrates Unilever’s “lack of management credibility” says Chris Beckett, head of equity research at Quilter Cheviot. There are also concerns about the amount of debt the group could take on to finance an acquisition: “Should Unilever eventually succeed with an offer, an acquisition of this business would be consistent with its stated strategy - increasing exposure to high growth, higher margin health, beauty and hygiene products. GSK’s consumer business currently has strong positions in the toothpaste and vitamin markets so there is certainly a fit there for Unilever. “However, if the acquisition was financed with circa 80% debt and 20% equity it would be concerning as the company’s debt pile would begin to stack high. In the short term, the acquisition would be far less enhancing to the value of the business than a share buyback of a similar scale. Unilever could control this debt by following through with a subsequent sale of its remaining food businesses. This would be good strategically but materially dilutive. “Initial investor reaction demonstrates Unilever’s lack of management credibility. Unilever’s management have not demonstrated the ability to consistently grow both sales and margins and as such are now turning to large scale inorganic growth to do so. However, there is not much faith that they will be able to do this with a larger, more diverse range of products. Given vocal investor concern of late and Unilever’s share price reaction this morning, this could prevent a higher offer from materialising. “Unilever is not an expensive stock trading on 16.5x this year’s expected earnings - a substantial discount to the wider consumer staples category. However input cost pressure and lower disposable income in many markets will make 2022 a difficult year for the company, with GSK’s consumer business or not.” Unilever has pledged to grow its health, beauty and hygiene business and sell its slower-growing operations. CEO Alan Jope said this morning that GSK Consumer Healthcare would be “a very attractive option” for Unilever but added “it’s not the only option”. Here’s the full story: China has warned the US and Europe against a rapid rise in interest rates that would “slam on the brakes” of the global recovery from the pandemic. Central banks should maintain the monetary stimulus or risk “serious economic consequences” from the spillover effects with developing markets bearing the brunt. In a virtual speech to open the World Economic Forum’s Davos Agenda, the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, said that while global inflation risks were emerging, policymakers should strengthen economic policy coordination and develop policies to prevent the world economy from dipping again. “We must do everything necessary to clear the shadow of the pandemic and boost economic and social recovery and development,” he said. “If major economies slam on the brakes or make major U-turns in their monetary policies there will be serious negative spillovers. They would present challenges to global and economic financial stability and developing countries would bear the brunt.” Anthony Fauci, chief medical advisor to the President of United States, has warned virtual Davos that disinformation is undermining the battle against Covid-19. In a World Economic Forum session on the pandemic, Fauci explains that the entire world is facing this disinformation, including in “a very, very disconcerting way in the US”. It is accompanying a problem where everyone should be pulling together against a common enemy, namely the virus, Fauci explains. Fauci warned that: We have disinformation that is entirely destructive to a comprehensive public health endeavour. I’m not sure how we’re going to counter that, except by getting out as much correct information as we possibly can, and use the social media in a positive way, as opposed to in the somewhat destructive way that it is being used right now. Fauci also explains that it is too early to say when Covid-19 will become endemic. He says Covid-19 will not be eradicated - pointing out that smallpox is the only infectious disease to be eradicated in man. But Covid-19 could be controlled - meaning it is present at a level that does not disrupt society. Fauci also explains that the long-term goal is to develop vaccines that target a commonality among all the real and potential variants, rather than getting into a “whack-a-mole” approach of boosters to every future variant that emerges. Moderna’s CEO, Stéphane Bancel, explained that scientists are working out how the vaccine should be adjusted for the autumn of 2022: Annelies Wilder-Smith, professor of emerging infectious diseases at London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, warned there is a ‘high probability’ that we will have another variant. Wilder-Smith says: The question is where, and when, and will it be more or less dangerous than the current variants of concern. High virus circulation drives the risk of new variants, she explains. But the hope is that future variants will not become more dangerous. It is likely that the virus will attenuate, so it has high transmissibility but causes less serious disease, Wilder-Smith added. The Scottish government is in line for a windfall of almost £700m after the largest ever auction of the country’s seabed plots attracted bids from big oil and renewable energy companies hoping to build next generation windfarms. Crown Estate Scotland will grant permission for oil companies including BP and Shell, renewable energy veterans Scottish Power and SSE, to lease the Scottish seabed to build enough windfarms to power the equivalent of 23m UK homes a year. The auction awarded seabed permits to 17 windfarm projects, out of more than 70 bidders, which will lay the foundation for companies to develop new wind power farms two-and-a-half times the size of the UK’s existing offshore wind fleet, and equal to Europe’s current combined capacity. Simon Hodge, the chief executive of Crown Estate Scotland, said the results were “a fantastic vote of confidence” in Scotland’s energy industry, which will deliver almost £700m “straight into the public finances and billions of pounds’ worth of supply chain commitments”. The Omicron variant knocked UK consumer confidence last month, as people grew less optimistic over the economic outlook. The latest consumer confidence report from YouGov and the Centre for Economics and Business Research (Cebr) found that: Headline consumer confidence declined by -0.5 points in December 2021 Business activity measures for past month and next 12 months both worsened Britons reported that their household finances improved over the past month, but grew more pessimistic about the year ahead Home value outlook rose to highest level since May 2017 Back in the UK, Amazon has halted its planned ban on UK-issued Visa credit cards. The web retailer has dropped plans to stop accepting UK-issued Visa credit cards this week, and says it is working with Visa to resolve a dispute over payment fees. The company said in an email to customers that: “The expected change regarding the use of Visa credit cards on Amazon.co.uk will no longer take place on January 19,” “We are working closely with Visa on a potential solution that will enable customers to continue using their Visa credit cards on Amazon.co.uk.” Analysts had suggested that a last-minute deal could be reached, and that the row could be a negotiating tactic by Amazon to get Visa to lower its fees. The outlook for jobs globally this year has worsened markedly since last spring as new variants of the Covid-19 virus have slowed growth and restricted hiring, according to a report from the International Labour Organisation. In its latest assessment of the state of the labour market, the Geneva-based ILO said unemployment would remain above 2019 levels until at least 2023 and the damage caused by the pandemic would take years to repair. The ILO said its latest estimates showed there would be the equivalent of 52m fewer jobs globally in 2022 than in the last quarter of 2019, the period immediately before the pandemic struck. That represents a doubling from the 26m in the organisation’s last labour market update in May 2021. According to the report, global unemployment will be 207m, a smaller drop from the 214m in 2021 than previously expected and well above the 186m reported in 2019. The ILO said the impact of the pandemic on employment was “significantly” greater than the raw figures suggested, because many people had left the labour force entirely. More here: President Xi insisted during his Davos speech that globalisation is the trend of our times, comparing it to a river that may face counter-currents, but can’t be stopped from reaching the sea. And he warned that a ‘cold war mentality’ must be discarded, saying: We need to discard cold war mentality and seek peaceful co-existence and win-win outcomes. The world today is far from tranquil, Xi adds, warning of ‘rhetoric that stokes hatred and prejudice’. He says acts of containment, suppression or confrontation arising from this cause harm to world peace and security, warning: History has proved time and again that confrontation does not solve problems, it only invites catastrophic consequences. Xi then adds that “protectionism and unilateralism” ultimately hurt both sides, and that “hegemony and bullying” run against the tides of history. Tensions between China and the West have been rising in recent months, with Australia, the UK and US creating a three-way strategic defence alliance called Aukus, and rising concerns that China could invade Taiwan. Xi also criticises “overstretching the concept of national security” to hold back economic and technological advances. [Both the UK and the US have been active on this. The US communications regulator has voted to revoke China Telecom’s licence in America last year, while the UK has been looking to create a new funding model for nuclear power stations to shut out Chinese companies.] President Xi also insists that China’s ‘overall momentum’ remains sound, after today’s GDP data showed that gross domestic product grew by around 8% year on year in 2021. We have every confidence in the future of China’s economy, Xi tells virtual Davos. He adds that it will continue with its economic reforms and the opening up of its economy. Xi also says China will let the market play a decisive role in allocating resources, and that all types of capital are welcome, if they comply with laws. Beijing has been cracking down on its technology sector, which prompted Yahoo to pull out of China last November. More clips from president Xi’s speech, in which he spoke about the need for equitable rollout of Covid-19 vaccines: Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China, has warned that global inflation risks are emerging, and urged countries to strengthen economic policy coordination to prevent the world economy from dipping again. In a virtual speech to open the World Economic Forum’s Davos Agenda, Xi warns that that emerging markets could suffer if central banks tighten monetary policy to tackle inflation. He also called for world leaders to continue to embrace cooperation to defeat the pandemic. Xi explains that the world is undergoing major changes, and that the global economy faces many constraints - such as ongoing supply chain disruption and a tight energy market. The global low inflation environment has changed, Xi says, with inflation risks emerging. And he warns that there could be serious spillovers if major economies apply the brakes to monetary policy (by raising interest rates and ending stimulus measures). That would create challenges to economic and financial stability, Xi warns, with developing markets bearing the brunt. Update: Xi says: If major economies slam on the brakes, or take a u-turn in their monetary policies, there will be serious negative spillovers. They would present challenges to global economic and financial stability, and developing countries would bear the brunt of it. Xi also says the international community has fought a courageous battle against the pandemic - comparing the response to one gigantic ship riding out a storm, where a collection of small boats would not have survived. He also says the pandemic continues to pose a serious threat to people’s safety and health - strong confidence and cooperation is the only way to respond, rather than holding each other back or assigning blame. Economists and researchers at the NIESR thinktank are to stage a two-week strike in a row over two years of below inflation pay offers, the Unite union has announced. The strike is set to begin this coming Friday, and run to Friday 4 February. NIESR employees held a strike ballot after being offered a basic pay deal worth 2% this year, after wages were frozen last year. That’s sharply below UK inflation, with the consumer prices index hitting 5.1% in November and RPI inflation running at 7.1%. NIESR’s staff were understandably unhappy about being offered a real terms pay cut, and have voted to walk out. As our economics correspondent Richard Partington reported out last month: Asking workers to stomach a below-inflation pay rise is never popular. Asking them to do so when their day job is forecasting the cost of living is really asking for trouble. The action means that there is a very real possibility that NIESR’s forthcoming forecasts for the UK and global economies, which have been published quarterly since the 1980s, will not go ahead, says Unite. Unite regional officer, Peter Storey says the walkout can be avoided, if NIESR’s management improve their offer. “Unite is committed to reaching an agreement with the NIESR but the Institute needs to improve its pay offer. Morale is at an all-time low, so it’s high time for management to recognise the contribution NIESR’s staff have made to the Institute’s success through difficult times. ”The strike will disrupt a number of research contracts and forecasts for the UK and the global economy. We urge management to join Unite in talks this week and avoid this dispute.” The chairman of Credit Suisse, António Horta-Osório, has resigned after the Swiss bank reportedly found that he had broken Covid-19 quarantine laws, including by attending the Wimbledon tennis tournament, my colleague Jasper Jolly writes. Horta-Osório, the former chief executive of Lloyds Banking Group, said in a statement that his “personal actions” had made it more difficult for him to represent the bank. He had also admitted breaking Swiss quarantine rules. It means that Horta-Osório managed less than a year in the job, after he was brought in to steady the bank after a series of expensive failures, including its involvement in the collapse of Archegos, an investment company, and Greensill Capital, a supply chain finance firm. Horta-Osório said in a statement issued by Credit Suisse on Monday. “I regret that a number of my personal actions have led to difficulties for the bank and compromised my ability to represent the bank internally and externally. “I therefore believe that my resignation is in the interest of the bank and its stakeholders at this crucial time.” The breach emerged in December, after Reuters reported it was discovered through a preliminary investigation by Credit Suisse’s legal team. The news came just weeks after Horta-Osório admitted that he breached Covid rules in Switzerland, having flown out of the country within three days of arriving on 28 November despite being required to quarantine for 10 days. Credit Suisse confirmed on Monday that Horta-Osório had resigned after an investigation commissioned by the board, but did not give any details of the findings. More here: Here’s Neil Wilson of Markets.com on Unilever’s rebuffed £50bn approach for GlaxoSmithKline’s Consumer Healthcare business: Unilever wants the attractive cash flow and growth of GSK’s joint venture with Pfizer (4-6% is the aim for the GSK unit, though many think this is a tad ambitious). Unilever CEO Alan Jope is under pressure to grow the business after a lacklustre few years - a megadeal highlights the difficulty is fixing the core business and/or a lack of ideas. Terry Smith – boss of Fundsmith, a top shareholder – says the company has ‘clearly lost the plot’ (in his annual letter to shareholders). GSK’s CEO Emma Walmsley is under pressure, too, not least from activist investors, to bolster the firm’s drugs pipeline; a particularly acute concern having missed out on a covid vaccine. Debt may prohibit Unilever from going much higher; the company leveraged itself up after the Kraft-Heinz bid to ward off leveraged buyers...ironic that this could stop it from doing a deal. Other suitors, including private equity, may move in for the kill. Does Unilever want it bad enough? I don’t think so. More pressing things to consider … like the purpose of mayonnaise. Feels like bolting together two rather slow growth consumer staples businesses, which leaves scale/synergies as the key to success … but then you still have all the debt to pay down. The number of households suffering from “fuel stress” – those spending at least 10% of their family budgets on energy bills – is set to treble to 6.3m overnight when the new energy price cap comes in on 1 April, according to a leading research group. Fuel stress will no longer be confined to the poorest households, according to a study by the Resolution Foundation. Low- and middle-income families will also find it hard to cope as they spend a far greater share of their family budget on these essentials than higher earners. The forecast will add to calls for the government to take action to avert a cost-of-living catastrophe after global energy market prices surged to record levels. The research shows 9% of English households are currently experiencing fuel stress, an indicator of finding energy bills unaffordable and also the definition of fuel poverty in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. That figure is expected to leap to 27% when the energy price cap rises to about £2,000 a year in April, an increase of more than 50%. The energy regulator, Ofgem, will announce the new price cap level on 7 February. More here: Back in China, new government data has shown its property market slump persisted in December -- helping to spur the People’s Bank of China into today’s interest rate cut. The downturn spanned developers’ sales, investments, land purchasing and financing activities, according to Bloomberg calculations based on full-year government figures released today. It suggests that weaker demand from homebuyers, and the intensifying credit crunch facing developers, is hitting the sector. Bloomberg explains: The woes in December were particularly acute in property investment, which shrank 17% from November and 14% from a year earlier. Such spending directly contributed 13% of gross domestic product last year. Home sales by value declined 19.6% from a year earlier, a sixth consecutive monthly drop, a signal that investors shouldn’t be cheered by figures released Saturday that showed a narrowing decline in new-home prices. More here: China’s Home Market Slump Persists on All Fronts, Hurting Growth The FTSE 100 has hit a new two-year high this morning, as it benefits from hopes of an economic recovery from the pandemic. The blue-chip index has risen by 53 points, or 0.7%, to 7596 points, levels last seen in late January 2020 just before Covid-19 struck. GSK are still the top riser, after Unilever said its consumer arm would be a ‘strong strategic fit’ after seeing a £50bn deal rejected (see earlier post). It’s followed by consumer goods company Reckitt Benckiser (+3%), mining company Antofagasta (2.6%), conference organiser Informa (+2.5%). Housebuilder Taylor Wimpey are also higher (+2.5%) after telling investors to expect a share buyback in the coming months after an “excellent” 2021. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, says: “European markets have opened on a stronger footing with the healthcare sector outperforming amid M&amp;A speculation. The FTSE 100 is in an upbeat mood, extending gains after Friday’s positive close with the index close to breaking above the next major resistance hurdle at 7,600 as it inches towards the January 2020 pre-covid peak.” And a deal for GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer products vision is “very much still on the cards” despite GSK rejecting three offers including the latest £50 billion approach, she adds: Unilever will have to raise its bid to somewhere around £55 billion and move fast in order to avoid a bidding war from rival private equity buyers who are likely to be eyeing up counter offers. Large-cap UK stocks mostly missed out on the M&amp;A boom last year. However, this deal would be one of the biggest ever London-listed deals and the largest globally since the start of Covid-19. It would create some attractive synergies between GSK’s consumer health brands and Unilever’s Beauty and Personal Care business, which has suffered a slowdown in sales during the pandemic.” Shares in Credit Suisse have dropped 1.4% in early trading. Shares in healthcare company GSK have jumped 5.5% in early trading after it rebuffed a £50bn takeover offer from Unilever for its consumer healthcare venture. GSK is the top FTSE 100 riser, after it insisted Unilever’s proposals “fundamentally undervalued” the consumer business and its future prospects. But Unilever is bookending the other end of the FTSE, falling nearly 6%, as analysts predict it would have to make a higher offer to secure the prize - which Unilever insists this morning would be a good fit with its business. GSK’s consumer arm owns brands including Panadol painkillers, Sensodyne toothpaste, Tums digestive health products, Otrivin and Theraflu respiratory products and Nicorette nicotine replacement therapy Over the weekend GSK released new, higher organic sales growth forecasts for its consumer health division, which is a joint venture with Pfizer. It is planning to spin it off, and float on the stock market. GSK says: The Board of GSK therefore remains focused on executing its proposed demerger of the Consumer Healthcare business, to create a new independent global category-leading consumer company which, subject to approval from shareholders, is on track to be achieved in mid-2022. Unilever has confirmed that it approached GSK and Pfizer about a potential acquisition of the business, insisting that the deal would make sense, saying: GSK Consumer Healthcare is a leader in the attractive consumer health space and would be a strong strategic fit as Unilever continues to re-shape its portfolio. European stock markets have opened higher at the start of the week. The FTSE 100, Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC are all up around 0.4%, as investors digest China’s decision to cut a lending rate to stimulate its economy, as growth slows. Lee Hardman of MUFG Bank, Ltd explains: The main development overnight has been the decision from the PBoC to provide further stimulus to support growth in China. The PBoC decided to lower the one-year medium-term lending facility (MLF) rate by a larger than expected 0.10 point to 2.85%. It was the first cut since the initial negative COVID shock hit in April 2020. It follows last month’s decision to lower the one-year loan prime rate (LPR) by 0.05 point. According to Bloomberg, the decision to lower the MLF rate suggests that the PBoC wants banks to increase lending providing a credit boost to the economy. It appears that the PBoC is now providing more front-loaded policy support to prevent growth from falling significantly below 5.0% this year. The 10 richest men in the world have seen their global wealth double to $1.5tn (£1.01tn) since the start of the global pandemic following a surge in share and property prices that has widened the gap between rich and poor, according to a report from Oxfam. Urging governments to impose a one-off 99% wealth tax on Covid-19 windfall gains, the charity said World Bank figures showed 163 million more people had been driven below the poverty line while the super-rich were benefiting from the stimulus provided by governments around the world to mitigate the impact of the virus. Oxfam projects that by 2030, 3.3 billion people will be living on less than $5.50 per day. The charity said the incomes of 99% of the world’s population had reduced from March 2020 to October 2021, when Elon Musk, the founder of the electric car company Tesla, and the other nine richest billionaires had been collectively growing wealthier by $1.3bn a day. Here’s the full story: Credit Suisse is proving to be “something of a graveyard” for the reputations of once high-flying international financiers, says Peter Thal Larsen of Breakingviews. The Swiss bank announced on Monday that Chair António Horta-Osório had stepped down following a board investigation. It’s been less than a year since he arrived to stabilise the lender still reeling from the ousting of former chief executive Tidjane Thiam. New broom Axel Lehmann, a former UBS bigwig, has to hope his reputation is more durable. Credit Suisse appeared to have scored a bit of a coup last year when it recruited Horta-Osório, who had led the turnaround of Britain’s Lloyds Banking Group following the financial crisis. The Portuguese banker made an immediate impact following his arrival in Zurich, settling a Mozambican scandal, drawing a line under the spying saga that toppled Tidjane, and unveiling a new strategy to shift capital from investment banking to wealth management. Yet Horta-Osório’s personal conduct appears to have fallen short of the high standards he set for the bank. Early in December he admitted to “unintentionally” breaching Switzerland’s Covid-19 quarantine rules. An internal investigation subsequently found that he had also broken British rules when attending the Wimbledon tennis finals in July, Reuters reported last month. That was hard to square with his desire to improve Credit Suisse’s culture and focus on “personal responsibility and accountability”. More here: New Credit Suisse chair has grim streak to break Antonio Horta-Osório, who is well-known in the UK following his time running Lloyds Banking Group, says: “I have worked hard to return Credit Suisse to a successful course, and I am proud of what we have achieved together in my short time at the bank. Credit Suisse’s strategic realignment will provide for a clear focus on strengthening, simplifying and investing for growth. I am convinced that Credit Suisse is well positioned today and on the right track for the future. I regret that a number of my personal actions have led to difficulties for the bank and compromised my ability to represent the bank internally and externally. I therefore believe that my resignation is in the interest of the bank and its stakeholders at this crucial time. I wish my colleagues at Credit Suisse every success for the future.” Big news in the banking sector this morning: Credit Suisse chairman António Horta-Osório has quit following an internal probe into his personal conduct, following breaches of Covid-19 rules. Credit Suisse announced that Horta-Osório had resigned after a board investigation, after it emerged he had broken British quarantine rules to attend the Wimbledon tennis finals in London last July. The Portuguese banker had flown in from Switzerland, which had been on the UK government’s amber list of countries that required arrivals to isolate for 10 days. Horta-Osório had also admitted breaching Covid rules in Switzerland at the end of November, having flown out of the country within three days of arriving on 28 November, despite being required to quarantine for 10 days. It’s an embarrassing blow to the embattled lender, which had appointed Horta-Osório less than a year ago. Credit Suisse incurred heavy losses from the implosion of the Archegos investment fund last year, and also provided funding to the now-collapsed supply chain finance firm Greensill Capital. Credit Suisse has now appointed board member Axel Lehmann chair, as it tries to recover from this string of scandals. Severin Schwan, Vice-Chairman and Lead Independent Director of the Board of Credit Suisse, said: “We respect António’s decision and owe him considerable thanks for his leadership in defining the new strategy, which we will continue to implement over the coming months and years. Axel Lehmann as the new Chairman, with his extensive international and Swiss industry experience, is ideally suited to drive forward the strategic and cultural transformation of the bank. We wish Axel every success in his new role and António all the best for the future.” Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. China’s economy slowed at the end of last year as the Covid-19 pandemic and the crisis in its property sector hit growth-- prompting Beijing to cut a key interest rate. China’s GDP expanded by 4% year-on-year in October-December, data from the National Bureau of Statistics shows - which is the weakest expansion in 18 months. For 2021 as a whole, China’s economy expanded by 8.1% - the fastest in a decade - as it recovered from the slump in activity at the start of 2020. But there are clear signs of a slowdown at the end of the year, as China’s government introduced new restrictions to combat the latest wave of Covid-19. Retail sales growth slowing sharply to just 1.7% year-on-year in December, down from 3.9%. Spillovers from the crisis at indebted property developer Evergrande also weighed on China’s economy. And in response, China’s central bank has cut its key interest rate for the first time in almost two years to help bolster the economy. The People’s Bank of China has lowered the rate at which it provides one-year loans to banks by 10 basis points -- the first reduction since April 2020. Louis Kuijs, head of Asia economics at Oxford Economics, says: “Consumption remains the weakest link in China’s growth story at the moment and that will by and large continue for much of this year,” said “We think Beijing has a bottom line of around 5%. As is the case at the moment, if growth is weaker than that, they’d feel strongly motivated to pursue more policy easing.” China’s president Xi Jinping will be speaking later today, as part of the Davos Agenda series organised by the World Economic Forum (as the usual Annual Meeting has been postponed again due to the pandemic). We’ll also get the results of Scotland’s largest-ever auction of permits to construct offshore windfarms, which could raise up to £860m. The agenda: 10am GMT: Scottish auction for offshore windfarm permits results 10am GMT: Special Address by Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China, at Davos Agenda 11am GMT: ILO publishes new analysis of labour market and social trends, and impact of Covid-19 3pm GMT: Special Address by Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of India, at Davos Agenda 4.30pm GMT: Special Address by António Guterres, Secretary-General, United Nations, at Davos AgendaA British man who flew to the US, acquired a gun and took hostages at a Texas synagogue had a criminal record and an extensive history of mental health issues, the Guardian understands. Malik Faisal Akram, a 44-year-old from Blackburn, was killed after a tense 11-hour hostage standoff at the Congregation Beth Israel synagogue in the Dallas suburb of Colleyville on Saturday evening. All four hostages survived the siege and were unharmed. President Joe Biden on Sunday declared the incident an act of terror and the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said the UK government condemned “this act of terrorism and antisemitism”. In a statement to Sky news Akram’s brother Gulbar asked how he had been able to acquire a visa to enter the US. “He’s known to police. Got a criminal record. How was he allowed to get a visa and acquire a gun?” he said. Asked by reporters on Sunday how Akram could have procured weapons in the US, Biden said: “the assertion was he got the weapons on the street. He purchased them when he landed.” The Guardian understands that Akram had a criminal record in the UK but no known terrorism convictions. Investigators in the UK believe that Akram had no connection to Texas and travelled there earlier this month. Officers at MI5, the British Security Service, were on Monday examining their records to see if he had ever been known to them. Akram had been the subject of an exclusion order in 2001 banning him from Blackburn magistrates court after he made remarks about the September 11, 2001 attacks on the US, saying he wished a court usher had been on the planes flown into buildings to commit mass murder. During the synagogue siege, Akram could be heard demanding the release of Aafia Siddiqui, a Pakistani neuroscientist suspected of having ties to al-Qaida, who was convicted in 2010 of trying to kill US military officers while in custody in Afghanistan. Siddiqui is in federal prison in Texas serving an 86-year sentence. As the siege unfolded the FBI asked British police to get Akram’s family to try to talk him into surrendering. They spoke to Akram as he held hostages, but could not convince him to give himself up. British detectives continued to question two teenagers arrested in Manchester who are both believed to be male. They are being questioned to see if they knew anything about Akram’s intentions to travel to the US to stage the attack. A community source in Blackburn said Akram was known to behave unusually, including in and around mosques in the Lancashire town. Malik Faisal Akram was known as Faisal to those who knew him in Blackburn, Lancashire. A neighbour of the former family home described him as “a bit hotheaded”, but otherwise a generally unremarkable man who at one point had been trying to build a property business. “I never thought at all in my wildest dreams that this was ever going to happen”. A taxi driver, who had known Akram since childhood, said he had recently lost his business and house. “He went through some bad issues, he must have lost a lot. But his mental health issues were genuine, we’ve known him for all of our life.” MP Kate Hollern said the Akram’s actions were “not a reflection of Blackburn or any religious community”. The head of the local council, Mohammed Khan, said Blackburn and Darwen would be assisting with the investigation. “In Blackburn we firmly stand by the belief that no community should live in fear for its safety as they go about practising their religious beliefs or identity. We stand in solidarity in condemning this act of hate, violence and terror.” Lancashire Council of Mosques also condemned the hostage situation in Texas and urged its members to avoid speculation and sharing unverified information. The standoff began during a Saturday morning service at the Reform synagogue in the affluent city of about 26,000 residents. The service was being live streamed on Facebook when a man with a British accent could be heard shouting off camera. The feed was eventually cut hours later and police were called at about 10.41am. One male hostage, believed to be the synagogue’s rabbi, was released at around 5pm as negotiations continued throughout the day. Armed FBI officers stormed the building and rescued the three remaining hostages at around 9pm, authorities said. [See footnote.] Details of the manner of Akram’s death have not been released. • Note added 18 January 2022: When the rabbi was interviewed on 17 January he confirmed that he was not the hostage who was released at around 5pm, but was one of the three hostages who escaped later.China’s population growth rate has fallen to its lowest level in six decades, barely outnumbering deaths in 2021 despite major government efforts to increase population growth and stave off a demographic crisis. Across China, 10.62 million babies were born in 2021, a rate of 7.52 per thousand people, the national bureau of statistics said on Monday. In the same period 10.14 million deaths were recorded, a mortality rate of 7.18 per thousand, producing a population growth rate of just 0.34 per thousand head of population. The rate of growth is the lowest since 1960, and adds to the findings of last May’s once-a-decade census, which found an average annual rise of 0.53%, down from 0.57% reported from 2000 to 2010. China, like much of east Asia, is in the grip of a population crisis, with lowering birthrates, and predictions of imminent negative population growth and an ageing population. Monday’s figures showed the proportion of over-60s in China rose from 18.7% in 2020 to 18.9%. “The demographic challenge is well known but the speed of population ageing is clearly faster than expected,” said Zhiwei Zhang, the chief economist at Pinpoint Asset Management. “This suggests China’s total population may have reached its peak in 2021. It also indicates China’s potential growth is likely slowing faster than expected.” Beijing has announced major reforms to address the decline, including raising the retirement age. A three-child policy has replaced the two-child policy that was introduced in 2016 and had sparked a slight increase in births before falling again. The high cost of living, delayed marriages and lack of social mobility are frequently cited as contributing factors to young Chinese people’s reluctance to have children. In response, Beijing has banned expensive private tutoring, and pledged better access to childcare and maternity leave. Prof Wang Feng, from the University of California Irvine and who specialises in Asian demographics, said the results showed the root causes ran deeper than the policymakers realised. “The policies announced last year are mostly rhetoric, or at most like Band-Aids,” he told the Guardian. “Without addressing the deeply rooted causes discouraging young Chinese from getting married and having children, from gender inequality to high living cost, what we are seeing now is likely just the beginning of a further decline in birthrate and a prolonged process of population decline in China.” China also faces potential instability on the economic front, with GDP data published alongside the population findings revealing a dramatic slowdown in the final months of 2021. China, the world’s second-largest economy, reported a higher-than-expected GDP rise of 8.1% year-on-year, beyond the government’s predictions of 6%, but with the growth concentrated in the first half of the year. In the fourth quarter it rose by 4%, down from 4.9% in the third quarter. “The domestic economy is under the triple pressures of demand contraction, supply shock and weakening expectations,” said bureau spokesman Ning Jizhe. The last year has seen extraordinary levels of change in consumer habits and of government intervention in major Chinese industries. Retail sales growth dropped from 3.9% in November to 1.7% in December. “Economic growth is clearly under pressure, (and) recent Omicron outbreaks in China exacerbated the downside risk,” said Zhang. Construction has slumped and property sales were battered amid a crisis in development, most notably the ongoing financial difficulties of major firm Evergrande. Government intervention into the $1bn private tutoring industry and continued crackdowns on the tech sector have also seen waves of layoffs. An emissions-reduction push coupled with supply chain issues and bans on some imported coal have been blamed, alongside rising power prices for power cuts. • The headline and first paragraph of this story were amended on 17 January 2022. It is the population growth rate, not the birthrate, that has reached its lowest level in six decades. The birthrate is at its lowest since 1949.Millions of households could face a second record energy price hike this year which would lift the average gas and electricity bill to £2,255 from October, intensifying the UK’s cost of living crisis. Energy bills are expected to soar to almost £2,000 a year from April under the regulator’s energy price cap, and industry analysts have warned that a second surge in October could drive bills more than 75% above today’s prices. The energy price cap, which sets a limit on default energy tariffs used by 15m households, climbed to an average of £1,277 this winter in the steepest bill increase since the cap was introduced in 2019. The level of the cap is expected to surge to £1,925 from 1 April, according to analysts at consultancy Cornwall Insight, and rise again in October, unless the government takes action to help prevent millions of people from plunging into fuel poverty. The number of households who are in ‘fuel stress’ because they are unable to pay their energy bills is expected to treble overnight to 6.3m across the UK from 1 April, according to research from the Resolution Foundation thinktank. The research has added to growing calls for ministers to take urgent action to avert a national energy crisis, triggered by a global gas supply crunch, including proposals that the Treasury scraps VAT on energy bills and moves green levies and other policy costs into general taxation. Gareth Miller, the chief executive officer at Cornwall Insight said: “It is not helpful for government to keep pointing to the default tariff cap when pressed on what action it is taking. The cap will not protect consumers from increases in gas and power prices in the long run.” Miller warned the government against “quick fixes” to counter the record energy market highs which threaten the livelihoods of households and businesses in favour of a rethink of the UK’s energy sources. He urged ministers to “look again” at low-carbon energy technologies which could protect the UK from a boom in international fossil fuel prices, and consider homegrown gas supplies because “where we get gas from is irrelevant so long as we stick to a declining usage as we move to net zero”. “The current energy crisis is of economy wide concern, having a potential impact on business competitiveness, general inflation, and household affordability,” Miller said. “It is vital that the magnitude and speed of actions match the scale of risk faced by the economy from the current situation, and that attentions turn away from quick fixes, and instead focus on large scale reform of the energy system.”In better times, the French left used to draw inspiration from the old Popular Front phrase, “les lendemains qui chantent” (the tomorrows that sing). These days that kind of optimism – along with any sense of unity among progressives – is just a poignant memory. With less than 100 days to go before the first round of the French presidential election, the jockeying for position among the flatlining candidates of the left has become a fractious sideshow, as the campaign continues to be dominated by the right. At the weekend, the Socialist former justice minister, Christiane Taubira, became the latest hopeful to formally throw her hat into the ring. She joins the mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo – also a Socialist – France Unbowed’s veteran hard-left leader Jean-Luc Mélenchon, the Green candidate, Yannick Jadot, and an assortment of fringe figures. None of the candidates has managed to break through the 10% barrier in polls and none has a chance of making it through to the second round of voting; yet all remain in the race, vying to take votes from each other. “Singing tomorrows” have given way to a cacophonous clashing of stubborn egos. The result is that the 30% or so of voters who identify as being on the broad left are being effectively disfranchised. Ms Taubira is associated with one of the most notable progressive victories in recent times, having pushed through same-sex marriage in 2013. Charismatic and popular with grassroots activists, she will hope that her radical pedigree can transcend the factional warfare. But there is also a risk that she simply divides this divided field still further. Ms Hidalgo recently warned that the choice for the left was to either unite or risk eventual extinction as a political force in France. But Mr Jadot and Mr Mélenchon, whose poll ratings have more than halved since the election of 2017, have both refused to recognise the validity of an unofficial “people’s primary” at the end of the month. It is a sorry spectacle. In 2012, following the election of François Hollande as president, the Parti Socialiste controlled the Élysée, both houses of parliament and most regional administrations. It then paid a heavy price for enacting post-crash austerity measures and haemorrhaged working-class support during the growing backlash against globalisation. In 2017, the party was out-manoeuvred by Emmanuel Macron, who left it to set up the centrist En Marche movement and successfully brought about a realignment in which he became the presidential bulwark against the threat of the far right. Faced with these formidable structural challenges, the French left cannot afford the luxury of endless infighting and self-indulgent campaigns leading to mutually assured destruction at the polls. The people’s primary was set up by progressive activists in a last-ditch attempt to achieve a united front. It seems destined to fail in that aim – though it may serve as a kind of launchpad for Ms Taubira, who has said she will not run unless she wins. The near-certain humiliation that awaits the left in April should be the catalyst for a radical reboot of how progressive politics is done in France.On Sunday, Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, tweeted that the BBC licence fee will be abolished in 2027 and broadcaster’s funding frozen for the next two years. The licence fee is the guarantor of the BBC’s financial independence and underpins its unique quality. Doing away with the funding stream without warning and with no replacement in sight in advance of a mid-charter review revealed Ms Dorries’ true intentions. The backlash to her peremptory threat was enough for her to back down. It was hard not to believe the reason the BBC was being sacrificed was to distract attention away from accusations that the prime minister lied over illegal Downing Street parties. Nothing appears too valuable in British life that cannot be wrecked to save Boris Johnson’s premiership. The BBC has not got off lightly: Ms Dorries confirmed she intends to keep the fee flat at £159 for a colour licence until April 2024, which will mean a severe real-terms cut to the corporation’s funding. The negotiations between Ms Dorries and the BBC to agree a settlement had not been conducted transparently or appropriately. This is ominous. The Tories have long used the BBC as a punchbag. But under Mr Johnson the “Brexit-Bashing Corporation” is key to drawing up cultural dividing lines rather than economic ones. The longer-term threat to get rid of the licence fee has not gone away. Linking the BBC’s mid-charter review, and implicitly the fate of the licence fee, with the “impartiality” of a broadcaster’s editorial output makes ministers sound more like tinpot tyrants than respectable democrats. Ms Dorries’ defence is that she is cutting the cost of watching television in a cost-of-living crisis. This is not an unreasonable argument. But low inflation in the last decade did not mean a better deal for Auntie. Licence fee income has suffered a real terms cut of 30% since 2010. The BBC is the glue of the nation, bringing people together with its sports coverage and landmark dramas and documentaries. Dissolving those bonds is in no one’s interest apart from the BBC’s corporate rivals like Rupert Murdoch. Defund Auntie and ministers also help to defund TV’s private sector, which relies on the BBC to commission shows. Cutbacks also don’t help the one in eight people who spend three hours a day watching the five major public sector broadcaster channels. The media analyst Claire Enders points out that despite public debate being dominated by the tastes of younger viewers, audience fragmentation and online subscription services, there are 8 million adults in the UK who lack the means, or do not wish, to pay for any TV service beyond the licence fee. The central role the BBC plays in national life ensures a source of trusted news and information benefits from large audiences thanks to entertainment-driven schedules. The pandemic has reminded us of this social and political role in dramatic fashion. Much has been made of the rise of subscription services such as Netflix. The BBC might do very well under such a model, but it would not be the BBC as it exists today. Netflix has built its empire on $15.5bn of debt. Ministers’ are delusional to think the BBC could compete with a £700m borrowing facility. Modern national polities are in part a creation of television, which is why governments decided to monopolise broadcasting at its outset. The Conservative party appears to want to cast society in the image of the market rather than the democratic state. Hence its death-by-a-thousand-cuts approach to the BBC. There needs to be an independent and transparent process to set the level of the licence fee. Discussions over whether to replace the funding model and the BBC’s wider obligations cannot be decided by ministerial whim or implicitly by commercial rivals’ interests.A man has been jailed for raping a teenage woman more than three decades ago after he was arrested last year for an unconnected crime and his DNA found to match the attacker’s profile. Armed with a large sharpened stick, Paul Shakespeare grabbed his 18-year-old victim from a footpath in Gloucestershire as she walked her dog and dragged her into bushes before attacking her. The daylight rape in Cheltenham left the teenager so traumatised she never told her family what happened to her on the afternoon of Sunday 29 April 1990. After raping the girl, Shakespeare threatened to find her and kill her if she told anyone, Gloucester crown court heard. Shakespeare, now 66, was brought to justice after he was arrested in Cumbria last year and his DNA matched. He was jailed for nine years. In a victim impact statement read to the court, the victim said the rape had a profound effect on her causing her to try to take her own life. “I couldn’t tell my family because of the shame I felt, I felt embarrassed, violated and dirty,” she said. “To this day my mum is not aware of what happened to me. “Being raped will haunt me for the rest of my life. On that day I was the most scared I have ever been. I didn’t know whether I would live or die – I was petrified.” Virginia Cornwall, prosecuting, told the court the attack took place in daylight near to a children’s play area on the Honeybourne line, a former railway line area popular with walkers and cyclists. She said: “This was a premeditated stranger rape when a weapon was used to gain the victim’s submission. The defendant had noticed the teenager alone and he had selected her. “After raping her he asked where she lived and where she worked and it seems she told him through fear. Before running off he told her: ‘I know where you live and where you work and I’ll come and find you. If you tell anyone I’ll kill you.’” An investigation was launched and despite local and national press coverage, Shakespeare was not caught. In 2008 the victim took part in a BBC Crimewatch reconstruction but the defendant still evaded justice. In June last year Shakespeare was arrested for possession of an offensive weapon and his DNA matched samples taken from the rape. He pleaded guilty to rape and possession of an offensive weapon. Kim Whittlestone, defending, said Shakespeare, from Carlisle, has been married for 20 years to an NHS nurse and he had three adult children. Judge Michael Cullum said: “I am so relieved this day has finally come for your victim. For 30 years she has been denied justice and living daily with the nightmare you inflicted upon her. She knew this day would come and her remarkable faith in criminal justice has been borne out.” Outside court, DC Simone Bowley praised the victim’s courage, adding: “She has had to wait for more than 30 years for Shakespeare to admit his abhorrent crimes.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Even a Marmite reaction – some loving it, some hating it – would have been better from brand owner Unilever’s point of view. Unfortunately, almost everybody seemed to agree: the big idea of offering £50bn for GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer products division, a proposal rejected by the pharmaceutical firm’s board, was a shocker. Unilever’s share price plunged 7%, which is a large move when you’re worth (or were) £100bn. “Initial feedback on the deal from investors over the weekend has been almost uniformly negative,” reported Jefferies analyst Martin Deboo. Amid chief executive Alan Jope’s talk about “rotating” Unilever’s product portfolio, one line of thinking says he’s in danger of rotating himself out of a job. Is it really such a terrible proposal, though? In purely strategic terms, the fit looks decent. If your aim is to be bigger in “health, beauty and hygiene”, which Unilever has been saying for a while, then GSK brands such as Panadol, Advil and Sensodyne are one definition of what you want. If the targeted operation can be relied upon to increase sales annually at 4%-6%, which is GSK’s revised estimate, that’s a notch above the 3%-5% at which Unilever generally travels. The difference is not huge, obviously, but Unilever would also seek buyers for some or all of its food operation, parts of which show roughly zero growth. That’s the “rotation” part of Jope’s script, also designed to ensure that borrowing does not rise to nose-bleed ratios. Jope faces at least five problems, however – and none is small. First, GSK is under little pressure to sell. Its investors seem happy with the current plan to demerge the consumer products business this summer via a listing in London. It might take an offer at £55bn to force negotiations. Second, Jope is trying to execute a mega-deal with Unilever’s share price close to a five-year low. Given that new shares represented £8.3bn of the rejected £50bn offer, the deal mechanics would turn far more smoothly at a higher share price. Third, Jope has exposed himself to the charge that he should try to fix what he’s got before contemplating a “transformational” mega-deal. Grumbling about Unilever’s pedestrian performance is not confined to Terry Smith, the fund manager who made an entertaining jab last week about a corporate obsession with finding purpose in mayonnaise. The wider issue is a sense that Unilever isn’t converting its “sustainability” credentials into grubby profits at the required rate. Nestlé’s success stands in contrast. Fourth, Jope didn’t calm nerves by talking about alternative deal-making “options” should the GSK adventure not come off. If plan A for a big acquisition is hopeful, plan B is vague. Fifth, any strategy that involves spending £50bn and then selling, say, £30bn of food assets is complex. Brands like Hellman’s, Ben &amp; Jerry’s and Marmite might attract a rush of would-be buyers, but the overall disposal tally is what matters, and it’s not guaranteed. For all those reasons, Jope’s chances of success in his pursuit look slim – maybe 25%. But that is a day-one view and momentum can turn. If Unilever could produce a big and credible cost-saving plan, it might change the mood. Evidence that revenues have accelerated after last year’s tepid third-quarter performance would also help – financial results are due next month. It’s not much to cling to, but do not count out Unilever just yet. This could be a long campaign and the ambition, for all the practical difficulties, looks entirely reasonable. A medicines-for-Marmite strategy is not illogical. Game, set and match: Saint António is out The default assumption is usually that Swiss banks are inward-looking institutions that always find a way to remove a reform-minded outsider from the boardroom. No such conspiratorial thinking is required in the case of António Horta-Osório at Credit Suisse, however. The former Lloyds Banking Group boss is entirely the author of his own downfall. He seems to have broken Covid quarantine rules in both Switzerland and the UK, the latter on a trip to watch the tennis at Wimbledon last summer. And the initial plea that the breaches were “unintentional” was undercut by reports in the Swiss press that he sought official exemptions from the quarantine rules and was refused. Resignation was the only possible outcome, especially as Saint António was hired as chairman of Credit Suisse to promote what he called “a culture of personal responsibility and accountability” at the bank after its many entanglements, including Greensill Capital. Even on his home patch at Lloyds, AHO surely wouldn’t have survived this episode.The climate crisis will wipe at least 1% a year off the UK’s economy by 2045 if global temperatures are allowed to rise by 2C, the government has said. More action would be needed on key areas such as flood defences, restoring natural protections such as peatlands and wetlands, and making the built environment more resilient to extreme weather, ministers said. The government’s third five-yearly assessment of the risks from climate change was published on Monday. While taking what many regarded as a conservative estimate of future risks, the assessment painted a future of drastic disruption and costly impacts from the climate crisis. Damage to the UK’s food production, and to infrastructure, from extreme weather, and the risks of flooding, are all likely to cost more than £1bn a year each. In all, at least eight areas of risk were judged likely to cost more than £1bn a year by 2050 – however, some may cost much more, as the risks were assessed in bands, with more than £1bn the highest available. Many other potential areas of risk, such as risks to business supply chains and to the delivery of health services, and the potential damage to culturally important heritage sites, were judged unable to be fully assessed. Jo Churchill, the minister for climate adaptation, said: “The scale and severity of the challenge posed by climate change means we cannot tackle it overnight, and although we’ve made good progress in recent years there is clearly much more that we need to do. By recognising the further progress that needs to be made, we’re committing to significantly increasing our efforts and setting a path towards the third national adaptation programme, which will set ambitious and robust policies to make sure we are resilient to climate change into the future.” Green campaigners said the predictions showed the government needed to do far more to prepare for the effects of the climate crisis. Doug Parr, policy director at Greenpeace UK, said: “This report makes clear that even modest increases in global temperature will have profound impacts across every aspect of our lives. Adaptation can no longer be an afterthought, action on climate change of all kinds needs to be right at the heart of government policy and programmes.” The costs of cutting greenhouse gas emissions – a renewed focus of political attention, as some backbench Tory MPs have called the net zero target into question amid energy price rises – also looked modest in comparison with the cost of the impacts of climate breakdown, according to analysts. Matt Williams, climate and land programme lead at the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit, said: “The damage caused to the UK by climate change will be greater than the investments needed to avoid harmful levels of warming.” Signe Norberg, of the Aldersgate Group of businesses supporting sustainability, said: “Investing in a healthier natural environment is key to making the UK more resilient to the impacts of climate change and it will be critical that the government puts forward ambitious and credible targets under the Environment Act as well as a new and comprehensive environmental improvement plan later this year. The UK must also continue its efforts to deliver rapid emission reductions across the economy and beyond just the power sector. Key policy gaps remain in crucial areas, such as energy efficiency, agriculture and land use, and skills.” Labour said the government had failed to reduce emissions and to prepare the country’s infrastructure for the impacts of the climate crisis. Jim McMahon, the shadow environment secretary, said: “After more than a decade in power the Conservatives have failed to build the efficient homes, strengthened flood defences, and resilient natural habitats necessary to tackle the climate crisis. Their lack of action and empty promises are putting people, nature, and our economy at risk.” The government said it was investing £5.2bn to build 2,000 new flood defences by 2027, and increasing the nature for climate fund on peat restoration, woodland creation and management to more than £750m by 2025.Dominic Cummings has accused Boris Johnson of lying after No 10 denied the prime minister was warned against allowing a “bring your own booze” party during the first lockdown. Johnson admitted to parliament last week that he attended drinks in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020 but claimed he had not realised it was a social gathering. The event was organised by Johnson’s principal private secretary (PPS), Martin Reynolds, who told people to “bring your own booze” – but No 10 denies that the prime minister saw the emailed invitation to about 100 staff. It has also denied allegations that two senior staffers warned Johnson not to go ahead with the drinks event, saying this was “not true”. But Cummings, a former senior aide to the prime minister, wrote a new blog post on Monday challenging that account. He said he personally told Reynolds that the invitation broke the rules and claimed Reynolds replied: “So long as it’s socially distanced I think it’s OK, I’ll check with the PM if he’s happy for it to go ahead.” Cummings said in his blogpost: “Not only me but other eyewitnesses who discussed this at the time would swear under oath this is what happened.” Sue Gray, the senior civil servant in charge of the inquiry into Downing Street parties, could make a formal request to interview Cummings, Whitehall sources confirmed. It is within the remit of the inquiry to approach former members of staff if their evidence might be relevant. No 10 staff had hoped that the inquiry, which is examining more than 15 separate allegations of illegal gatherings in Downing Street, would conclude this week. Because of the constant drip of new parties and developments, officials believe it may now report next week. The inquiry is expected to outline when each alleged party occurred, how many people were present and who was involved in organising them. It will also outline the regulations at that time, and could suggest whether each event appears to have broken the regulations at that time. The Gray report is not expected to recommend a criminal investigation. Cummings then said that during a discussion over the future of the cabinet secretary and Reynolds, he had said to the prime minister something like: “Martin’s invited the building to a drinks party, this is what I’m talking about, you’ve got to grip this madhouse.” Cummings added: “The PM waved it aside. I had told him repeatedly the PPS should be replaced, as had other competent officials who knew the whole structure needed a huge upgrade in personnel and management. ‘He’s MY guy, I don’t want you replacing him with YOUR person.’ (Yes, this says a lot.) I went home to bed at 3ish, still very ill from Covid.” He claimed Reynolds had checked with Johnson whether the party should go ahead, the prime minister agreed it should and they both went to the party. Another former Downing Street staffer told the Guardian: “It is inconceivable: there is no way Martin would go ahead without checking with Boris. There is no way any PPS would. If two senior people come to you and say, ‘this shouldn’t happen’, you don’t then proceed with it without speaking to the principal.” Asked about Cummings’s latest claims, a No 10 spokesperson pointed to an earlier statement, saying: “It is untrue that the prime minister was warned about the [20 May] event in advance. As he said … he believed implicitly that this was a work event. He has apologised to the house and is committed to making a further statement once the investigation concludes.” The party on 20 May has emerged as the most contentious event for Johnson out of all the allegations that lockdown rules were broken in Downing Street. With Tory MPs openly questioning Johnson’s future as party leader, there are worries among backbenchers about a drip-drip of further damaging revelations causing harm to the government’s reputation. • John Crace will join a Guardian Live online event about the No 10 lockdown parties and Boris Johnson’s future this Wednesday 19 January from 8pm to 9pm GMT. Book hereThank you very much for joining me, I think we can all agree it was a riveting night of expensive outfits and shiny trophies. The presenters sign off and there is more high fiving between Infantino and Ronaldo. There also seems to be an applause machine on as I can’t see an audience. We exit with a video praising Qatar, obviously. Infantino gets a hug from Big Ron. Ronaldo thanks his international teammates past and present. He moves on to praising his family. Ronaldo says he plays to entertain himself. He feels good and motivated, which is a relief for Ralf Rangnick. Cristiano Ronaldo has turned up in person to receive his award. He hasn’t got much on at the moment. “Fifa Best awards are as reliable as Boris Johnson’s next cockup,” writes Yash Gupta. “Still Lamela and Rabona won which is highly unusual. Someone must be drunk in Fifa garden for giving that award to Lamela who really deserved it.” We now get a montage of Ronaldo goals. Oh ... there is one more award for Cristiano Ronaldo for some reason or other. Is it for his great Instagram posts? Great that Infantino gets to announce the two biggest awards of the night, he’s really deserved it. The Pole is handed the award by a man in a mask. He is “very proud” of his latest triumph. Robert Lewandowski wins! To the men’s award. Your nominees ... Robert Lewandowski (Poland and Bayern Munich) Lionel Messi (Argentina, Barcelona and PSG) Mo Salah (Egypt and Liverpool ) You will be pleased to know it was Infantino with the shiny envelope. What an honour for Putellas to have her name read out by the great man. Alexia Putellas wins! We now do reach the Best Women’s Player award. Your nominees ... Jennifer Hermoso (Spain and Barcelona) Alexia Putellas (Spain and Barcelona) Sam Kerr (Australia and Chelsea) “Hi Will,” says Robbie Hiller, “please let me know when someone wears something worth noting. Fabulous coverage, Robbie.” It was all downhill after Yaya’s tux. Bonucci has some nice velvet on. In the Women’s team they completely missed out the three nominees for the Best player of the year award. I am so confused. Garth Crooks is picking these teams, isn’t he? The Men’s team is in the classic 3-3-4 formation: Donnarumma, Alaba, Bonucci, Ruben Dias, Jorginho, Kante, Kevin de Bruyne, Cristiano Ronaldo, Haaland, Lewandowski, Messi The Best Men’s team as Donnarumma in net. He didn’t even win the Best goalkeeper award ... The Women’s XI does not include any Barcelona players, which is pretty ruddy hilarious. Who picked it? We have the Best Men’s XI coming up with Lothar Matthaus and Arsene Wenger. Some more banal Jenas questions delay the announcement. Before we get to the best individual, the finest XI of the year is announced. Best XI: Endler, Bronze, Renard, Bright, Eriksson, Banini, Lloyd, Bonansea, Miedema, Marta, Alex Morgan Soon it’ll be time for the Best Women’s player. Your nominees: Jennifer Hermoso (Spain and Barcelona) Alexia Putellas (Spain and Barcelona) Sam Kerr (Australia and Chelsea) The winner is the Denmark and Finland fans for their response following Christian Eriksen’s cardiac arrest. Both sets of supporters spent a long time chanting Eriksen’s name while he was treated on the pitch. Jenas has said “I totally agree” in response to everything said by guests tonight. What a reassuring presence he is. Next up is the Fifa Fan Award. Julio Cesar comes on to present. I hope I win. That’s three wins for Chelsea today as they pick up the BEST goalkeeper and both coach awards. Thomas Tuchel decked in a Chelsea hoodie. Tuchel says winning is “pretty surreal” and he “feels pretty uncomfortable”. Thomas Tuchel wins the award. Your nominees in this category: Pep Guardiola (Man City) Thomas Tuchel (Chelsea) Roberto Mancini (Italy) Everyone wheeled out needs to praise Fifa for a few seconds before getting on with the real business. Wenger is aiming to make coaching better around the world, you will be pleased to know. The Best Men’s Coach is next up. Arsene Wenger is here to tell is more about it and hopefully not banning throw-ins. Emma is “so shocked”. “I am not usually stunned.” Hayes goes on to thanks her players and staff. She has some lovely exposed brickwork as a backdrop at home. Emma Hayes wins the award. Next up is the women’s Best coach award. Your nominees: Fifa Women’s Coach Lluís Cortés (Barcelona) Emma Hayes (Chelsea) Sarina Wiegman (Netherlands and England) The award goes to the Denmark football and medical team for their actions after Christian Eriksen’s cardiac arrest. Now we have a tribute to Gerd Muller who left us in 2021. Lamela is on screen. “Thank you so much. I am very happy to win this award. In that moment, I didn’t think too much, I didn’t realise how special the goal was, I just kicked it and ran around.” Erik Lamela wins the award! Jenas’ patter asks what Toure’s most memorable goal is. A goal against Sunderland in the League Cup final is his favourite. It was a cracker, to be fair. Yaya Toure wanders out in his tux for the Puskas Award. The Puskas Award nominees: Erik Lamela – Arsenal vs Tottenham, Premier League (14 March 2021) Patrik Schick - Czech Republic vs Scotland, Euro 2020 (14 June 2021) Mehdi Taremi – Chelsea vs FC Porto, Champions League (13 April 2021) The Chelsea goalkeeper is not available due to a technically issue so we get a big photo of him instead. The passport photo of him looks very happy to win the award at least. Peter Schmeichel says he’s been a “revelation” in the Premier League. The Dane says Mendy shows great leadership. Edouard Mendy wins the award! The nominees ... Gianluigi Donnarumma (Italy, AC Milan and PSG) Edouard Mendy (Senegal and Chelsea) Manuel Neuer (Germay and Bayern Munich) Peter Schmeichel is the latest legend to be wheeled out. He will announce the winner of the men’s goalkeeper’s award. Christiane Endler says she is “very happy and proud”. The Chilean is the first South American to win the award, a fine accolade for her fine work after being nominated on three occasions prior to this. Christiane Endler wins the award! Fara Williams is brought onto stage. We have more chat about how great Sinclair is to start off. Now we move on to the great goalkeepers of the year in the women’s game. The nominees are as follows: Ann-Katrin Berger (Germany and Chelsea) Christiane Endler (Chiles, PSG and Lyon) Stephanie Lynn Marie Labbé (Canada, Rosengrad and PSG) Sinclair speaks very well as she praises all and sundry. Jenas comes back to her to discuss her calmness in front of goal. “I am sure my dad and mum will say they taught it to me but I’ve always felt calm in front of goal.” At the end Steve Nash congratulates her, which is nice. Infantino is back with trophy in hand as this night is all about him, it would seem. He is speaking to Sinclair over a videocall from the future. She doesn’t even have a replica of the trophy to stroke. Infantino speaks over Sinclair before allowing her to thank everyone for the prize. First up we have a ‘Special Award’ for Canada’s Christine Sinclair who has scored 188 goals in 303 appearances for her country, which isn’t bad going. Gianni Infantino has turned up, which is a relief. Let’s pander to him for while. He is welcoming everyone to Zurich. Although there are only three people at this ceremony in person. “We’ve all been suffering for two years but it is important to know health comes first.” Who will present the One Show instead tonight? Matt Albright? Ronan Keating? Matt Baker? The One Show’s Jermaine Jenas and Reshwin Chaudhry are our presenters. What a treat. I just want to thank you for joining me while Dominic Cummings takes to Twitter to try and take down the government. “Great coverage,” emails Ben Fisher. “Winning the most improved player award for Portishead Juniors U13s is the still comfortably my biggest achievement.” Sadly, that is where the improvement ended for Ben, as his teammates will find out tonight at five-a-side. And a little bit of Mehdi Taremi. Patrick Schick v Scotland. Let’s have a look at the goals up for the Puskas Award, starting with Erik Lamela. Here is a little look at awards that will be handed out this evening. Why can’t everyone win? Where is the most improved award? Fifa Men’s Player Robert Lewandowski (Poland and Bayern Munich) Lionel Messi (Argentina, Barcelona and PSG) Mo Salah (Egypt and Liverpool ) Fifa Women’s Player Jennifer Hermoso (Spain and Barcelona) Alexia Putellas (Spain and Barcelona) Sam Kerr (Australia and Chelsea) Fifa Men’s Coach Pep Guardiola (Man City) Thomas Tuchel (Chelsea) Roberto Mancini (Italy) Fifa Women’s Coach Lluís Cortés (Barcelona) Emma Hayes (Chelsea) Sarina Wiegman (Netherlands and England) Fifa Men’s Goalkeeper Gianluigi Donnarumma (Italy, AC Milan and PSG) Edouard Mendy (Senegal and Chelsea) Manuel Neuer (Germay and Bayern Munich) Fifa Women’s Goalkeeper Ann-Katrin Berger (Germany and Chelsea) Christiane Endler (Chiles, PSG and Lyon) Stephanie Lynn Marie Labbé (Canada, Rosengrad and PSG) Puskas Award Erik Lamela – Arsenal vs Tottenham, Premier League (14 March 2021) Patrik Schick - Czech Republic vs Scotland, Euro 2020 (14 June 2021) Mehdi Taremi – Chelsea vs FC Porto, Champions League (13 April 2021) The awards ceremony named in honour of Tina Turner’s love of the game is here once more. I am sure you are as excited as I am to find out who picks up the gongs and to then review opinion on Twitter about why someone’s favourite player should have won at the expense of another excellent footballer. We do not just get to find out about The Best players in the men’s and women’s game but also many other categories from the world game. We will trawl through gongs for coaches, goalkeepers and the Puskas Award for the best goal. In between I am sure we will be treated to some shiny interviews and apologies for why people could not be there in person. In the meantime, this is what it is all about.The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, has confirmed that the BBC’s funding will be frozen for the next two years – but has softened her stance on the permanent abolition of the television licence fee. The annual levy on television usage will remain at £159 until April 2024, requiring cuts to the BBC’s output. However, it will then rise in line with inflation for the next four years – a better deal than had been proposed in some press briefings from the government. Dorries also watered down her own suggestion that the licence fee would be abolished from 2028 onwards, raising suspicions that the focus of her provocative intervention on Sunday was to distract from Boris Johnson’s woes. On Sunday Dorries tweeted that the current licence fee settlement “will be the last” and the “days of the elderly being threatened with prison sentences and bailiffs knocking on doors are over”. Yet when formally announcing the BBC funding settlement in parliament on Monday afternoon, her language was notably softer. She insisted that no final decision had been made on the future of the licence fee: “It is not a policy – we are announcing a debate and a discussion. The decision as to what the future funding model looks like is up for discussion.” The BBC said rising inflation meant that freezing its main source of income for two years “will necessitate tougher choices which will impact licence fee payers”. Some services may have to be closed to make hundreds of millions of pounds in savings. Richard Sharp, the chair of the BBC, suggested the broadcaster had been blindsided by the government’s decision to brief the licence fee deal to Sunday newspapers. “I hadn’t anticipated learning what I learned over the weekend,” he told BBC Radio 4’s PM programme. “I had a meeting with the secretary of state last week. We were expecting to have further discussions and come to a conclusion this week.” Dorries told parliament that the BBC was a “beacon” of British culture that needed to survive, but there should be a debate about how it should be funded in the future. She said she could not envisage a world where households in 2028 were still paying a fee based on ownership of a television, but did not have any preference as to what funding model could replace the licence fee. Dorries repeatedly emphasised that she was unlikely to be in her current job when the decision was made: “We haven’t even begun the discussions yet … There are a number of ways I have been told already that we could fund the BBC going forward. It’s not for me to decide until we have all the information and all the evidence.” She also criticised some aspects of the BBC’s output, saying there should be further investigations into the BBC’s “impartiality and groupthink”. Dorries’ suggestion that freezing the licence fee would help with the cost of living was welcomed by some Tory MPs in so-called red wall seats. However, she also had to contend with several backbench Conservative MPs who spoke up in defence of the BBC – suggesting the politics of cutting the national broadcaster’s budget are not clear cut. The veteran Tory Sir Peter Bottomley, the longest-serving MP in parliament, said he was not impressed by the announcement and questioned why the licence fee was the “one thing” that could not be increased in line with inflation by the government. In a joint statement, Sharp and the BBC director general, Tim Davie, said it was disappointing that the funding freeze for the next two years meant the BBC would now have to absorb rising costs, particularly with inflation running at more than 5%. They said they would set out where budget cuts would fall in the coming months. The licence fee is also used to fund Welsh language channel S4C, which will receive an extra £7.5m to boost its online offering as part of the deal. The House of Commons Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, earlier reprimanded Dorries for tweeting out the licence fee announcement rather than announcing it in parliament. He suggested there was a “major colander right across government” and that there might need to be a leak inquiry to find out who briefed her policy to Sunday newspapers. Dorries apologised and said she had “refused every invitation for media yesterday and today”. The Labour MP Catherine McKinnell later asked if Dorries was “seeking to undermine and sacrifice this great national institution in order to save the prime minister’s political skin”. Dorries replied: “I’m not.”