More than 30,000 jobs would be put at risk if the government were to scrap the energy bill levy that pays for home insulation improvements for poor households, the industry has warned. Ministers are mooting an end to the Energy Company Obligation (ECO), a £1bn levy on energy bills that pays for energy efficiency measures for people on low incomes. The energy price cap is expected to rise by about £700 to £2,000 for the average household bill in April, after a surge in gas prices. The government is reluctant to take major steps such as windfall tax, which the Labour party and others have called for, and the longstanding ECO has been targeted by the Treasury as a way of reducing bills. However, the amounts saved from scrapping it would be small, at about £29 on the average bill. The Insulation Assurance Authority has written to ministers urging them to keep ECO. The body said the levy added less than 52p a week to the average energy bill but had reduced household energy bills by about £300 a year on average for the 3m homes treated so far. Nigel Donohue, chief executive of the industry body, said: “ECO has been the backbone in supporting those hit hardest by fuel poverty. We need a long-term solution to end our dependence upon high cost gas and that means we must ramp up energy efficiency investment. Cutting or just suspending ECO would be utterly self-defeating, lead to mass redundancies in the industry and harm the most vulnerable. ECO must be saved.” He warned that any move to abandon or suspend the measure would be disastrous for jobs. The insulation industry has suffered from government policy reversals over the last decade, when plans for a nationwide “green deal” insulation scheme were first trumpeted from 2010 then abruptly squashed in 2015. That left the ECO as the only remaining insulation programme, until the “green homes grant” was launched in 2020 then scrapped last spring after six months of maladministration. Experts have said this “stop-start” pattern to government intervention in the market has led to a severe lack of investment, training and skills in insulation, which is proving problematic as the UK has the leakiest homes in Europe. Previous moves to slash the ECO in the face of high energy prices led to the number of jobs in insulation falling by about half, the IAA said.The UK’s state pension payment system is not fit for purpose, resulting in the “shameful shambles” of an underpayment scandal that left tens of thousands of pensioners short-changed, according to a scathing report from a committee of MPs. The public accounts committee (PAC) also lambasted the Department for Work and Pensions for its “complacency”, and accused it of not having been “sufficiently transparent” to parliament about the problems. In September last year it emerged that the DWP was estimating it had underpaid 134,000 pensioners, mostly women, a total of more than £1bn of state pension cash that they were entitled to. At the time, the National Audit Office said this long-term underpayment of state pensioners – some problems date as far back as 1985 – was the result of repeated errors that were almost inevitable amid complex rules and outdated IT systems. It emerged that those affected that the DWP could trace would be paid an average of £8,900 each. The state pension is paid to around 12.4 million people, and these errors affect pensioners who first claimed it before April 2016 and who do not have a full national insurance record or should have inherited additional entitlement from their deceased partner. Of the 134,000 people hit by these problems, it is thought that 94,000 are alive – about 0.9% of those currently claiming the pre-2016 basic state pension. Where those affected have died, the department owes the pensioners’ estates. The PAC decided to investigate the issue, and said the underpayments uncovered ranged between one pence and £128,000. In February 2021 the Guardian featured the case of Angela Jenner, now 79, who was getting only 86p a week as her state pension but, after making a claim, saw this increased to £80.45 a week, and also learned she was owed £42,700. Dame Meg Hillier, the Labour chair of the committee, said that for decades the DWP had relied on a state pension payment system that was “clunky” and required staff to check many databases, “and now some pensioners and the taxpayer are paying in spades”. She added: “This is a shameful shambles. The PAC expects the DWP to set out the step changes it will make to ensure it is among their last.” The report stated that the pension payment system “is not fit for purpose”, and set out a series of recommendations. The committee said the department was now on its ninth go at fixing the mistakes since 2018, and that this “comes at great cost to the taxpayer” – the bill for staff costs alone is expected to top £24m by the end of 2023. The MPs also said the DWP had “left people in the dark over their entitlement”, adding: “The department also admits that many other pensioners are under-claiming their state pension … these pensioners need clearer information to act or risk missing out on significant sums.” Responding to the report, a DWP spokesperson said resolving the historical state pension underpayments that had been made by successive governments was a priority, and it was committed to doing so as quickly as possible. “We have set up a dedicated team and devoted significant resources to processing outstanding cases, and have introduced new quality control processes and improved training to help ensure this does not happen again. Those affected will be contacted by us to ensure they receive all that they are owed.” The spokesperson added that the DWP would respond formally in due course.An 88-year-old woman has told of her joy at becoming the first patient in the UK to benefit from a groundbreaking bionic eye implant that enabled her to detect signals for the first time since going blind. The woman from Dagenham suffers from geographic atrophy. The condition is the most common form of dry age-related macular degeneration (AMD), which affects millions of people worldwide and can cause loss of sight. The breakthrough, which experts say offers hope of restoration of sight to people suffering vision loss because of dry AMD, involves a revolutionary chip that was implanted behind her blind left eye. Hi-tech camera glasses she was given to wear this week captured the scene in front of her before relaying the data to the implant that sent an electrical signal to her brain – just like natural vision. “Losing the sight in my left eye through dry AMD has stopped me from doing the things I love, like gardening, playing indoor bowls and painting with watercolours,” the unidentified woman said in a statement released by Moorfields eye hospital NHS foundation trust. “I am thrilled to be the first to have this implant, excited at the prospect of enjoying my hobbies again and I truly hope that many others will benefit from this too.” She received the Prima System device – developed by Pixium Vision in France – at Moorfields in London as part of a Europe-wide clinical trial backed by the National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at Moorfields and the UCL Institute of Ophthalmology. The implant works by surgically inserting a 2mm-wide microchip under the centre of a patient’s retina. The patient then wears special glasses, containing a video camera that is linked to a small computer attached to their waistband. The chip captures the video provided by the glasses, and in turn transmits this to the computer, which uses artificial intelligence algorithms to process the data and guide the focus of the glasses. The glasses then project this image as an infrared beam back through the eye to the chip, which transforms it into an electrical signal that travels back through the retina cells and into the brain. The brain then interprets this signal as if it were natural vision. Mahi Muqit, consultant vitreoretinal surgeon at Moorfields eye hospital, said: “The success of this operation, and the evidence gathered through this clinical study, will provide the evidence to determine the true potential of this treatment.” Muqit, who is an honorary clinical lecturer at the UCL Institute of Ophthalmology and a NIHR research investigator, added: “This groundbreaking device offers the hope of restoration of sight to people suffering vision loss due to dry AMD.”1) Gunn in line of fire for Norwich Norwich’s hopes of following up on last weekend’s win over Everton by prevailing in Friday’s crucial six-pointer against Watford suffered a blow when it was confirmed Tim Krul would miss the game with a shoulder injury. While one goalkeeper’s misfortune is another’s opportunity, Norwich fans won’t take much confidence from Angus Gunn’s most recent spell deputising for Krul between the sticks, when it could be argued he could have done a lot better for four of the eight goals Norwich conceded in games against Arsenal and Crystal Palace over the festive period. “Gunny was disappointed with the results that we had in the two games that he played in,” said Dean Smith. “He has been working hard to get that opportunity back again and it has presented itself now, so he knows he has got to go and play well.” No pressure, Angus. BG Watford v Norwich City, Friday 8pm (all times GMT) 2) Rangnick tackles Ronaldo row? Ralf Rangnick’s decision to substitute Cristiano Ronaldo in Manchester United’s 3-1 win against Brentford on Thursday dominated the post-match headlines. But this distracted attention from the more concerning issue for the manager: a first half in which Brentford battered United and could have been out of sight. Rangnick was seen trying to placate a visibly angry Ronaldo on the bench in the closing stages – a neat visual metaphor for the club’s seemingly intractable problems. Ronaldo currently wields disproportionate power in relation to his ability, like many other contemporary footballers, and it is debatable whether the United team is better with him in it. Sir Alex Ferguson helped to get Ronaldo’s return from Juventus over the line, and remains an influential presence, but as a manager he would simply not have tolerated such petulance from a player. Rangnick is seen as a footballing progressive but, if he is going to transform Old Trafford, Ronaldo is not the only towering figure from the club’s past whose influence should be reduced. LM Manchester United v West Ham, Saturday 3pm 3) Gerrard and Ferguson reunited Everton host Aston Villa at Goodison in Saturday’s lunchtime kick-off, a game in which Duncan Ferguson and Steven Gerrard renew hostilities for the first time since Liverpool beat Everton 3-1 in a Merseyside derby at Anfield in March 2006. On that occasion both men spent most of the game monitoring proceedings from the touchline – Gerrard was sent off after 18 minutes while “Big Dunc” came on as a second-half substitute. A mere 16 years later, they will again be watching from the sidelines as Everton’s caretaker manager attempts to arrest his team’s alarming slide towards the relegation zone and Aston Villa’s boss tries to end a run of four games without a win. With Gerrard’s managerial credentials already established, Ferguson needs the win more. Famously tight-lipped off the pitch as a player and never one for self-promotion, he will expect Everton’s underperforming players to help him stake a claim for a job many believe him to be to the manner born. BG Everton v Aston Villa, Saturday 12.30pm 4) Spurs looking to outflank Chelsea With Reece James and Ben Chilwell still out, a good way to get at Chelsea is by attacking down their sides. Brighton’s Tariq Lamptey and Marc Cucurella have had great fun at their expense in recent weeks, including in Tuesday’s draw at the Amex. Tottenham? Not so much. Chelsea coasted through both Carabao Cup semi-finals, with Matt Doherty suffering particular torment as Spurs’ left wing-back. But the Irishman showed on Wednesday how effective he can be in his preferred position on the right by contributing mightily to the extraordinary comeback against Leicester. He is at least as good a defender as Emerson Royal and more impactful than the Brazilian going forward – thanks to his aerial threat in particular. Marcos Alonso will not want Doherty to start at right wing-back when Spurs go to Stamford Bridge. PD Chelsea v Tottenham, Sunday 4.30pm 5) Saints’ new era facing stern test Manchester City are locked on course for another league title but Southampton’s season remains one that may go either way. There is an air of optimism since the arrival of the Serbian media magnate Dragan Solak, but the euphoria of a thumping win over Brentford to welcome their new owner was tempered by defeat at Wolves last weekend. Solak has spoken of a long-term investment plan so although discussions are ongoing over signing Armando Broja from Chelsea, a January trolley dash looks highly unlikely. Ralph Hassenhüttl will hope to be backed in the transfer market come the end of the campaign, with the austerity of the Gao Jisheng years left behind, but the more pressing issue is steering his thin, inconsistent squad towards the top half. Considering the kind of fluent form that Pep Guardiola’s team are in, Saturday’s visit of the champions will most likely mean focusing on damage limitation. LM Southampton v Manchester City, Saturday 5.30pm 6) Partey off as Arteta gamble fails Mikel Arteta, like most managers, has railed against fixture congestion this season and the demands it places on players. But such complaints do not wash when he then chooses to bring on Thomas Partey a few hours after the player has got off a plane from Cameroon, where he had just contested three high-stakes Africa Cup of Nations matches in draining conditions. For the Ghanaian to be sent off for a couple of late challenges should not necessarily come as a surprise. Now, with Granit Xhaka also suspended, Arsenal again have a problem in central midfield for the visit of Burnley and, using his own logic, it is one partly of Arteta’s creation. Burnley, meanwhile, have certainly been well rested for the game, having played two league matches since 12 December. PD Arsenal v Burnley, Sunday 2pm 7) Goals galore at Brentford? As mentioned earlier, Brentford’s failure to convert a raft of first-half chances cost them dearly against Manchester United, while for all their good football Wolves were struggling to find the net with any sort of frequency until a recent glut of six goals in two games, against Sheffield United and Southampton. Only Burnley (16) and Norwich (10) have scored fewer than the 17 Premier League goals celebrated by Bruno Lage’s side this season, but with even the profligate – eight goals in 159 top-flight appearances – Adama Traoré getting on the scoresheet against Saints, the floodgates might finally have opened. While they lost against United, Brentford did at least see Ivan Toney end a run of eight games without a goal with his side’s late consolation. Saturday’s crowd at the Brentford Community Stadium could be treated to a glut of goals, even if the very suggestion here means a scoreless draw is probably guaranteed. BG Brentford v Wolves, Saturday 3pm 8) Palace still fragile at set pieces When Crystal Palace lost 3-0 at Anfield in September, the goals were scored by Mohamed Salah, Naby Keïta and Sadio Mané. So the Africa Cup of Nations is well timed for Patrick Vieira, since all three of those players will still be away with their national teams when Liverpool head to Selhurst Park on Sunday. All three goals at Anfield came from set pieces, though, and fragility from those is a problem Vieira has not yet been able to solve fully. There’s also the fact that the most significant African absentee on Sunday could actually be Cheikhou Kouyaté, since Palace’s midfield is much weaker without the Senegal international. PD Crystal Palace v Liverpool, Sunday 2pm 9) Will Foxes rally after late collapse? One way or another, Leicester’s spectacular stoppage-time collapse against Tottenham is likely to have a lasting impact. The under-strength Foxes were a few seconds from an unlikely victory, handed to them by James Maddison, before Steven Bergwijn’s double denied them even a single point. Will Brendan Rodgers’ side now pull together, collectively resolving not to throw points away in such careless fashion again? Or has their usual springtime slump arrived early this season? Brighton arrive looking buoyant, having got out of jail against Crystal Palace with a late goal in their 1-1 draw last Friday, before holding lavishly-funded Chelsea to a draw on Tuesday night. Following the shocking denouement against Spurs, now would be a good time for Leicester to prove they still belong in the scrap for Europe. LM Leicester v Brighton, Sunday 2pm 10) Newcastle shedding fear factor? Eddie Howe needs to tell Newcastle players about the joys of the Championship. He should tell them they will love it, it will be a blast, the atmosphere at St James’ Park will be festive at every home match and, basically, everything’s going to be all right. Maybe then Newcastle’s players will stop fretting about relegation and will be able to play without fear. Too often this season – and regardless of the manager – many Newcastle players have seemed so scared of making a mistake or failing that they have ended up doing just that. The symptoms are particularly noticeable when they take a lead: they often wind up cowering in their own half, neutered by the prospect of giving away their advantage. Last weekend’s draw against Watford was the latest of many examples. They need to learn how to play with abandon and Leeds, who have pulled nine points clear of the drop zone, will show them how. That is something for Newcastle to be enthused about. Or very afraid. PD Leeds v Newcastle, Saturday 3pmThe UK government will invest £100m in Britishvolt as the car battery manufacturing startup seeks to build Britain’s first large-scale “gigafactory” in the north-east of England. The government’s Automotive Transformation Fund will invest alongside asset management company Abrdn and its majority-owned property investment arm, Tritax, to fund a sale and leaseback deal for the huge building that will house the electric car battery factory, near Blyth in Northumberland. Peter Rolton, Britishvolt’s executive chairman, said: “The UK automotive industry needs a local source of batteries. Chinese or other Asian imports are not going to be an option. There will be very, very significant shortfalls of batteries. We are absolutely vital to maintain the UK industry and support those jobs.” Britishvolt is one of two major UK battery manufacturing projects that has secured funding, alongside an expansion of an existing plant at Sunderland owned by China’s Envision that supplies to Nissan. The company is hoping to build the plant rapidly with the aim of supplying a large part of the UK car industry’s needs as it transitions from internal combustion engines to electric cars that produce zero exhaust emissions. It is in talks with several potential clients, and sportscar maker Lotus has signed a memorandum of understanding, Bloomberg reported on Thursday. The plant will employ about 3,000 workers when it is at full capacity in around 2028. The first batteries are scheduled to start production in 2024 to take advantage of rising demand ahead of the UK’s 2030 ban on new cars without a battery. The government and Britishvolt declined to detail the size of the government investment, citing commercial confidentiality. However, a source with knowledge of the negotiations said it was worth about £100m. The government-funded Advanced Propulsion Centre calculates that the UK will need to produce batteries with a capacity of 90 gigawatt hours (GWh) a year if it is to retain a car industry of a similar size. Current UK production capacity is less than 2GWh, but Britishvolt hopes to produce 30GWh. Local authorities in the West Midlands and Somerset are trying to attract investors to two more potential battery manufacturing sites. The West Midlands site at Coventry airport last week gained pre-emptive planning permission. Rolton said: “The company was still working on the timing of a planned stock market listing which will raise the money to build the production line. The full project is expected to cost £3.8bn, but the government backing has already helped in conversations with potential investors.” Britishvolt has previously won backing from Glencore, the FTSE 100 miner, and preparatory construction work at the 93-hectare site has begun. Securing investment in UK-based battery manufacturing has been an important goal for the government. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, has on several occasions referred to his hopes for the project as part of his plans to “level up” parts of the country that have missed out on investment in recent decades. The plant will be based in the constituency of Wansbeck, narrowly retained by Labour in the 2019 general election. It is next door to Blyth Valley, a seat formerly part of Labour’s “red wall”, which voted in a Conservative MP for the first time in that election. Johnson said the plan “is a strong testament to the skilled workers of the north-east and the UK’s place at the helm of the global green industrial revolution”. He added that the factory will “boost the production of electric vehicles in the UK”. Rolton said Britishvolt had taken part in a jobs fair in the area which prompted “queues round the block”, while some parents even took children out of school to attend. “That’s what it means for the area,” he said.The UK data watchdog has intervened in the debate over end-to-end encryption, warning that delaying its introduction puts “everyone at risk” including children. The Information Commissioner’s Office said strongly encrypting communications strengthens online safety for children by reducing their exposure to threats such as blackmail, while also allowing businesses to share information securely. The watchdog was responding to the launch of a government-backed campaign that said social media platforms would be “willingly blindfolding” themselves to child abuse if they pushed ahead with end-to-end encryption for private messaging. “E2EE [end-to-end encryption] serves an important role both in safeguarding our privacy and online safety,” said Stephen Bonner, the ICO’s executive director for innovation and technology. “It strengthens children’s online safety by not allowing criminals and abusers to send them harmful content or access their pictures or location.” Child safety campaigners have warned that the encryption plans would prevent law enforcement, and tech platforms, from seeing messages by ensuring that only the sender and recipient can view their content – a process known as end-to-end encryption. Mark Zuckerberg’s Facebook Messenger and Instagram apps are preparing to introduce end-to-end encryption and their plans were strongly criticised last year by the home secretary, Priti Patel, who described them as “not acceptable”. Bonner said accessing encrypted content was not the only way to catch abusers. Other methods used by law enforcement include infiltrating abuse rings, listening to reports from children targeted by abusers and using evidence from convicted abusers. He added: “Until we look properly at the consequences, it is hard to see any case for reconsidering the use of E2EE – delaying its use leaves everyone at risk, including children.” The ICO, which oversees the protection of people’s data in the UK, believes that end-to-end encryption is one of the most reliable ways of protecting the data of people who use large messaging platforms. Bonner said encryption protects children by preventing criminals and abusers from accessing their pictures – which could expose them to the risk of blackmail – and their location. Meta, the owner of Messenger and Instagram, said in November last year it would delay its end-to-end encryption plans by a year to 2023. Its WhatsApp messaging service already uses end-to-end encryption. Damian Hinds, the home office minister, said the government-backed campaign, called No Place to Hide, was calling for a “more balanced debate” on the issue. Writing in the Times, he added: “There is a risk that end-to-end encryption, without the right safety capabilities, blinds companies and law enforcement, taking us backwards. Neither this government, nor society as a whole could accept that.” Responding to the ICO, the NSPCC said end-to-end encryption offered privacy benefits but put children at risk if it was poorly implemented. “That’s why the NSPCC wants companies to risk assess end-to-end encryption and balance the privacy and safety requirements of all users, including young people, to ensure it is rolled out in the best interests of the child,” said Andy Burrows, head of child safety online policy at the charity.Joe Biden clarified his comments about a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine, after the president appeared to downplay the threat of a “minor incursion” into Ukraine. “If any – any – assembled Russian units move across the Ukrainian border, that is an invasion,” Biden said. “Let there be no doubt at all that, if Putin makes this choice, Russia will pay a heavy price.” Biden’s initial comments about Ukraine had set off a flurry of criticism and a frantic clean-up effort by White House officials. The president of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelensky, said in response to Biden’s remarks, “We want to remind the great powers that there are no minor incursions and small nations. Just as there are no minor casualties and little grief from the loss of loved ones.” The US Treasury issued sanctions against four Ukrainian officials believed to be involved in a Russian conspiracy to discredit Zelensky’s government. “Russia has directed its intelligence services to recruit current and former Ukrainian government officials to prepare to take over the government of Ukraine and to control Ukraine’s critical infrastructure with an occupying Russian force,” the Treasury statement accompanying the sanctions said. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection requested the voluntary cooperation of Ivanka Trump. According to the letter sent by committee chairman Bennie Thompson, investigators are seeking information from Ivanka Trump on Donald Trump’s efforts to pressure Mike Pence to attempt to overturn the results of the 2020 election. The Senate failed to pass Democrats’ voting rights bill or approve a change to the filibuster, underscoring the significant challenges that Biden faces in enacting his legislative agenda. During yesterday’s Senate session, the voting rights bill failed along party lines, while Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema joined their Republican colleagues in opposing a change to the filibuster. The Supreme Court rejected the latest bid by abortion providers to block Texas’ law banning abortions as early as six weeks – when many people do not even know they are pregnant. In a dissent, justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote: “Today, for the fourth time, this court declines to protect pregnant Texans from egregious violations of their constitutional rights.” The supreme court rejected the latest bid by abortion providers to block Texas’ law banning abortions as early as six weeks – when many people do not even know they are pregnant. In a dissent, justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote: “Today, for the fourth time, this court declines to protect pregnant Texans from egregious violations of their constitutional rights.” In December, the court allowed the Texas anti-abortion law, one of the strictest in the US, to remain in place, but left open the possibility of future challenges. The law encourages anyone to sue people suspected of providing or facilitating abortions, effectively giving rise to anti-abortion bounty hunters. It has led to an 80% reduction in abortions in state, Texas clinics say. “Once again the supreme court has betrayed the people of Texas, who have been callously stripped of their constitutional right to abortion for more than four months now,” said Alexis McGill Johnson, president of Planned Parenthood Federation of America. Joe Biden on Thursday marked a year since his inauguration as president obliged to confront the same urgent crises he inherited when he took the oath of office: an unrelenting pandemic, economic uncertainty and a democracy threatened by partisan division and lies. But now those challenges have been compounded by a string of setbacks, both at home and abroad, that have eroded confidence in his leadership. In his first public appearance of the day, 12 months on from the one where he swept Donald Trump out of the White House, Biden was in a position of having to clarify loose remarks he made the day before about a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. During a marathon press conference on Wednesday afternoon to mark the anniversary of his presidency, Biden alarmed Kyiv by appearing to suggest that allies were divided over how to respond should a move by Moscow be a “minor incursion”. On Thursday, speaking at the White House, he said “any” Russian movement across the Ukrainian border would be met with a “severe and coordinated economic response” from Nato. He also vowed a response should Russia “use measures other than overt military actions”, such as “paramilitary tactics” and other methods of warfare. Warning the Russian president, Biden said: “Let there be no doubt at all: if Putin makes this choice, Russia will pay a heavy price.” Biden’s clarification came after the Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy tweeted in English and Ukrainian: “We want to remind the great powers that there are no minor incursions and small nations. Just as there are no minor casualties and little grief from the loss of loved ones.” Biden made the initial remarks at a Wednesday press conference, during which he also mounted a nearly two-hour defense of his first year in office. He insisted that the administration had handled the coronavirus “remarkably well”, noting that tens of millions of Americans had been fully vaccinated. On the economy, he touted record low unemployment, and outlined his plans for taming inflation and alleviating supply chain bottlenecks. Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden clarified his comments about a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine, after the president appeared to downplay the threat of a “minor incursion” into Ukraine. “If any – any – assembled Russian units move across the Ukrainian border, that is an invasion,” Biden said. “Let there be no doubt at all that, if Putin makes this choice, Russia will pay a heavy price.” Biden’s initial comments about Ukraine had set off a flurry of criticism and a frantic clean-up effort by White House officials. The president of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said in response to Biden’s remarks, “We want to remind the great powers that there are no minor incursions and small nations. Just as there are no minor casualties and little grief from the loss of loved ones.” The US Treasury issued sanctions against four Ukrainian officials believed to be involved in a Russian conspiracy to discredit Zelenskiy’s government. “Russia has directed its intelligence services to recruit current and former Ukrainian government officials to prepare to take over the government of Ukraine and to control Ukraine’s critical infrastructure with an occupying Russian force,” the Treasury statement accompanying the sanctions said. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection requested the voluntary cooperation of Ivanka Trump. According to the letter sent by committee chairman Bennie Thompson, investigators are seeking information from Ivanka Trump on Donald Trump’s efforts to pressure Mike Pence to attempt to overturn the results of the 2020 election. The Senate failed to pass Democrats’ voting rights bill or approve a change to the filibuster, underscoring the significant challenges that Biden faces in enacting his legislative agenda. During yesterday’s Senate session, the voting rights bill failed along party lines, while Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema joined their Republican colleagues in opposing a change to the filibuster. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. A spokesperson for Ivanka Trump seemed to suggest that she did not have any relevant information to share with the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. “As the Committee already knows, Ivanka did not speak at the January 6 rally,” the spokesperson said in a statement provided to CBS News. “As she publicly stated that day at 3:15 pm, ‘any security breach or disrespect to our law enforcement is unacceptable. The violence must stop immediately. Please be peaceful.’” However, in his letter to Ivanka Trump, committee chairman Bennie Thompson specifically said the panel is interested in any conversations she had with Donald Trump about efforts to overturn the results of the 2020 election. So even though Ivanka Trump did not speak at the January 6 rally that preceded the insurrection, it is still quite likely that she has relevant information for the investigation. The statement makes it seem even less likely that Ivanka Trump will voluntarily agree to cooperate with the select committee. Democratic congressman Jamie Raskin, a member of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, said Ivanka Trump could be a “material fact witness” for the panel’s inquiry. “If the former president has no executive privilege to hide evidence of an attempted coup or insurrection, neither do his family or friends,” the Maryland congressman said on Twitter. “If Ivanka Trump was with Donald Trump as the attack unfolded, she is a material fact witness. I look forward to her testimony.” According to the letter that committee chairman Bennie Thompson sent to Ivanka Trump, the panel is seeking information she may have about Trump’s efforts to pressure Mike Pence to attempt to overturn the results of the 2020 election. “As January 6th approached, President Trump attempted on multiple occasions to persuade Vice President Pence to participate in his plan,” Thompson said in the letter. “One of the President’s discussions with the Vice President occurred by phone on the morning of January 6th. You were present in the Oval Office and observed at least one side of that telephone conversation.” Thompson also requested information from Ivanka Trump on “any other conversations you may have witnessed or participated in regarding the President’s plan to obstruct or impede the counting of electoral votes”. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack is asking Ivanka Trump, the daughter of the former president, to appear for a voluntary deposition to answer questions about Donald Trump’s efforts to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election victory. The move by the panel marks an aggressive new phase in its inquiry into the 6 January insurrection, as House investigators seek for the first time testimony from a member of the Trump family about potential criminality on the part of the former president. Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chair of the select committee, said in an 11-page letter to Ivanka Trump that the panel wanted to ask about Trump’s plan to stop the certification, and his response to the Capitol attack, including delays to deploying the national guard. The questions to Ivanka appear directed at a key issue: whether her father oversaw a criminal conspiracy on 6 January that also involved obstructing a congressional proceeding – a crime. The letter said that the panel first wanted to question Ivanka Trump about what she recalled of a heated Oval Office meeting on the morning of the 6 January insurrection when the former president was trying to co-opt Mike Pence into rejecting Biden’s win. Read the Guardian’s full report: Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, pointed to the Treasury Department’s newly announced sanctions against four Ukrainian officials as an example of how the US is proactively responding to Russian aggression. “We are not waiting to take action to counter Russia. We see what they’re doing. We’re disrupting it,” Psaki said at her daily briefing this afternoon. “And these actions are also of course separate and distinct from the broad range of high-impact, severe measures we and our allies are prepared to impose in order to inflict significant costs should they invade.” The Guardian’s Julian Borger, Luke Harding and Andrew Roth report: The US has alleged that Russian intelligence is recruiting current and former Ukrainian government officials to take over the government in Kyiv and cooperate with a Russian occupying force. The US Treasury on Thursday imposed sanctions on two Ukrainian members of parliament and two former officials it said were involved in the alleged conspiracy, which involved discrediting the current government of the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. “Russia has directed its intelligence services to recruit current and former Ukrainian government officials to prepare to take over the government of Ukraine and to control Ukraine’s critical infrastructure with an occupying Russian force,” the Treasury statement accompanying the sanctions said. The claims suggest US intelligence fears Russia is preparing a full-scale invasion and not the “minor incursion” that Joe Biden referred to as a possibility in remarks on Wednesday that triggered alarm in Kyiv. Online researchers have identified Russian troops and military vehicles within just ten miles of Ukraine’s borders, increasing the risk that Vladimir Putin could launch a military offensive on short notice. As she wrapped up her daily briefing, White House press secretary Jen Psaki was asked whether Joe Biden plans to do more press conferences in the future. “Stay tuned,” Psaki replied. “Buckle up, bring snacks next time.” Biden’s press conference yesterday lasted nearly two hours, after the president decided to extend the event by calling on reporters who were not on the original list provided to him by his staff. After taking questions for about an hour and a half, Biden looked at his watch and decided to keep talking for another 20 minutes -- likely to the chagrin of his press staff. A reporter asked Jen Psaki for further clarification on Joe Biden’s comments about the possibility of Russia executing a “minor incursion” into Ukraine. The president has since sought to clear up those comments, saying this morning, “I’ve been absolutely clear with President Putin. He has no misunderstanding. If any -- any -- assembled Russian units move across the Ukrainian border, that is an invasion.” Psaki said Biden was making the point yesterday that the US and its allies have “a range of tools” to respond to Russian aggression, which may take the form of paramilitary tactics like cyberattacks. The press secretary also addressed Biden’s comment that there are “differences in Nato as to what countries are willing to do, depending on what happens”. “We have been focused on ensuring that we remain united with Nato,” Psaki said. “Now united doesn’t mean that everything will be identical, right? It means we’re united in taking actions should they decide to invade. And we are united.” A reporter pressed Jen Psaki again on Joe Biden’s comments yesterday about the legitimacy of the upcoming 2022 elections in the face of new voting restrictions in many states. The reporter, Peter Alexander of NBC News, noted that Biden said yesterday, “I’m not going to say it’s going to be legit. The increase and the prospect of being illegitimate is in direct proportion to us not being able to get these reforms passed.” Alexander asked Psaki, “Yes or no: does the president believe, if all remains as it is right now, that the elections this fall will be legitimate?” Psaki replied, “Yes, but the point that he was making was that, as recently as 2020 as we know, the former president was trying to work with local officials to overturn the vote count and not have ballots counted. And we have to be very eyes wide open about that and clear-eyed that that is the intention potentially of him and certainly of members of his party.” Alexander then asked for clarification that Biden is confident in the legitimacy of the upcoming elections if no changes are made in voting rights legislation moving forward. “Yes,” Psaki responded. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing, and she is continuing her efforts to clean up some of Joe Biden’s comments from his press conference yesterday. A reporter asked Psaki whether Biden has confidence in the legitimacy of the 2022 elections, as Democrats struggle to pass their voting rights bill. During his press conference, Biden was asked whether he had faith in the legitimacy of the upcoming midterm elections if Democrats are unable to pass their bill. Biden responded, “It all depends on whether or not we’re able to make the case to the American people that some of this is being set up to try to alter the outcome of the election.” Psaki reiterated that Biden was not intending to cast doubt upon the legitimacy of the 2022 election but was instead making a point about how the 2020 election would have been illegitimate if election officials had cooperated with Donald Trump’s demands to overturn the results in battleground states. The press secretary made the same point over Twitter this morning: Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell is attracting intense criticism for his comments about Black voters, which he made last night after Republican senators blocked Democrats’ voting rights bill (again). Speaking to reporters after the bill failed and the Senate rejected a change to the filibuster, McConnell was asked for his message to minority voters who are concerned that they will not be able to vote unless the Democratic bill is enacted. “The concern is misplaced, because if you look at the statistics, African-American voters are voting in just as high a percentage as Americans,” McConnell said. That comment sparked a lot of confusion among those who pointed out that African American voters are, in fact, Americans. Democratic congressman Bobby Rush called out McConnell’s comment, saying in a tweet, “African Americans ARE Americans. #MitchPlease” It’s also worth noting that studies indicate the voting restrictions enacted by 19 states in the past year will disproportionately impact voters of color. Demonstrators are right now outside the US Capitol demanding action to protect voting rights and election integrity in the US, following the Senate’s resounding refusal, once again, to pass legislation on this issue last night. New York first-term Democratic congressman Jamaal Bowman appears to have been arrested as part of the protests in Washington, DC. His office has reported that at least 20 others were arrested, including “faith leaders and youth who have been hunger striking for our democracy,” according to spokesman Marcus Frias. Demonstrators began gathering around midday, which is the time 12 months ago when Biden’s inauguration began on the Capitol front overlooking the crowds on the national mall. The Capitol Police also put out a statement via Twitter, saying: “Just before 12:00 pm, demonstrators started blocking one side of the North Barricade outside the U.S. Capitol. We have already issued them three warnings. The demonstrators refused to move out of the driveway, so we are making arrests.” Here is one protester’s tweet: The district attorney for Fulton county, Georgia, Fani Willis, is requesting a special grand jury to aid in her investigation of Donald Trump’s efforts to overturn the state’s 2020 election results, when he was still president but had lost the race to Democrat Joe Biden, a new report this afternoon reveals. The news has been broken by the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, so that newspaper can take up the story about the prosecutor’s actions: In a Thursday letter to Christopher S. Brasher, chief judge of Fulton County’s Superior Court, Willis said the move was needed because a “significant number of witnesses and prospective witnesses have refused to cooperate with the investigation absent a subpoena requiring their testimony.” She cited comments Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger made during an October 2021 interview with NBC News’ Chuck Todd, in which he said “if she wants to interview me, there’s a process for that.” So-called special purpose grand juries are rarely used in Georgia but could be a valuable tool for Willis as she takes the extraordinary step of investigating the conduct of a president while he was in office. Her probe, launched in February, is centered on the Jan. 2 phone call Trump placed to Raffensperger, in which he urged the Republican to “find” the votes to reverse Joe Biden’s win in Georgia in November 2020. Special grand juries, which typically have 16 to 23 members, can’t issue indictments. But they can subpoena witnesses, compel the production of documents, inspect and enter into certain offices for the purposes of the investigation. Willis said a special grand jury would be beneficial because jurors can be impaneled for a longer period and would be focused on the one probe. A regular Fulton County grand jury is seated for two months. Jurors typically hear hundreds of felony cases before their service ends. The DA also requested that a Fulton County superior court judge be assigned to assist and supervise the special grand jury in carrying out its investigation and duties. Willis’ request must be approved by a majority of the county’s superior court judges. This is a developing story. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden clarified his comments about a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine, after the president appeared to downplay the threat of a “minor incursion” into Ukraine. “If any -- any -- assembled Russian units move across the Ukrainian border, that is an invasion,” Biden said. “Let there be no doubt at all that, if Putin makes this choice, Russia will pay a heavy price.” Biden’s initial comments about Ukraine had set off a flurry of criticism and a frantic clean-up effort by White House officials. The president of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said in response to Biden’s remarks, “We want to remind the great powers that there are no minor incursions and small nations. Just as there are no minor casualties and little grief from the loss of loved ones.” The Senate failed to pass Democrats’ voting rights bill or approve a change to the filibuster, underscoring the significant challenges that Biden faces in enacting his legislative agenda. During yesterday’s Senate session, the voting rights bill failed along party lines, while Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema joined their Republican colleagues in opposing a change to the filibuster. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. While emphasizing the severe consequences that Russia will suffer if Vladimir Putin launches a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Joe Biden noted that the US and its allies are also prepared to respond to other forms of Russian aggression. “Russia has a long history of using measures other than overt military action to carry out aggression and paramilitary tactics, so-called gray zone attacks and actions by Russian soldiers not wearing Russian uniforms,” Biden told reporters at the start of his infrastructure meeting. The president added, “We have to be ready to respond to these as well in a decisively united way with the range of tools at our disposal.” Biden noted that the Ukrainian foreign minister has indicated confidence in America’s commitment to protecting Ukraine, and he echoed that assessment. The Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, told the Wall Street Journal, “We in Ukraine have no doubt that President Biden is committed to Ukraine … and he wants to prevent the conflict and deter Russia.” However, Kuleba also issued a warning about the danger of downplaying any threat from Russia, saying, “We should not give Putin the slightest chance to play with quasi-aggression or small incursion operations. This aggression was there since 2014. This is the fact.” Joe Biden sought to clarify his comments from yesterday about a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine, after the US president appeared to downplay the threat of a “minor incursion” into Ukraine. Speaking at the start of a meeting on infrastructure, Biden told reporters moments ago, “I’ve been absolutely clear with President Putin. He has no misunderstanding. If any -- any -- assembled Russian units move across the Ukrainian border, that is an invasion.” Biden said such an invasion would be met with a “severe and coordinated economic response,” which he has “discussed in detail with our allies as well as laid out very clearly for President Putin”. He added, “But there is no doubt — let there be no doubt at all that, if Putin makes this choice, Russia will pay a heavy price.” Biden’s comments come one day after he seemed to imply that Nato was at odds over how to respond to Russian aggression depending upon the type of attack that was launched against Ukraine. “I think what you’re going to see is that Russia will be held accountable if it invades,” Biden said at his press conference yesterday. “And it depends on what it does. It’s one thing if it’s a minor incursion and then we end up having a fight about what to do and not do, et cetera.” That comment required a coordinated clean-up effort from Biden administration officials, with Kamala Harris and Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, seeking to clarify that the US and its allies are united in responding to Russian aggression. The president of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, delivered some thinly veiled criticism of Joe Biden’s remarks yesterday about a potential Russian invasion. “We want to remind the great powers that there are no minor incursions and small nations,” Zelenskiy said. “Just as there are no minor casualties and little grief from the loss of loved ones. I say this as the President of a great power.” That appeared to be a direct reference to Biden’s comment at his press conference yesterday, when the US president outlined the various responses that Nato is considering if Russia escalates its aggression toward Ukraine. “I think what you’re going to see is that Russia will be held accountable if it invades,” Biden said. “And it depends on what it does. It’s one thing if it’s a minor incursion and then we end up having a fight about what to do and not do, et cetera.” Biden and his aides later tried to clarify that he was attempting to distinguish between an actual invasion and other threats against Ukraine, such as cyberattacks. However, Biden’s flippant remark has clearly sparked some anxiety among Ukrainian officials. Kamala Harris has joined in on the White House’s campaign to repair Joe Biden’s flub on Ukraine in his press conference on Wednesday, where he revealed Nato is divided on how to respond to a “minor incursion” from Russia. “The president of the United States has been very clear, and we as the United States are very clear: if Putin takes aggressive action, we are prepared to levy serious and severe costs. Period,” Harris said in a Thursday morning appearance on NBC’s Today Show. Host Savannah Guthrie countered that the White House had been “less than clear”, issuing a statement just minutes after Biden’s press conference affirming the “united response” between the US and its allies. “Savannah, I’m being clear with you right now. If you’re interested, I’ll continue to be clear,” Harris said in response. During his press conference yesterday, Biden said there were “differences in Nato as to what countries are willing to do, depending on what happens”. Harris went on the defense for Biden when Guthrie asked how “damaging” it was that Biden “openly talked about division within Nato countries and Nato allies”. “I think your audience knows Joe Biden has been working as the former head of foreign relations, and as the former vice-president and a senator in a role of leadership on foreign policy, for years,” Harris said. “I have witnessed him continuously engage in direct and honest conversations with our partners and allies, and this is no exception.” Joe Biden held a nearly two-hour-long press conference yesterday, taking questions from dozens of reporters as he marked one year in office. One answer that the president gave in response to a question about Ukraine is attracting a lot of attention (and often scorn) both at home and abroad. A reporter asked the president about whether he believed the threatened economic sanctions against Russia would be enough to deter Vladimir Putin from approving an invasion of Ukraine. “I think what you’re going to see is that Russia will be held accountable if it invades,” Biden said. He then added, “And it depends on what it does. It’s one thing if it’s a minor incursion and then we end up having a fight about what to do and not do, et cetera.” Biden later clarified that he was distinguishing between Russia actually moving troops across Ukraine’s border and the Kremlin continuing to launch cyberattacks on its neighbor. But the comment sparked fears that Biden was essentially giving Putin permission to launch an invasion, prompting White House press secretary Jen Psaki to release a statement further clarifying his position last night. “President Biden has been clear with the Russian President: If any Russian military forces move across the Ukrainian border, that’s a renewed invasion, and it will be met with a swift, severe, and united response from the United States and our Allies,” Psaki said. “President Biden also knows from long experience that the Russians have an extensive playbook of aggression short of military action, including cyberattacks and paramilitary tactics. And he affirmed today that those acts of Russian aggression will be met with a decisive, reciprocal, and united response.” Nancy Pelosi sharply criticized Senate Republicans for blocking Democrats’ voting rights bill, which passed the House in a party-line vote last week. “On Monday, our nation celebrated the birthday of civil rights hero Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. for his courage, leadership and sacrifice for our democracy,” the House speaker said. “Today, Senate Republicans have dishonored his leadership and legacy by blocking passage of urgently needed legislation to protect voting rights and our democracy.” Pelosi described the voting restrictions that have been enacted in 19 states over the past year, combined with Donald Trump’s “big lie” of widespread voter fraud in the 2020 election, as “the most severe and sinister threat to our democracy since the era of Jim Crow”. “Yet, an arcane Senate Rule – one that clearly conflicts with the intentions of our Founders and has long been used to block progress on civil rights – continues to stand in the way of enacting this vital legislation,” Pelosi said. “In the fight for voting rights, nothing less than our democracy is at stake. Democrats will never relent in our mission to safeguard the sacred right to vote.” Democrats’ voting rights proposals have failed in the Senate before, but Wednesday marks the first time senators have taken a formal vote on changing the filibuster. Its likely failure marks a profound setback for Joe Biden’s presidential agenda. The president spent an enormous amount of political capital in recent weeks pressuring Senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema to support rule changes to the filibuster, giving a speech in Atlanta and traveling to Capitol Hill to try to get support. In stirring remarks just before the vote on the voting rights bill, Raphael Warnock, a Democrat from Georgia, said senators could not praise the legacy of Dr Martin Luther King, Jr while voting against voting rights. “You cannot remember MLK and dismember his legacy at the same time,” Warnock said. “I will not sit quietly while some make Dr King a victim of identity theft.” The bill that failed on Wednesday, Freedom to Vote: John R Lewis Act, combined two major voting rights bills into a single mega bill. It would have set a national baseline for election access, guaranteeing 15 days of early voting as well as online voter registration. It protected local election officials from harassment and partisan interference in their jobs and curbed gerrymandering, the severe distortion of partisan district lines. It also restored a key piece of the 1965 Voting Rights Act that required places with a history of voting discrimination to get their changes approved by either the justice department or a federal court in Washington before they go into effect. Joe Biden expressed severe disappointment in the Senate’s failure to pass Democrats’ voting rights bill or amend the filibuster for the legislation. In a statement released after the votes, the president condemned the “unprecedented effort to suppress the sacred right to vote” unfolding in state legislatures across the country. “In the face of those threats, I am profoundly disappointed that the United States Senate has failed to stand up for our democracy. I am disappointed — but I am not deterred,” Biden said. The president pledged that his administration would continue its efforts to protect voting rights and strengthen election systems, even in the face of the demoralizing defeat. “My Administration will never stop fighting to ensure that the heart and soul of our democracy — the right to vote — is protected at all costs,” Biden said. “As dangerous new Republican laws plainly designed to suppress and subvert voting rights proliferate in states across the country, we will explore every measure and use every tool at our disposal to stand up for democracy.” Greetings, live blog readers. Senate Democrats suffered painful failures on two fronts last night – first on voting rights and then on filibuster reform. Democrats’ voting rights bill failed to advance because of a Republican filibuster, which requires 60 votes for legislation to move forward. The final vote on the voting rights bill was 49-51, with every Republican voting against the proposal. (Majority leader Chuck Schumer changed his vote from “yes” to “no” because that will allow him to bring up the matter again later.) The Senate then voted on a rule change that would have allowed the voting rights legislation to circumvent the traditional legislative filibuster. That measure was defeated in a vote of 48 to 52, with Democrats Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema joining their Republican colleagues in opposing the proposal. The results of the votes demonstrate that challenges that Joe Biden faces in enacting his agenda, as he marks one year since he took office. With a 50-50 Senate, it will be extremely difficult to pass another other major bills before the midterm elections. And if Democrats cannot enact their agenda, they will likely face some angry voters in November. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today’s Covid blog. Please join me on our latest live feed here where I’ll be focusing a little more on the coronavirus crisis across Asia, Australia and the Pacific. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. Here’s a round-up of all the latest international developments for the past 24 hours: Europe: The Irish government has been given the green light to lift the majority of the state’s Covid restrictions. In France, Covid-19 restrictions will be loosened from February onwards, the prime minister has said, shortly after country’s Covid vaccination pass comes into effect. Jean Castex said on Thursday the pass will come into effect on 24 January, provided it is approved by the Constitutional Council. Austria announced it will introduce a national vaccine lottery to encourage holdouts to get shots and has extended Covid lockdown measures for another ten days. MPs voted to approve a Covid-19 vaccine mandate which will apply to all residents of Austria aged 18 and over. England will soon scrap virtually all Covid measures, the health secretary confirmed. Germany reported another record rise of 133,536 daily new cases. It is the second consecutive day the European country has broken a pandemic record, with 234 deaths also reported, according to recently updated figures from the Robert Koch Institute. Australia and New Zealand: Australia’s drugs regulator has for the first time approved oral treatments for Covid-19 which should help address supply shortages of other treatments. Australia’s Therapeutic Goods Association has also given provisional approval to the protein-based Novavax Covid-19 vaccine. New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said restrictions will be tightened if there is a community transmission of Omicron. The state of Western Australia has cancelled plans to reopen its borders on 5 February, citing health risks from a surge in Omicroncases elsewhere in the country, as the tally of coronavirus cases since the pandemic began topped two million. Asia: Taiwan will mandate the use of passes for proof of Covid vaccination to enter entertainment venues. Thailand will resume its ‘Test &amp; Go’ quarantine waiver for vaccinated arrivals starting on 1 February, the country’s coronavirus taskforce said on Thursday. Japan recorded a daily rise of 41,377 new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, shattering the record it set a day earlier by about 10,000 as the government puts more prefectures under a quasi-state of emergency. Hong Kong will likely suspend face-to-face teaching in secondary schools from 24 January, local media reports. China’s capital Beijing has ramped up efforts to curb Covid-19 infections, ordering checks among cold-chain firms and urging residents to cut unnecessary gatherings. United States: US president Joe Biden has admitted that more should have been done in terms of Covid-19 testing availability earlier in the pandemic. The US is set to require Covid vaccines for essential workers crossing borders. Africa: Cases of Covid have sharply declined in Africa and deaths are declining for the first time since the emergence of the Omicron variant, the World Health Organization has said. Here’s a quick snap from the US Centres of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). “Rates of Covid-19 cases are high and continuing to increase in many parts of the US. The 7-day average of daily new cases is 744,616, a 5% decrease from the previous week,” the agency said. A Covid data tracker as seen below shows the levels of community transmission across the country. The US is set to require Covid vaccines for essential workers crossing borders. The US Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is announcing Thursday it is requiring that non-US essential workers such as truck drivers and nurses who are crossing land borders be fully vaccinated against Covid-19, effective Saturday, Reuters reports. The Biden administration first announced in October that effective 8 November it would again allow non-essential foreign visitors to travel from Canada and Mexico into the US across land borders if they were vaccinated. The US land borders with Canada and Mexico had been closed to non-essential travel for 20 months because of Covid-19 concerns. DHS is announcing on Thursday it is extending those requirements to essential workers who are not US citizens or lawful permanent residents. Starting Saturday DHS “will require that non-US individuals entering the United States via land ports of entry or ferry terminals along our Northern and Southern borders be fully vaccinated against Covid-19 and prepared to show related proof of vaccination,” said DHS Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as my colleague Tom Ambrose calls it a night in London. As I’m reporting to you from Sydney here’s a snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The state of NSW has marked its deadliest day with 46 Covid deaths while 20 deaths have been recorded in Victoria. The reopening of Australia’s most isolated state Western Australia has been suspended indefinitely to allow West Australians to get booster shots, as the more transmissible Omicron variant rips through the nation. The Irish government has been given the green light to lift the majority of the state’s Covid restrictions. It is understood that the National Public Health Emergency Team (Nphet) has recommended restrictions around hospitality can be lifted, including the 8pm curfew, PA Media reported. The recommendations also say that live venues and sport venues can return to full capacity and that Covid passes only be required for international travel. The wearing of face masks is recommended to continue on public transport and in retail settings. The Restaurants Association of Ireland has urged the Government in light of the recommendations to allow all hospitality businesses to trade as normal from Friday. Government ministers will meet on Friday to assess the advice before Taoiseach Micheal Martin will make an announcement. Minister for Finance Paschal Donohoe told RTE it is reasonable to expect that the state will be able to exit regulations at a faster pace than would have looked likely a number of weeks ago. He said: What we have done at all points in this pandemic is been guided by public health advice. We have looked to deploy timings that get the balance right between the needs to our economy and society and that of public health, and that is what we will continue to do. In the United States, Kentucky congressman who has been critical of pandemic mask and vaccine mandates said he has tested positive for Covid. Thomas Massie, a Republican from northern Kentucky, tweeted on Thursday that he is not vaccinated but his symptoms have been mild and he believes he is “over it.” Massie said on Twitter he would not be voting, meeting anyone in person or making public appearances until next week. Massie added that people who find themselves sick with the virus should seek a doctor’s advice, “because every case is unique and some cases are very serious.” The five-term congressman has been outspoken about his opposition to mandates for masking and vaccinations since early in the pandemic. Last week, he wrote on social media that his congressional office would “not comply” with Washington DC’s vaccine mandate for restaurants. “We will get our food from Virginia or we will bring it to work,” he tweeted. “Shame has befallen our nation’s capital.” Earlier this year he called the House’s mask rule “unscientific and unconstitutional.” He has asserted that he has an immunity to the disease because he also tested positive for it in 2020. Brazil has had 168,495 new cases of the novel coronavirus reported in the past 24 hours, and 350 deaths from Covid, the health ministry said on Thursday. The South American country has now registered 23,585,243 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 622,205, according to ministry data. Brazil’s Covid toll is the world’s third deadliest after the United States and Russia, according to a Reuters tally. The state of Western Australia has cancelled plans to reopen its borders on 5 February, citing health risks from a surge in Omicron cases elsewhere in the country, as the tally of coronavirus cases since the pandemic began topped two million. WA Premier Mark McGowan made the shock announcement late Thursday saying it would be “reckless and irresponsible” to open up now given the rapid spread of the variant. Instead, re-opening would be delayed indefinitely or at least until the percentage of triple dose vaccinations reached 80%. It is currently around 26%. “If we proceeded with the original plan, we would be deliberately seeding thousands upon thousands of Covid cases into WA and at this point in time that is not what I am going to do,” McGowan told reporters. The state of 2.7 million has for months been effectively closed off to the rest of the country and the outside world, taking advantage of its natural isolation to keep cases low. Fraud and errors in Scottish Covid business support schemes cost the public purse at least £16 million, auditors have told MSPs. Between 1% and 2% of the two main schemes - which paid out a total of £1.6 billion - are thought to have been lost to fraud and error, the Press Association reported. Holyrood’s Public Audit Committee heard from Audit Scotland officials on Thursday, following their analysis of the Scottish Government’s yearly consolidated accounts. Auditor General Stephen Boyle said the Government had accepted a higher level of risk than usual given the urgent need to deliver support during the pandemic. He said: Headline level, the Government’s own assessment is that between 1% and 2% of that spending will be attributable to fraud and error. So somewhere between £16 million and £32 million of that is likely to have been spent not in accordance with the associated laws. In our judgement, £16 million to £32 million of course is a hugely significant amount of public spending that hasn’t been spent properly. But in the overall materiality of the Government’s accounts, we’ve already mentioned this morning of £50 billion, we’re satisfied that the accounts are fairly stated. Committee member Willie Coffey asked about efforts to recover money which was distributed due to fraud or error. Audit Scotland audit director Michael Oliphant said between 14% and 30% of business support applications had been rejected, which suggested there was a “good control framework” in place. Also in Canada, the province of Ontario has blunted transmission of the Omicron coronavirus variant and will gradually relax restrictions on businesses from late January, premier Doug Ford said. The health care system is starting to stabilise in the wake of limitations imposed on 5 January, Ford told a news conference, saying Omicron cases should peak later this month. “We can be confident that the worst is behind us and that we are now in a position to cautiously and gradually ease public health measures,” Ford said. The province will allow restaurants, malls, and cinemas to operate with a 50% capacity limit from 31 January, before removing more curbs in February and March, Reuters reported. “While February will continue to present its own challenges, given current trends these are challenges we are confident we can manage,” Ford said. In neighbouring Quebec, premier Francois Legault said he would maintain restrictions to help protect the health care system even though Omicron cases had peaked. “I understand we are all tired, but lives are at stake. I’m currently under a lot of pressure to remove measures, but my duty is to be responsible to protect the lives of Quebecers,” he told a news conference. Ontario and Quebec together account for around 61% of Canada’s population of 38.2 million people. Canadian consumers should soon see higher prices and some empty shelves in supermarkets and other retail outlets because of disruptions stemming from a Covid vaccine mandate for cross-border truckers, top trucking executives warned this week. The mandate, imposed by Ottawa to help curb the spread of the virus, has cost six Canadian trucking companies about 10% of their international drivers, and many are hiking wages to lure new operators during what they said is the worst labour shortage they have experienced. Within the next two weeks, consumers will see “there’s not as many choices on the shelves,” said Dan Einwechter, chairman and chief executive officer of Challenger Motor Freight Inc in Cambridge, Ontario. “Eventually the prices will be passed on from the sellers of those products, because we’re passing on our increases to them,” he said. Hello. Tom Ambrose here to bring you all the latest Covid news and headlines over the next four hours or so. Let’s start with the news that it could be a slow return to business across the UK as chilly weather and ongoing fears about the spread of Omicron keep many workers, shoppers and diners at home, despite the change in guidance. The many workplaces who have told staff to work from home until a review in late January are also unlikely to make a swift change in plan. See the full story here. Covid-19 restrictions will be loosened in France from February onwards, the prime minister has said, shortly after the country’s Covid vaccination pass comes into effect. Jean Castex said on Thursday the pass will come into effect on 24 January, provided it is approved by the Constitutional Council. MPs in Austria have voted to approach Europe’s first universal adult Covid-19 vaccine mandate, despite waves of protest against the plan.The mandate, which will apply to all residents of Austria aged 18 and over, was passed in Austria’s parliament by 137 votes to 33. The rate of new cases of Covid-19 among young schoolchildren in England has jumped sharply to a record high, figures show. In the seven days to 16 January, there were 1,935.7 cases per 100,000 five- to nine-year-olds, up from 1,372.7 a week earlier. People from black Caribbean and black African backgrounds were estimated to have the highest rates of non-vaccination in the UK, at 40.9% and 27.0% respectively, according to an official analysis. The equivalent rate for people identifying as white British was 9.1%. More than 1 million adults in France got their first dose of Covid vaccine in the past month, after the government announced a plan to exclude unvaccinated people from all restaurants, sports arenas and other venues, the government’s spokesman has said. You can see a summary of the biggest events earlier here. That’s it from me, Damien Gayle for the day. Bye for now. Starbucks is no longer requiring its US workers to be vaccinated against Covid-19, reversing a plan it announced earlier this month. In a memo sent Tuesday to employees, the Seattle coffee giant said it was responding to last week’s ruling by the Supreme Court, the Associated Press reports. In a 6-3 vote, the court rejected the Biden administration’s plan to require vaccines or regular COVID testing at companies with more than 100 workers. “We respect the court’s ruling and will comply,” Starbucks’ chief operating officer, John Culver, wrote in the memo. Starbucks’ reversal is among the most high-profile corporate actions in response to the Supreme Court ruling. The company employs 228,000 people in the US. MPs in Austria have voted to approach Europe’s first universal adult Covid-19 vaccine mandate, despite waves of protest against the plan. The mandate, which will apply to all residents of Austria aged 18 and over, was passed in Austria’s parliament by 137 votes to 33. Exemptions were made for pregnant women and people who for medical reasons cannot be vaccinated, or who have recovered from a coronavirus infection in the past six months. Officials said the mandate was necessary because vaccination rates in Austria remained too low. As of Wednesday, 71.8% of the population of 8.9 million was considered fully vaccinated. That was about the EU average, but far lower than France and Italy. The health minister, Wolfgang Mueckstein, speaking in parliament on Thursday afternoon, called the measure a “big, and, for the first time, also lasting step” in Austria’s fight against the pandemic. “This is how we can manage to escape the cycle of opening and closing, of lockdowns,” he was quoted as saying by the Associated Press. Compulsory Covid vaccinations have also been introduced in Ecuador, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Indonesia and Micronesia. Covid-19 restrictions could be loosened in France from February onwards, the prime minister has said, shortly after the country’s Covid vaccination pass comes into effect. Jean Castex said on Thursday the pass will come into effect on 24 January, provided it gets approved by the constitutional council. From 2 February, guidance recommending employees work from home three days a week would be dropped, with remote working arrangements now at the discretion of individual workers and their bosses. Nightclubs would reopen from 16 February. Castex said that the general Covid situation in the country was becoming more favourable. He added that the Covid pass could even be suspended if the Covid situation improved dramatically. The heading of this post, and the blog’s main headline, were amended on 21 January 2022 to remove incorrect suggestions that France has been in lockdown. Israel will next week scrap mandatory quarantines for children exposed to Covid-19 carriers, the health minister, Nitzan Horowitz, said on Thursday. According to Reuters, Horowitz cited a need to relieve pressure on parents and schools as the reason for the change. The prime minister, Naftali Bennett, in a joint televised address, said children would instead be required to take twice-weekly home tests for the virus. If they test positive or feel unwell, they should absent themselves from school until they recovered, he said. Italy reported 188,797 cases of Covid-19 on Thursday, against 192,320 the day before, while the number of deaths rose to 385 from 380. According to the latest update from the health ministry, patients in hospital with Covid-19 – not including those in intensive care – stood at 19,659 on Thursday, up from 19,500 a day earlier. There were 155 new admissions to intensive care units, up from 134 on Wednesday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,698 from a previous 1,688. Italy has registered 142,590 deaths linked to Covid since its outbreak emerged in February 2020, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth highest in the world. The country has reported 9.42 million cases to date. The rate of new cases of Covid-19 among young schoolchildren in England has jumped sharply to a record high, figures show, following the return to nurseries and primary schools after Christmas. In the seven days to 16 January, there were 1,935.7 cases per 100,000 five- to nine-year-olds, up from 1,372.7 a week earlier. The rate among under-fives had also increased, from 706.9 to 829.7. For both age groups, it was the highest weekly rate since the data was first collected in summer 2020, according to the latest surveillance report from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). The agency said figures for case rates may have been affected by a recent change in the rules for testing, which meant people with a positive lateral flow test no longer needed to get a confirmatory PCR test. Although the figures seemed to coincide with the return of children to nurseries and primary schools in early January, there was no sign of a similar jump in rates among secondary school-age children. Rates were falling in all other age groups, including for people aged 80 and over, where the figure had dropped week-on-week from 641.7 cases per 100,000 to 432.1. Every region of England had seen a fall in case rates. North-east England had the highest rate, at 1,410.0 per 100,000 people, while south-west England had the lowest, at 800.7. Cases of Covid have sharply declined in Africa and deaths are declining for the first time since the emergence of the Omicron variant, the World Health Organization has said. The UN health agency’s regional office for Africa said newly reported cases fell 20% in the week to Sunday. Notified deaths dropped 8%, said Matshidiso Moeti, the WHO’s regional director for Africa. But, she added: “The continent has yet to turn the tables on this pandemic. So long as the virus continues to circulate, further pandemic waves are inevitable.” Moeti said Africa should “not only broaden vaccinations, but also gain increased and equitable access to critical Covid-19 therapeutics to save lives and effectively combat this pandemic”. Only 10% of people in Africa are fully vaccinated, according to the WHO. The continent, with a population of 1.2 billion, has been relatively unscathed by the pandemic, reporting 234,913 deaths from 10.5 million cases, according to AFP tallies. Nightclubs will reopen again in Northern Ireland next week, as the province’s regional assembly ends a ban on dancing that has lasted a month. The Stormont executive agreed that nightclubs will be permitted to open from noon on Wednesday, 26 January. They were closed on 26 December, the same date a general ban on dancing and indoor standing events was imposed. Under the new regime, Covid certifications will still be needed to get into nightclubs and larger indoor unseated or partially seated events. For other settings the certification will no longer be required but its use encouraged. The remaining Covid restrictions in Northern Ireland will be reviewed by the Stormont executive on 10 February, according to the PA Media news agency. A laboratory study has found that Russia’s Sputnik V vaccine gives longer lasting protection against the Omicron coronavirus variant than Pfizer’s. Researchers said samples taken three to six months after the second dose of a vaccine have shown that the antibodies in recipients of two doses of Sputnik V were more resistant to Omicron than in those vaccinated with Pfizer. According to their findings, Omicron-specific neutralising antibodies were detected in the blood serum of 74.2% of the people vaccinated with Sputnik and in 56.9% of those vaccinated with Pfizer/BioNTech. The study was funded by the Russian Direct Investment Fund, which markets Sputnik V abroad, and conducted by scientists from the Spallanzani Institute in Italy and Gamaleya Institute in Moscow, the developer of Sputnik V vaccine. It included 51 people vaccinated with Sputnik V and 17 with two shots of the Pfizer vaccine. It has not yet been peer reviewed. UK health authorities have reported 330 more deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test, with the seven-day total up 1% to 1,860. According to the latest update, 107,364 people tested positive for the virus, with daily infections falling since the beginning of January. Of those sick with Covid, 1,905 were admitted to hospital. All figures were from the latest data provided on Thursday, the update said. On Wednesday, 66,770 booster or third doses of Covid vaccine were administered, 29,893 second doses and 16,949 first doses. Of UK population aged over 12, 90% had had a first dose of vaccine, 83.6% a second dose, and 63.8% a third dose. People from black Caribbean and black African backgrounds are estimated to have the highest rates of non-vaccination in the UK, at 40.9% and 27.0% respectively, according to an official analysis. On Thursday, the Office for National Statistics published updated estimates for vaccine take-up among the whole adult population in England up to 31 December, broken down by ethnicity, levels of deprivation and other characteristics. The equivalent rate for people identifying as white British was 9.1%. Some 19.3% of adults identifying as Muslim were likely to have not been vaccinated, ahead of Jewish (12.9%), Christian (10.6%) and Hindu (8.3%), the ONS found. The proportion of adults in the most deprived areas of England who had not received a vaccination was estimated at 17%, compared with 7.3% for those in the least deprived areas. Overall, the agency estimated 11.6% of people in England aged 18 and over had not been vaccinated. More than 1 million adults in France got their first dose of Covid vaccine in the past month, after the government announced a plan to exclude unvaccinated people from all restaurants, sports arenas and other venues, the government’s spokesman has said. The so-called vaccine pass “is a new step in our strategy to encourage (vaccination) and ensure maximum protection. It is already producing its effects,” Gabriel Attal said, according to the Associated Press. Under the law, entry into restaurants and bars, cinemas, theatres and other leisure and sport facilities, and passage on interregional trains and domestic flights, will be restricted to those who have had a full course of vaccinations. It applies to everyone 16 and over. MPs approved the new law over the weekend and it is expected to be imposed in the coming days. About 92% of French adults – over 48 million people – are already fully vaccinated, and 94% have received at least one shot. “France is now in the European leading group regarding its vaccination campaign,” Attal said. France this week reported a record number of over 464,000 confirmed cases of infection in a single day. On average, over 320,000 cases per day have been recorded over the past week. Merck will allow generic drug manufacturers to produce its anti-Covid pill molnupiravir at a cut cost for low- and middle-income countries, according to an announcement today. The UN-backed Medicines Patent Pool said it had signed agreements with 27 manufacturers - spread across Bangladesh, China, Egypt, Jordan, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Pakistan, South Africa, South Korea and Vietnam - to supply the drug to 105 of the world’s poorer nations. Merck’s pill is taken within five days of symptom onset and was shown in a trial of 1,400 participants to reduce Covid hospitalisations and deaths by 30% among at-risk people. “This is a critical step toward ensuring global access to an urgently needed Covid-19 treatment and we are confident that … the anticipated treatments will be rapidly available in LMICs,” said MPP executive director Charles Gore, according to AFP. This is Damien Gayle taking the controls on the Covid blog for the rest of the afternoon and early evening. France will unveil a timetable for easing Covid restrictions at 7pm in Paris tonight, a government spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, said, though he cautioned that the wave of Omicron infections tearing through the country had not reached its peak. Attal said France’s new vaccine pass rules would help allow a softening of rules even as the incidence rate of infections continued to increase. NHS England staff absences due to Covid have fallen by 22% on the previous week, figures show, with signs the staffing crisis in the health service may be easing off. Ambulance handover delays at A&amp;E departments in England improved slightly last week, though hospital pressures “remain high”. Of the 14,588 patients reported as having the virus in hospital on 18 January, 6,983 (48%) were not being treated principally for Covid-19. Care homes in England have said that staff with Covid-19 must not be allowed to return to work despite this week’s announcement by the health secretary, Sajid Javid, that legal self-isolation requirements are to be lifted. Return to work instructions in England have seen the usage of major rail stations up 10% compared with the same period last week. In London, tube journeys were up by 8%. Nicola Sturgeon has raised doubts in Scotland about Boris Johnson’s decision to scrap all plan B Covid rules in England, as Scottish Conservative leader Douglas Ross attacked her for imposing “unnecessary restrictions” on the Scottish public over the festive period. Downing Street is to hold talks with the artist Tracey Emin after she said one of her works should no longer hang inside No 10 because of her concerns about alleged parties inside the building. In Northern Ireland, the deputy first minister, Michelle O’Neill, has said while the pandemic was not over, she believed the country had passed the peak of Omicron. The Stormont executive meets today to discuss plans to relax restrictions from 21 January. Austria’s government has agreed to extend Covid lockdown measures for another 10 days – however, for the first time the Social Democrat party refused to support the move. Austria has also announced it will introduce a national vaccine lottery to encourage holdouts to get vaccinated. For each shot someone has had, they will be offered one lottery ticket, and one in 10 tickets will deliver a €500 voucher prize. Sweden will loosen Covid-19 quarantine rules and make it easier for employees with key jobs in sectors like healthcare and the police to go to work, the health agency said. It also asked people who can work from home not to get tested, to allow those who need to be at their jobs to take tests and continue to work, as the national test capacity has hit its ceiling. Russia’s official figure for daily new Covid cases is 38,850 today. That is up by nearly 5,000 from the level the day before, and approaching the peak of just over 40,000 seen in November last year. Germany reported another record rise of 133,536 daily new cases. It is the second consecutive day the European country has broken a pandemic record. Japan’s western prefecture of Osaka and two neighbouring regions are expected to join in a widening declaration of Covid-19 prevention measures, Osaka’s governor has said. Japan added more than 41,000 new Covid infections on Wednesday and the prime minister, Fumio Kishida, expanded quasi-emergency measures to cover the capital, Tokyo, and a dozen other regions. In her first press conference of the year, New Zealand’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, told reporters: “Omicron is knocking at our door. We won’t stop Omicron, but we can try and slow it down.” At least three cases of the new variant have been confirmed among border workers and their contacts in Auckland, and there are fears it made have already spread into the wider community. The reopening of Australia’s most isolated state – Western Australia – has been suspended indefinitely to allow the population to get booster shots, as the more transmissible Omicron variant rips through the nation. I mentioned earlier the Prof Devi Sridhar piece that we had yesterday, where she said that now science has defanged Covid, it’s time to get on with our lives. In it she outlined the precautions that she thought people should still be taking, writing: We still need to test. We still need to vaccinate and combat misinformation. We need to encourage people to wear medical-grade masks such as N95s in crowded and indoor settings. Employers need to recognise and support employees who have been identified as in a shielding group. We also need to review isolation and other policies so they remain safe, but are less disruptive to the functioning of society. Claire Horwell is professor of geohealth at Durham University and has an honorary contract with the UK Health Security Agency. She writes for us today on the best way to stay safe from coronavirus in England, suggesting don’t ditch the mask: So how can you protect yourself when most people stop wearing masks? The best way is to wear a mask that is designed to protect the wearer: an FFP2 or FFP3 mask. These are available in pharmacies, supermarkets and online, but you may need to try a few to find one that fits the shape of your face. If you want to avoid exposing others to your exhaled breath, make sure you choose a valveless mask. The government says that it’s now up to us to assess our own risk and how we will mitigate it (although people are still advised to continue to wear face coverings in enclosed or crowded spaces and when meeting strangers). While we may not have choices about going to work or school, or how we get there, if we choose to, we can continue to use face masks to protect ourselves effectively. And don’t forget, anyone can have Covid … not just strangers. Read more here: Claire Horwell – The best way to stay safe from Covid in England? Don’t ditch the mask Sweden will loosen Covid-19 quarantine rules and make it easier for employees with key jobs in sectors like healthcare and the police to go to work, the health agency said today, as the Omicron variant of the virus spread across the country. People testing positive or who live with someone who has tested positive will have to isolate for 5 days instead of 7 previously, the Public Health Agency said. A small number of key workers will not have to quarantine at all if they have no symptoms, despite having been in contact with a sick person. “In order to deal with the high rate of infection, that is also expected to increase in the coming period, and in order not to put social functions at risk, we are adjusting the recommendations for testing and for restrictions,” health agency official Sara Byfors told a news conference. Johan Ahlander reports for Reuters from Stockholm that the Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency said staff shortages could become a real problem and that key workers in areas such as power, heat, water and internet distribution as well as in the emergency services could be exempted from the quarantine rules. Sweden on Thursday reported a new daily record for Covid-19 cases, registering 39,938 cases, marginally higher than the previous day. The health agency said a large proportion of the population risked getting the virus in coming weeks. The real number of cases was likely to be substantially higher as the national test capacity has hit its ceiling. The health agency asked people who can work from home not to get tested to allow those who need to be at their jobs to continue to work. In Northern Ireland, Deputy First Minister Michelle O’Neill has said while the pandemic was not over, she believed the country had passed the peak of Omicron. PA Media quote her saying: The pandemic is far from over but we are cautiously optimistic. We believe we are through the peak and we believe we have some space now to be able to reverse the protections that we put in place over the course of the last number of weeks. It is a positive picture but I would ask people not to be complacent yet, we still have a journey to travel. I do think after our Executive meeting we hope we will be able to say positive things that will be welcomed by both individuals and also by the hospitality sector.” PA Media are also reporting these are the plans for the easing of Covid restrictions in Northern Ireland which may get approved today: From 21 January, the requirement for table service in the hospitality sector and the “rule of six” on table numbers would be removed. Guidance to keep domestic indoor gatherings limited to three households would also be lifted - though gatherings should still be limited to 30 people in total. In regard to face coverings, the requirement to provide proof of exemption would be removed and the reasonable excuse of “severe distress” would be reintroduced. From 26 January nightclubs can reopen and indoor standing events can resume. The prohibition on dancing would be lifted. The legal requirement for Covid certification for nightclubs and indoor unseated and partially-seated events with 500 or more attendees would remain in place. For all other settings where certification is now required, the legal requirement would be replaced with guidance to “strongly encourage” their continued use. In workplaces, the requirement for office-based workplaces to take reasonable measures to have two-metre social distancing would be removed - with guidance remaining that risk assessments should still be carried out. Care homes in England have said that staff with Covid-19 must not be allowed to return to work despite this week’s announcement by the health secretary, Sajid Javid, that legal self-isolation requirements are to be lifted. Barchester, one of the UK’s largest care home operators, said it would defy any attempt to weaken self-isolation rules for staff. Barchester’s chief executive, Pete Calveley, said: “I don’t care what the government says, we are going to make sure we do a risk assessment on every individual. [Lifting self-isolation] is probably fine for the general public but not for care homes.” On Wednesday, Javid said: “We must learn to live with Covid, in the same way we have to live with flu. We’re looking to replace legal requirements on self-isolation with advice and guidance.” But with Omicron remaining highly infectious and deaths from the latest variant still rising, social care providers are being cautious and demanding clarification from the government. Mike Padgham, chair of the Independent Care Group, which operates care homes in Yorkshire, said: “I can’t see it changing for us for some time. It is still dangerous. I think there will be face masks and PPE in care homes for several more months. The only concession I can see coming is more visitors than the three [that are currently allowed].” Read more of Robert Booth’s report here: ‘Dangerous’ to lift self-isolation rules for UK care home staff PA Media has some figures from National Rail looking at whether the change in advice on working from home has made a difference in England. The figures show the number of people using its stations between 6am and 10.30am today was up 10% compared with the same period last week. This was an increase from 275,000 people to 303,000 people. The rise compared with Wednesday was just 1%, and the statistics show that daily passenger numbers were increasing even before the guidance to work from home was lifted. Our transport correspondent, Gwyn Topham, has been looking at the numbers for the London underground, and he reports that tube journeys were up by 8%. Transport for London said 1.09m entry and exit “taps” with contactless cards or Oyster were recorded up to 10am on Thursday on the tube – about 80,000 more than last Thursday’s morning peak. Bus journeys were up 3% week on week, with 1.19m boarding taps recorded this morning. There had already been signs of growing weekday journeys in London throughout the month, with total tube journeys throughout Wednesday up 4% week-on-week. You can read more of Gwym Topham’s report here: Tube journeys up 8% after work-from-home Covid guidance ends The reopening of Australia’s most isolated state has been suspended indefinitely to allow West Australians to get booster shots, as the more transmissible Omicron variant rips through the nation. Just one month after promising that from 5 February double-vaccinated interstate and international travellers would be allowed to enter Western Australia without quarantine, the WA premier, Mark McGowan, has said that all entrants will need to self-isolate for 14 days, be triple-dose vaccinated and take tests. “From 12.01am on Saturday 5 February, the hard border will stay, with new settings that will have a focus on both safety and compassion,” McGowan said. The premier did not provide a new date for when quarantine-free travel would be allowed into WA. Nevertheless, the list of people exempt from the hard borders will increase. People attending funerals, court, visiting those in palliative care or who are terminally ill, or those with strong recent connections, will now be allowed into the state after testing and quarantine. McGowan labelled the Omicron Covid spread a “new state of emergency” but said the border rules would be reviewed during the coming weeks. Read more of Narelle Towie’s report from Perth here: Reopening of Western Australia suspended amid Omicron spread Commuters in London have welcomed their freedom to return to the office, despite many believing the government’s motives had more to do with political expediency than science. “We’re opening back up today for a mixture of reasons, the biggest of which is that the government needs a distraction because of all the things that have been going on in Downing Street,” said Marianne Phillips, an accountant on her way to the office for the first time since the pandemic began, at Euston station on Wednesday morning. “But even though they might be opening up for the wrong reasons, it’s still the right time for people to get back to the office. I am slightly nervous because it’s been a long time but it’s the right thing to do, to get back to the office, and I’m happy I’m doing it,” she said. Emma Reeves, who works in the charity sector, was taking the opportunity to go to the office to collect some equipment before returning to work from home. “The government has only told us it’s OK to come back to the office because they want to be seen to be doing something,” she said. “We’ve had the same rules in place for ages and they need to change them every so often, to look like they know what they’re doing. Having said that, the economy does need to recover and as long as I’m not required to commute during rush hour, I don’t mind coming in a few days a week.” Diana Ursachi, an accountant, said she wanted to return to her workplace full-time. “We lost my dad from Covid during the pandemic, so it’s not been easy,” she said. “But I’ve had Covid, I’ve had my three jabs, and it’s time to get back to normal. We live with other diseases. We need to learn to live with this one now.” Read more of Amelia Hill’s report here: London commuters welcome office return but some say move is No 10 diversion Our community team are very busy today. I mentioned earlier that they were looking to hear from people planning a Festive February now that restrictions are being dropped, and also wanted to speak to people about their thoughts on returning to the office. However, the dropping of restrictions will not necessarily be welcomed in all quarters. And they have another call-out this morning, asking for people who have been shielding during the pandemic to get in touch. Boris Johnson has announced the end of all Plan B Covid restrictions in England from 26 January. We would like to know how people who are shielding feel about the rule change. How has your experience of shielding been? Do you have any concerns? You can get in touch with the team here. Austria’s government has agreed to extend Covid lockdown measures for another 10 days – however with some dispute. The state broadcaster ORF reports: The main committee of the National Council today extended the Covid-19 Protective Measures Ordinance by a further 10 days. In contrast to the compulsory vaccination and the incentive and reward package to increase the vaccination rate, where the SPÖ supports the government, the Social Democrats now rejected the extension of the regulation. The SPÖ has always supported the regulations in this regard, but this time the largest opposition party did not agree. The SPÖ’s Jörg Leichtfried justified this by saying that the lockdown for the unvaccinated was “apparently ineffective and also obsolete due to the coming vaccination requirement”. [The right-wing populist] FPÖ MP Petra Steger sees the lockdown for the unvaccinated as “the most serious encroachment on fundamental rights for healthy people.” Health minister Wolfgang Mückstein (Greens), on the other hand, defended the measures. He [said he] was aware that the lockdown for the unvaccinated was a drastic measure and had lasted for a long time, [and] therefore did not extend the lockdown lightly. Nicola Sturgeon has raised doubts about Boris Johnson’s decision to scrap all plan B Covid rules in England, as Scottish Conservative leader Douglas Ross attacked her at FMQs for imposing “unnecessary restrictions” on the Scottish public over the festive period. “There are still significant uncertainties ahead,” she told Ross at first minister’s questions, “which is why I think doctors, nurses, NHS managers, trade unions, all expressed some concern at the prime minister’s announcement yesterday to lift all restrictions at this stage, including the requirement to wear face coverings”. She said her government – in line with the Welsh and Northern Irish administrations – would continue to take a “proportionate and balanced” approach. There is a slightly odd story brewing that Downing Street has said it will speak to the artist Tracey Emin following her demand to take down one of her artworks in Number 10. PA Media are reporting that Emin has requested the piece – More Passion – be removed in protest at what she has described as “shameful” reports of parties at the residence during lockdown. It was installed in 2011 after being donated to the government art collection when David Cameron was prime minister. Yesterday evening she posted an image of it to Instagram, commenting: This is my neon that hangs at 10 Downing Street. It was a gift from myself to the government art collection. I am now in the process of requesting that my art work be removed from 10 Downing Street. I feel More Passion is the last thing this present government needs. This current situation is shameful. The prime minister’s official spokesman has responded today, saying: My understanding is that the work was gifted to the government art collection with an agreement to initially display it in No 10. We will obviously now discuss the location of the work with the artist and I believe it will remain part of the government art collection that displays works in a number of locations. Emin appeared on BBC Radio 4’s Woman’s Hour this morning, where she told Emma Barnett: I don’t want the work back because I donated it. I would simply like at the moment for it to be taken down, because the neon is notoriously for a party atmosphere. You have them at funfairs, casinos, bars or whatever. I really do not feel that No 10 needs any encouragement on this level. I want it taken down and this government, I will tell you what they need, they need compassion. That’s what they need, not passion. They don’t need more party atmosphere. Most of us are obeying the rules in every single way because this pandemic has affected everybody so terrible, whether it is financially, whether it was health-wise, people dying or whatever. And this government doesn’t seem to care about that. A spokeswoman for the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, which administers the collection, told PA Media: “When an artwork comes into the government art collection, the collection can display the work at any of its 365 locations.” France will unveil a timetable for easing Covid restrictions at 7pm in Paris tonight, a government spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, said, though he cautioned the wave of Omicron infections tearing through the country had not reached its peak. Prime Minister Jean Castex and his health minister, Olivier Veran, will unveil the timetable in a press conference. Attal said France’s new vaccine pass rules would help allow a softening of rules even as the incidence rate of infections continues to increase. France reported nearly half a million coronavirus infections on Wednesday to leave the seven-day average at 320,000 cases. However, the number of Covid patients in intensive care has stabilised, leaving the government some room for manoeuvre. Reuters reports that Attal declined to detail the plans for the progressive easing of restrictions, which include the closure of nightclubs, caps on the number of people allowed into sports and entertainment venues and working-from-home rules. On Sunday, the government gave final approval to President Emmanuel Macron’s plans for a vaccine pass, which will require people to have a certificate of vaccination to enter public venues like restaurants, cafes, cinemas and long-distance trains. The pass is expected to come into effect soon after the constitutional court rules on the matter on Friday. The vaccine pass has re-energised anti-vaccine street protests. There are a couple of other bits of interesting news in those new NHS England figures, as PA Media’s Ian Jones notes: Ambulance handover delays at A&amp;E departments in England improved slightly last week, though hospital pressures “remain high”. A total of 14,961 delays of at least 30 minutes were recorded across all hospital trusts in the seven days to 16 January, representing 18% of all arrivals. This is down from 23% in the previous week, which was the highest level so far this winter. Of the 14,588 patients reported as having the virus on 18 January, 6,983 (48%) were not being treated principally for Covid-19. This is the highest proportion since these figures were first published in June 2021, and is up from 26% at the start of December 2021. All hospital patients who have tested positive for Covid-19 need to be treated separately from those who do not have the virus, regardless of whether they are in hospital primarily for Covid-19 or not. But the growing proportion of patients who are in hospital “with” Covid-19 rather than “for” Covid-19 is another sign the current wave has not led to the same sort of pressure on critical care as in previous waves. Here are my colleagues Niamh McIntyre and Pamela Duncan with a fuller look at that latest NHS England data. They write: NHS England staff absences due to Covid have fallen by 22% on the previous week, figures show, with signs the staffing crisis in the health service may be easing off. There were more than 35,000 Covid absences on an average day in the week to 16 January, down from almost 46,000 the week before. However, the figures are still significantly higher than absence levels seen before the Omicron surge. At the start of December, there were about 12,000 absences on an average day. Absences for all reasons, including Covid, were down by 13% and stand at 77,000 across the NHS. Prof Stephen Powis, the NHS England national medical director, said: “Even though the numbers are going in the right direction, NHS staff will have many tough months ahead as they continue to deliver patient care while managing competing demands. While staff absences remain high and continue to increase in some parts of the country, it is good to see they have been reducing week on week. Read more here: NHS England Covid absences fall amid signs staffing crisis is easing A total of 29,517 NHS staff at hospital trusts in England were absent for Covid-19 reasons on 16 January. This was down 26% on the 40,031 the previous week but still more than double the number at the start of December. UK health secretary Sajid Javid justified the move to no longer require secondary school pupils to wear face masks in class in England from today, citing lower case numbers. England will soon scrap virtually all Covid measures. Covid certification entry requirements could be dropped across a number of hospitality settings in Northern Ireland, the first minister, Paul Givan, has said. Austria’s government has announced it will introduce a national vaccine lottery to encourage holdouts to get shots, hours before parliament was due to pass a bill introducing a national vaccine mandate. For each shot someone has had they will be offered one lottery ticket, and one in 10 tickets will deliver a €500 voucher prize. Russia’s official figure for daily new Covid cases is 38,850 today. That is up by nearly 5,000 from the level the day before, and approaching the peak of just over 40,000 seen in November last year. Germany reported another record rise of 133,536 daily new cases. It is the second consecutive day the European country has broken a pandemic record. Japan’s western prefecture of Osaka and two neighbouring regions are expected to join in a widening declaration of Covid-19 prevention measures, Osaka’s governor has said. Japan added more than 41,000 new Covid infections on Wednesday and prime minister Fumio Kishida expanded quasi-emergency measures to cover the capital Tokyo and a dozen other regions. China’s capital, Beijing, has ramped up efforts to curb Covid-19 infections ahead of next month’s Winter Olympics, ordering checks among cold-chain firms and urging residents to cut unnecessary gatherings. Taiwan will mandate the use of passes that provide proof of Covid vaccination for entry into entertainment venues. Hong Kong will likely suspend face-to-face teaching in secondary schools from Monday 24 January, local media reports. Tennis Australia chief executive, Craig Tiley, has declared he will not resign over the Novak Djokovic visa saga and rejected suggestions his governing body paid for the deported world No 1’s legal fees. The Australian federal court has published its reasons for dismissing Djokovic’s challenge. In her first press conference of the year, New Zealand’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, told reporters: “Omicron is knocking at our door. We won’t stop Omicron, but we can try and slow it down.” At least three cases of the new variant have been confirmed among border workers and their contacts in Auckland, and there are fears it made have already spread into the wider community. As the Omicron variant rips through the US, children are being infected with Covid-19 in record numbers – yet their rate of vaccination has lagged, creating a surge in hospitalisations and undermining in-person schooling. Andrew Sparrow has our UK live blog, which is dominated by political shenanigans in the Conservative party. You can find that here. I will be sticking with you for the next few hours bringing the latest coronavirus news from around the world and any significant UK developments. And if you fancy a complete change of pace, you could always pop over and try our fun and silly Thursday quiz. Our community team are looking for your reactions to the lifting of Plan B restrictions in England – and the order that people should return to working in offices. They’ve got two call-outs up on the site today – first off about going back into workplaces, if you are one of those people who has been able to work from home. There’s also been some indication that people are booking and re-arranging delayed Christmas celebrations, and they are interested to here what your plans for a “Festive February” might be. Russia’s official Covid figures have often not followed the kind of curve you see in other countries – for a long time earlier this year they sat at a plateau of around 8,000-9,000 new cases per day, with the pandemic neither seeming to gather pace or slow down in the country. Reuters are reporting that today’s official Russian figure for Covid is 38,850 new cases. That is up by nearly 5,000 from the level the day before, which was 33,899. That continues a trend of rising case numbers since 10 January, and is probably what you would expect to see with the Omicron variant now spreading in Russia. The country’s highest ever official daily caseload was a peak of 40,210 on 7 November 2021. A quick note from PA Media here that a total of 29,517 NHS staff at hospital trusts in England were absent for Covid-19 reasons on 16 January, down 26% on the previous week (40,031) but still more than double the number at the start of December (12,508). The new figures from NHS England include staff who were ill with coronavirus or who were having to self-isolate. The figures show the number of NHS hospital staff ill with coronavirus or having to self-isolate due to Covid had fallen week-on-week across every region of England. The Novak Djokovic furore is still rumbling on, as Emma Kemp reports: Tennis Australia chief executive Craig Tiley has declared he will not resign over the Novak Djokovic visa saga and rejected suggestions his governing body paid for the deported world No 1’s legal fees. It comes as TA faces increasing scrutiny from players concerned the Australian Open’s voluntary Covid-19 testing protocol is exposing them to needless risk. Tiley, who has remained largely out of the public eye throughout the Djokovic affair, was booed on Wednesday during a rare appearance at Kia Arena. A few hours later he broke his silence in a tense interview with the tournament’s host broadcaster, the Nine Network, during which he side-stepped questions about the ill-fated bid to bring the unvaccinated Djokovic to Melbourne Park, saying “we already addressed those questions”. Read more of Emma Kemp’s report here: Underfire Tennis Australia boss Craig Tiley refuses to resign over Djokovic visa saga Aritz Parra writes for the Associated Press that when the coronavirus pandemic was first declared, Spaniards were ordered to stay home for more than three months. For weeks, they were not allowed outside even for exercise. Officials credited the draconian measures with preventing a full collapse of the health system. Lives were saved, they argued. Now, almost two years later, Spain is preparing to adopt a different playbook. With one of Europe’s highest vaccination rates and its most pandemic-battered economies, the government is laying the groundwork to treat the next infection surge not as an emergency but an illness that is here to stay. The idea is to move from crisis mode to control mode, approaching the virus in much the same way countries deal with flu or measles. That means accepting that infections will occur and providing extra care for at-risk people and patients with complications. Just over 80% of Spain’s population has received a double vaccine dose, and authorities are focused on boosting the immunity of adults with third doses. Vaccine-acquired immunity, coupled with widespread infection, offers a chance to concentrate prevention efforts, testing and illness-tracking resources on moderate to high-risk groups, said Dr Salvador Trenche, head of the Spanish Society of Family and Community Medicine, which has led the call for a new endemic response. Covid-19 “must be treated like the rest of illnesses,” Trenche told the Associated Press, adding that “normalized attention” by health professionals would help reduce delays in treatment of problems not related to the coronavirus. The public also needs to come to terms with the idea that some deaths from Covid “will be inevitable,” Tranche said. “We can’t do on the sixth wave what we were doing on the first one: The model needs to change if we want to achieve different results,” he said. A quick snap from Reuters that Africa’s top public health body plans to talk to Merck about obtaining supplies of its Molnupiravir treatment pill for Covid, although talks with Pfizer about its Paxlovid medication were more advanced, it said on Thursday. “We don’t have a preference to talk only to Pfizer and not Merck, it’s just that Pfizer has been more forthcoming with their engagement. We plan to engage both companies equally,” said John Nkengasong, director of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. Andrew Sparrow has launched his UK live blog for today – that’s going to be very heavily-politics leaning today I suspect. You can find that here. I’ll be continuing with global coronavirus news and significant UK Covid lines here. Covid certification entry requirements could be dropped across a number of hospitality settings in Northern Ireland, the first minister has said. Paul Givan said, while he would support the removal of mandatory certification entirely, he anticipated a majority of ministers in the power-sharing administration will back proposals to retain the system in higher risk settings. Givan’s comments come ahead of a meeting of the Executive on Thursday afternoon. Laws requiring people to prove Covid status to gain entry to a range of hospitality venues and large-attendance events were introduced last November. PA Media remind us that the move proved politically contentious with Givan’s DUP party voting against the scheme while the other four Stormont executive parties backed it. Patrons wishing to access nightclubs, pubs, restaurants and other licensed premises have been required to provide proof of vaccination or a negative lateral flow test result or evidence of a previous Covid-19 infection. The same rules have applied for entry to large indoor and outdoor events, such as concerts and sporting events. A phased approach to the discontinuation of the system could see the removal of the requirement in settings such as pubs, restaurants and cinemas, with certification being retained for nightclubs and some other settings. If you didn’t see it yesterday, it well worth a couple of minutes to read this from Devi Sridhar about the state of play with coronavirus in the UK: There are now clearly three camps of scientists voicing opinions on what is happening and what to do in the coming weeks. This can be confusing for the public. The first group still seem to see the virus as the same deadly one of March 2020, despite the massive scientific progress in managing it, and they suggest extremely cautious measures. The second say they’ve been right all along in that mass infection is unavoidable; this is the “let it rip” group. They ignore the dramatic difference that mass vaccinations and treatments have made – avoiding serious illness from Covid-19 now is wholly different from 2020. The third group – where I sit – have evolved their position as the data and tools, namely vaccines and therapeutics, have also evolved to transform Covid-19 into something more akin to other infectious diseases that we control and manage. Read more here: Devi Sridhar – Now that science has defanged Covid, it’s time to get on with our lives On the BBC Radio 4 Today programme, UK health secretary Sajid Javid has justified the move to no longer require secondary school pupils to wear face masks in class in England from today, citing lower case numbers. PA Media quote him saying: There has long been a debate about face masks, particularly in schools. The government’s job is to take a balanced and proportionate decision, in this case balanced against the best interests of children. It is harder to teach children and it will have an impact on their education if they are required to wear face mask at all times in classrooms. Case numbers are falling in every part of the country, we are starting to see hospitalisations falling throughout England, in every area they are stabilised, in most areas they are starting to fall. Maria Cheng, who is one of the medical writers at Associated Press, has put together a Q&amp;A on what it means for a disease to be endemic, rather than an pandemic. All the noises from UK health secretary Sajid Javid comparing Covid to flu over the last 24 hours show that is the direction of travel that the government is heading in. She writes that diseases are endemic when they occur regularly in certain areas according to established patterns, while a pandemic refers to a global outbreak that causes unpredictable waves of illness. The World Health Organization (WHO) has said that redefining the coronavirus as an endemic disease is still “a ways off,” according to Catherine Smallwood, an infectious diseases expert in the agency’s European headquarters in Copenhagen, Denmark. “We still have a huge amount of uncertainty and a virus that is evolving quickly,” she said earlier this month. The WHO does not technically declare pandemics. Its highest alert level is a global health emergency. For many countries, designating a disease as endemic means that fewer resources will be available to combat it, since it will likely no longer be considered a public health emergency. It’s likely the pandemic will be over when the WHO’s experts declare that Covid no longer qualifies as a global emergency, but the criteria for that decision are not precisely defined. “It’s somewhat a subjective judgment because it’s not just about the number of cases. It’s about severity and it’s about impact,” said Dr Michael Ryan, the WHO’s emergencies chief. Others have pointed out that designating Covid as endemic is arguably a political question rather than a scientific one, and it speaks to how much disease and death national authorities and their citizens are willing to tolerate. Japan’s western prefecture of Osaka and two neighbouring regions are expected to join in a widening declaration of Covid-19 prevention measures, Osaka’s governor has said. Governor Hirofumi Yoshimura said the prefecture would hold a meeting on Friday to determine whether to apply for measures referred to as quasi-emergency that allow governors to request restaurants and bars shorten business hours and stop serving alcohol. Yoshimura said he was coordinating with the prefectural governors of Kyoto and Hyogo on making a joint request. “I think the three prefectures will probably join together to request the quasi-emergency measures (on Friday),” Yoshimura said. Yoshimura said he expected Osaka would log roughly 6,000 new infections on Thursday, close to the record number seen on Wednesday. Reuters report that Japan added more than 41,000 new Covid infections on Wednesday as the Omicron variant spread, breaking a record for two consecutive days. Prime Minister Fumio Kishida decided on Wednesday to expand the measures to cover the capital Tokyo and a dozen other regions. If the restrictions are widened to include Osaka and its two neighbors, 63% of the nation’s total population – or just under 80 million people – would live under the measure. The lifting of plan B restrictions in England means an immediate return of the debate about whether you should be wearing a face mask in crowded places still, even if it is not backed up by law enforcement. It also means a return to politicians being pressed on what they personally would do. PA Media quotes UK health secretary Sajid Javid telling BBC Breakfast: Will I be wearing a face mask? Yeah, I think I probably would be in a week’s time. Because prevalence is still high and there will be people there, especially if I am going to my local shop which is small and enclosed and can have quite a few people in there at one time in quite a small space, I don’t know most of those people, I think that would be sensible. I think it will be sensible on the tube in London, for example - quite an enclosed space. People will be asked to make their own personal judgment just as we do in fighting flu. Reuters are reporting that Austria’s government has announced it will introduce a national vaccine lottery to encourage holdouts to get shots, hours before parliament was due to pass a bill introducing a national vaccine mandate. Roughly 72% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against Covid, which is one of the lowest rates in western Europe. New daily infections hit a new record on Wednesday as the Omicron variant spread further, but the government wants to avoid another national lockdown, since the country emerged from its fourth one only last month. “What is there to win in the vaccination lottery? Vouchers!” Chancellor Karl Nehammer told a news conference with the leader of the opposition Social Democrats, Pamela Rendi-Wagner, with whom the measure was negotiated. Nehammer said he wanted there to be a financial reward for those who get vaccinated, adding: “We have learned from the past and we have seen that a vaccination lottery is the best possible way to set up such a system.” The plan appears to be that members of the public, whether already vaccinated or not, would get a ticket for each shot they have had - three tickets in total for those who have had their booster shot. Every tenth ticket would win a €500 (£415) gift voucher, Nehammer said, without specifying what the vouchers were for. UK health secretary Sajid Javid very carefully avoided directly saying that Boris Johnson would have to resign if he had broken Covid laws, but he did, in general, say that any minister who broke the law would have to step down. You can see him dancing on the head of a pin over this here: As the Omicron variant rips through the US, children are being infected with Covid-19 in record numbers – yet their rate of vaccination has lagged, creating a surge in hospitalizations and undermining in-person schooling. Nearly a million new Covid cases – more than 981,000 – were confirmed in children in the week ending 13 January, a 69% increase from the week before and four times higher than last winter’s peak, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics. That means one in 10 Covid cases among children in the entire pandemic have happened in the past week, the organization said. Adult rates have shot up, too, with an average of more than 870,000 confirmed cases a day in the US – but children have much lower vaccination rates. Only 18.8% of kids aged five to 11, and a little more than half of 12- to 17-year-olds, are fully vaccinated, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hospitalizations for kids are soaring, although severe illness and death are much less likely for children than adults. “Tons and tons of kids are getting infected this time,” said Almaz Dessie, assistant professor of pediatrics in emergency medicine at Columbia University medical center. Yet vaccinations are lagging. After a short burst of children’s vaccinations soon after the shot was authorized for the five to 11 age group, progress dropped significantly. Read more of Melody Schreiber’s report here: US children’s Covid vaccinations lag despite record infections Dr Richard Pebody, who leads the high-threat pathogen team at WHO in Europe has been on the media in the UK this morning, slightly pushing back on that message from UK health secretary Sajid Javid that Covid now was finally more like flu. He told Sky News viewers: We’re not at that point yet. SARS-CoV-2 is a different infection. It still can be a very serious infection in those who are unprotected. Those who are unvaccinated. And, you know, I’d really like to reinforce the message that if you’re not vaccinated, if you’ve not completed your course of vaccination, it is really important that you do get it, because it will protect you against serious disease, against hospitalisation. We are clearly moving into a different phase of the pandemic. We have to celebrate the success of the vaccine programme and the rollout in many countries, and the protection of the population. But we’re still not yet at the end of the road as far as the pandemic is concerned. Taiwan will mandate the use of passes that provide proof of Covid vaccination for entry into entertainment venues, the government said today, as it seeks to reduce infection risks while tackling a small rise in domestic Omicron cases. The Central Epidemic Command Centre said that from Friday entry into venues including bars and night clubs would require proof of full vaccination, either by showing a physical vaccine card or a new digital card. The centre said the move was needed to minimise the risk of community transmission as Taiwan deals with a small number of domestic infections of the Omicron variant. Ben Blanchard reports for Reuters that more than 70% of people in Taiwan have received two vaccine doses and booster shots are currently being rolled out, though only around 10% of residents have had their third shot so far. Taiwan has thus far kept the pandemic well under control with strict border measures enacted early on and a highly efficient tracing system. It has reported 18,041 cases to date out of a population of 23.5 million. In the UK, health secretary Sajid Javid got himself in a bit of a tangle of weeds about comparing Covid to flu yesterday. Sky News’ presenter Kay Burley asked him if he had meant to do that, and then when he said yes, asked why previously in the pandemic people had been mocked and criticised for comparing the novel coronavirus, which had killed over 150,000 people in the UK, to a flu. This is what Javid had to say: Because if it was an example of how we need to learn to live with Covid. The impact of Covid, of course, has been the biggest challenge this country has seen since the Second World War. We’ve seen, very sadly, thousands and thousands of deaths, but we have learned a lot about Covid. Sadly people die of flu as well. In a bad flu year, you can certainly lose about 20,000 lives, but we don’t shut down our entire country and put in place lots of restrictions to deal with it. We need to continue with our lives with sensible, appropriate and proportionate measures. The one thing we learned about flu, because it’s been around for far, far, far longer, is that we have annual vaccinations for older people and in particular for children. One thing I did also say yesterday’s is Covid is not going away. It’s going to be with us for many, many years, perhaps forever. And we have to learn to live with it. And what we have shown mainly, because of the vaccines, but also because the new treatments that we have, the antivirals – we’ve got more antivirals per head than any other country in Europe – the testing infrastructure that we’ve built, the biggest testing infrastructure, it is these things that will allow us to live with Covid. Pressed again on whether it had been to criticise people earlier in the pandemic for comparing the coronavirus to flu, Javid said: I think, if at the start of Covid when we had no vaccines, we had no testing infrastructure, we had no treatments, people were comparing it to flu, that would have been wrong. Of course, it would have been wrong. But look where we are today. The UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid has opened the UK media round on Sky News this morning. He was challenged over the World Health Organisation’s (WHO) warning about scrapping self-isolation. As a reminder, WHO said: Our recommendation is for isolation of the cases, isolation and clinical care of cases to continue, because our goal is to prevent onward spreads, and also the quarantining of contacts. We support countries in reducing that time. I don’t say abandon it, but reducing that time. When pressed by presenter Kay Burley on whether England would be dropping self-isolation in March, as Prime Minister Boris Johnson hinted at yesterday, he said that a decision would be taken nearer the time. He said: What we said yesterday was it marks a new chapter in our fight against the pandemic, where we are returning to Plan A. So that’s what we’re doing. And that’s because Plan B has worked. The data shows that Omicron is now in retreat. And it’s worked for a number of reasons, but mainly because of the time it bought us to build our defences, with some 15 million people coming forward to get boosted. I want to thank each and every one of them for what they have done to help us fight this pandemic, and also all the NHS workers, the volunteers, and what they did. Because of that, we’re now able to remove some of the rules and restrictions by returning to Plan A so it means that, for example, that we’re no longer encouraging people to work from home. From Thursday next week, there will be no mandatory use of the NHS Covid passes or the use of face coverings. The plans to drop restrictions in England will no doubt lead to a lot of scrutiny of the Covid numbers over the next few days from those who argue that the move his happening to soon. Here’s a snapshot of where we are: There were 108,069 new Covid cases recorded yesterday, over the last seven days there have been 652,469 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have decreased by 37% week-on-week – one of the reasons that the UK government is gambling that the Omicron wave has peaked in England. There have been 1,865 deaths recorded within 28 days of a positive Covid test in the last week, including 359 yesterday. Deaths have increased by 8.2% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have decreased by 4.9% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 18,979 people in hospital in total, of whom 703 are in ventilation beds. According to the government’s figures, the peak of hospitalisations during the pandemic was in January 2021, with 39,254 patients in hospital. Here’s a reminder of what the rules will be in England from 26 January: Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London taking over from Samantha Lock. I’ll bring you latest news from the UK media round as it unfolds this morning, as well as coronavirus updates from around the globe. The Australian federal court has just published its reasons for dismissing Novak Djokovic’s challenge seeking to restore his visa. In their judgment, the three justices set out the test for minister Alex Hawke to cancel the visa: It is not the fact of Mr Djokovic being a risk to the health, safety or good order of the Australian community; rather it is whether the minister was satisfied that his presence is or may be or would or might be such a risk. The judges concluded that it was open to Hawke to find that “Mr Djokovic had a stance that was well-known on vaccination and that he was opposed to it”. They noted: Mr Djokovic was not, by January 2022, vaccinated. It was plainly open to the Minister to infer that Mr Djokovic had for over a year chosen not to be vaccinated since vaccines became available ... It was plainly open to the Minister to infer that Mr Djokovic had chosen not to be vaccinated because he was opposed to vaccination or did not wish to be vaccinated.” While we’re in the Pacific region, here is a detailed summary of how Covid is currently playing out across Australia. The country marked another deadly day of the pandemic with 60 deaths on Thursday, with 25 from NSW, 15 in Victoria and 9 deaths recorded in Queensland. South Australia marked its deadliest day of the pandemic with 11 deaths reported. The interval for a booster shot will be reduced to three months in Victoria, New South Wales, South Australia and the ACT amid unprecedented strain on hospitals as Omicron cases surge. Here’s an update on the situation unfolding in New Zealand from our reporter Tess McClure in Auckland. In her first press conference of the year, New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Ardern told reporters “Omicron is knocking at our door”. “We won’t stop Omicron, but we can try and slow it down,” she added. At least three cases of the new variant have been confirmed among border workers and their contacts in Auckland, and there are fears it made have already spread into the wider community. For now, New Zealand is one of a very small handful of countries keeping Omicron at bay. That path is an increasingly lonely one – very few medium-sized economies have stayed dedicated to Covid-zero or heavy-duty suppression. China, the notable exception, faces increasing questions over how sustainable its elimination strategy is. While Beijing remains fiercely committed to that path, however, New Zealand’s leader is now resigned to battle Omicron, describing its transmission across the country as a matter of “when, not if”. “Omicron is in every corner of the world at the moment. And we also know that there will be other variants. And we know that we will experience in New Zealand cases at a level that we haven’t experienced before,” Ardern said. Read the full story here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you today as we unpack all the latest Covid developments from across the world. I’ll be reporting to you from Sydney and my colleague Martin Belam in London will take over shortly. Earlier, we reported that the World Health Organization issued a recommendation, advising countries to lift or ease their international travel bans. The UN health agency recently updated its international health regulations recommendations during an emergency committee meeting on Wednesday. Recommendations included to “lift or ease international traffic bans as they do not provide added value and continue to contribute to the economic and social stress” of some countries. Implementing blanket travel bans are “not effective in suppressing international spread” and “may discourage transparent and rapid reporting of emerging variants of concerns” the agency said in a statement. The WHO also said the requirement to provide proof of vaccination against Covid-19 for international travel may not be needed as “the only pathway or condition” permitting international travel. Hong Kong will likely suspend face-to-face teaching in secondary schools from Monday 24 January, local media reports. The city’s Education Bureau made the announcement on Thursday, because of a rising number of coronavirus infections in several schools. “The suspension could start on Monday, but the Form Six classes [the last year of secondary school] can be flexible,” a source told the South China Morning Post. Here’s a round-up of all the latest international developments you may have missed: Europe: Germany reported another record rise of 133,536 daily new cases. It is the second consecutive day the European country has broken a pandemic record, with 234 deaths also reported, according to recently updated figures from the Robert Koch Institute. The Covid pandemic has inspired record numbers of people to become nurses, with more than 56,000 signing up to nursing courses or apprenticeships in England since the outbreak in early 2020, according to a report. England will soon scrap virtually all Covid measures, the health secretary confirmed. Australia and New Zealand: Australia’s drugs regulator has for the first time approved oral treatments for Covid-19 which should help address supply shortages of other treatments. Australia’s Therapeutic Goods Association has also given provisional approval to the protein-based Novavax Covid-19 vaccine. New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said restrictions will be tightened if there is a community transmission of Omicron. Asia: Thailand will resume its ‘Test &amp; Go’ quarantine waiver for vaccinated arrivals starting on 1 February, the country’s coronavirus taskforce said on Thursday. Japan recorded a daily rise of 41,377 new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, shattering the record it set a day earlier by about 10,000 as the government puts more prefectures under a quasi-state of emergency. Hong Kong will likely suspend face-to-face teaching in secondary schools from 24 January, local media reports. China’s capital Beijing has ramped up efforts to curb Covid-19 infections, ordering checks among cold-chain firms and urging residents to cut unnecessary gatherings. United States: US president Joe Biden has admitted that more should have been done in terms of Covid-19 testing availability earlier in the pandemic. A complete summary for the past 24 hours is also available here. Thailand will resume its ‘Test &amp; Go’ quarantine waiver for vaccinated arrivals starting on 1 February, the country’s coronavirus taskforce said on Thursday. All arrivals must take a Covid-19 test on arrival and five days later, spokesperson Taweesin Wisanuyothin said at a briefing. Additional “Sandbox” areas were also announced, a similar scheme to revive the country’s battered tourism sector, where visitors must stay for one week in a designated location. Surfing great Kelly Slater could be the next big name in sport to be refused the right to compete in Australia, with the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, saying he wants to avoid another “soap opera” if the 11-time world champion is not vaccinated against Covid. Slater, who has not publicly disclosed his Covid vaccination status, has aired some controversial views on the Covid vaccine, including an Instagram comment in October that claimed he knew “more about being healthy than 99% of doctors”. The American tour veteran, who has no medical qualifications, has previously said he is not anti-vaccine but opposed to making vaccination mandatory. Slater has also been critical of the visa process that ended with the recent deportation of tennis world No 1 Novak Djokovic. The best surfers in the world are scheduled to arrive in Australia for back-to-back World Surf League events at Victoria’s Bells Beach and Western Australia’s Margaret River in March and April this year. Australia’s drugs regulator has for the first time approved oral treatments for Covid-19 which should help address supply shortages of other treatments. The approval applies to two drugs – Paxlovid and Lagevrio. They have been “provisionally” approved, which means they can be administered by health professionals in limited circumstances but the manufacturers must submit further data as the drugs are used more widely. The director of infectious diseases at Mater Health Services, associate professor Paul Griffin, said on Thursday: “We’ve got great safe and effective vaccines. We’ve got intravenously administered antivirals and monoclonal antibodies, which have certainly helped us. But what we’ve been missing right now is an oral therapy that changes the course of the Covid illness.” Read the full story here. Japan recorded a daily rise of 41,377 new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, shattering the record it set a day earlier by about 10,000 as the government puts more prefectures under a quasi-state of emergency. Another 13 deaths were also reported. The daily case rise is a significant increase on the previous seven-day average of 7,475, according to the health ministry data. Tokyo’s daily caseload hit a new record 7,377, up more than threefold from a week before, according to health ministry data. Elsewhere, Osaka prefecture logged 6,101 cases, Hyogo reported 2,514 and Kyoto saw 1,202 — all record highs for the second consecutive day, the Japan Times reports. The number of seriously ill Covid-19 patients nationwide as of Wednesday was 281, up by 20 from the previous day but still far below the record high of 2,223 marked on 4 September last year. The government intends to place 13 more prefectures including the capital under a quasi-emergency status from Friday until 13 February as the Omicron variant continues to spread. The 13 prefectures — Tokyo, Gunma, Saitama, Chiba, Kanagawa, Niigata, Gifu, Aichi, Mie, Kagawa, Nagasaki, Kumamoto and Miyazaki — will join Okinawa, Yamaguchi and Hiroshima, where the pre-emergency designation is already in effect. Hong Kong will likely suspend face-to-face teaching in secondary schools from 24 January, local media reports. The city’s Education Bureau made the announcement on Thursday, because of a rising number of coronavirus infections in several schools. “The suspension could start on Monday, but the Form Six classes [the last year of secondary school] can be flexible,” a source told the South China Morning Post. The government halted classes in primary schools and kindergartens early this month, and imposed curbs, such as a ban on restaurant dining after 6pm and the closure of venues such as gyms, cinemas and beauty salons. The Covid pandemic has inspired record numbers of people to become nurses, with more than 56,000 signing up to nursing courses or apprenticeships in England since the outbreak in early 2020, according to a report. Figures from the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (Ucas) show that more 18-year-old school leavers are applying for and accepting places to study nursing than before the pandemic, with applications up by 38% since 2019, while applications from those over the age of 21 have also risen by more than a third. The report by Ucas and Health Education England found that 69% of recent applicants said the Covid pandemic had inspired them to apply to become a nurse, with around one in 10 saying the pandemic was the most important factor in their decision. One in four applicants said the current high profile of healthcare workers was a significant influence on their decision. Read the full story here. Germany is reporting another record rise of 133,536 daily new cases. It is the second consecutive day the European country has broken a pandemic record, with 234 deaths also reported, according to recently updated figures from the Robert Koch Institute. The previous daily count recorded on Tuesday was 112,323 new coronavirus cases and 239 deaths. The weekly incidence rate is now above 584.4 new infections per 100,000 people over seven days. The number is a significant jump on Monday’s daily rise of 74,405 and 193 deaths and on case numbers recorded at the end of the last week. Germany now joins other European countries like the UK, France and Italy in recording more than 100,000 new Covid-19 infections on one day. Omicron now accounts for more than 70% of new infections. The country recently tightened restrictions on access to restaurants, bars and cafes to people who have received their booster jabs or who are tested on top of being fully vaccinated or recovered. Germany has also pledged to accelerate vaccinations while the parliament prepares to discuss introducing mandatory vaccinations - a measure supported by new chancellor Olaf Scholz. China’s capital Beijing has ramped up efforts to curb Covid-19 infections, ordering checks among cold-chain firms and urging residents to cut unnecessary gatherings, as the city reported an uptick in local cases weeks before the Winter Olympics. Beijing had three domestically transmitted infections with confirmed symptoms on Wednesday, including one previously reported as a local asymptomatic carrier for 18 January, according to local health authority data on Thursday. The city has reported less than ten local Covid infections since 15 January, with both the Delta and Omicron variants detected, a tiny case count compared with the rest of the world. The city of Beijing should immediately launch full inspections over its cold-chain industry and make the testing of staffers and goods more frequent, the city government said in a statement late on Wednesday, after some infections were found to be cold storage workers, Reuters reports. Residents are advised to reduce movement and unnecessary gatherings, while children, the elderly and people in weaker health should avoid crowded public places, the city’s health authority said in a statement on Wednesday. China reported a total of 43 locally transmitted infections for 19 January, according to a statement by the National Health Commission on Thursday, down from 55 a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636. As of 19 January, mainland China had 105,411 confirmed cases, including both local ones and those arriving from overseas. US president Joe Biden has admitted that more should have been done in terms of Covid-19 testing availability earlier in the pandemic. “Look, we’re also increasing testing. Should we have done more testing earlier? Yes. But we’re doing more now,” he said during a news conference on Wednesday. Look, we’re also increasing testing. Should we have done more testing earlier? Yes. But we’re doing more now. We’ve gone from zero at-home tests a year ago to 375 million tests on the market in just this month.” The president reiterated the White House’s plans to mail at-home tests to Americans who request them and the move to have insurers reimburse Americans for at-home tests they buy in stores. I know there’s a lot of frustration and fatigue in this country. And we know why, Covid-19. Omicron has now been challenging us in a way that it’s the new enemy. But while it’s caused for concern, it’s not cause for panic. We’ve been doing everything we can, learning and adapting as fast as we can and preparing for future beyond the pandemic. Biden also said the country is now better positioned to tackle the pandemic, citing vaccination efforts, testing tools and new medications now available. We’re in a very different place now, though. We have the tools. Vaccines. boosters, masks, tests, pills to save lives and keep businesses and schools open. 75% of adults are fully vaccinated. We’ve gone from 90 million adults with no shots in arms last summer and down to 35 million with no shots as of today. And we’re adding about 9 million more vaccinations each week.” South African-American biotech businessman Patrick Soon-Shiong opened a new vaccine plant in Cape Town on Wednesday, intended to help his local NantSA company make Covid-19 shots and address the continent’s deadly dearth of manufacturing capacity, Reuters reports. it will be the first in Africa to produce Covid-19 vaccines from start to finish, according to Agence France-Presse. The factory should produce its first vials of second-generation coronavirus vaccine “within the year” and produce a billion doses annually by 2025, Soon-Shiong said. South African president Cyril Ramaphosa, who attended the opening, supported the move, tweeting: This state-of-the-art vaccine manufacturing campus that we are officially launching today is part of a far broader initiative to propel Africa into a new era of health science. Today we are marking the establishment of a company that aims to develop next-generation vaccines that will reach patients across the continent. Africa should no longer be last in line to access vaccines against pandemics. Africa should no longer go cap in hand to the Western world, begging and begging for vaccines. Soon-Shiong, who is also a medical doctor, will transfer technology and materials from his California-based NantWorks to scientists in South Africa, where they will also work on vaccines targeting cancer, TB and HIV. “Greater self-sufficiency is essential,” Matshidiso Moeti, World Health Organization (WHO) regional director for Africa, said in a message of support for the plant. Soon-Shiong said he would transfer bioreactors stockpiled at his U.S. factories, with first production of vaccines seen later this year. To ensure a pipeline of skilled workers, he has pledged 100 million rand ($6.5 million) for scholarships. “We have now the capability to use the human capital of South Africans to build 21st century medicine,” Soon-Shiong told Ramaphosa, as he entered one of two warehouses, currently empty, in the semi-industrial area of Brackenfell near Cape Town. Australia’s health body, the Therapeutic Goods Association, has given provisional approval to the protein-based Novavax Covid-19 vaccine. The more traditional vaccine technology is preferred by many vaccine-hesitant groups across the country. Health minister Greg Hunt said: We have 51m units available, and obviously we have a first dose national vaccination rate of 95.2%, [but] we know that some people have waited for this vaccine. Although we have encouraged everyone to proceed ... we recognise that as a fact. Hopefully, this will encourage those people in the less than last 5% to come forward. We want to have as many people come forward to be vaccinated, the next stage is the Australian advisory group on immunisation and subject to their approval it will be made available over the coming weeks to be distributed through states and territories, general practices and pharmacies that seek to order it. New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said restrictions will be tightened if there is a community transmission of Omicron. Ardern made the remarks during a press conference on Thursday in which she provided an update on the country’s traffic light system. New Zealand will move to into the red zone as part of the traffic light system within 24 to 48 hours in the event of a community outbreak of Omicron but lockdowns will not be used, stuff.co.nz reports. Ardern said in a statement accompanying the announcement: We’re also confirming today that when we have evidence of Omicron transmitting in the community we won’t use lockdowns, instead the whole country will move into Red within 24 to 48 hours.” The prime minister previously told her MPs that Omicron is a “different foe” and will result in case numbers not seen in New Zealand before. However, she added that the variant “is not insurmountable” and long lockdowns should not be needed. Two new Omicron cases have been reported in Auckland. Testing in New Zealand for Covid will be free, and rapid antigen tests will be used more widely, Ardern added. The World Health Organization has recommended lifting or easing international traffic bans, citing the ineffectiveness of the measures to suppress the spread of the Omicron variant. The UN health agency recently updated its international health regulations recommendations during an emergency committee meeting on Wednesday. Recommendations included to “lift or ease international traffic bans as they do not provide added value and continue to contribute to the economic and social stress” of some countries. Implementing blanket travel bans are “not effective in suppressing international spread” and “may discourage transparent and rapid reporting of emerging variants of concerns” the agency said in a statement. The failure of travel restrictions introduced after the detection and reporting of Omicron variant to limit international spread of Omicron demonstrates the ineffectiveness of such measures over time. Travel measures such as masking, testing, isolation/quarantine and vaccination should be based on risk assessments and avoid placing the financial burden on international travellers, according to their recommendations. The WHO also said the requirement to provide proof of vaccination against Covid-19 for international travel may not be needed as “the only pathway or condition” permitting international travel. Do not require proof of vaccination against Covid-19 for international travel as the only pathway or condition permitting international travel given limited global access and inequitable distribution of Covid-19 vaccines. State parties should consider a risk-based approach to the facilitation of international travel by lifting or modifying measures, such as testing and/or quarantine requirements, when appropriate, in accordance with the WHO guidance.” Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as we unpack all the latest Covid developments from across the world. I’ll be reporting to you from Sydney and my colleagues from London will take over a little later in the day. Let’s dive in with a cautiously optimistic advice from the World Health Organization to lift or ease international travel bans. The UN health agency recently updated its international health regulations recommendations during an emergency committee meeting on Wednesday. Recommendations included to “lift or ease international traffic bans as they do not provide added value and continue to contribute to the economic and social stress” of some countries. Implementing blanket travel bans are “not effective in suppressing international spread” and “may discourage transparent and rapid reporting of emerging variants of concerns” the agency said in a statement. The WHO also said the requirement to provide proof of vaccination against Covid-19 for international travel may not be needed as “the only pathway or condition” permitting international travel. Here’s a round-up of all the top international Covid news. Europe: England will soon scrap virtually all Covid measures, the health secretary confirmed. Denmark reported a record 38,759 infections, a 37% jump on two weeks ago. Austria recorded a record daily rise in Covid infections with 27,641 cases reported in the past 24 hours, according to data from the Austrian Agency for Health (AGES). Algeria announced it’s closing schools for ten days over rising cases. Germany reported a record 112,323 cases as Omicron continues to batter Europe. Bulgaria reported its highest Covid tally of the whole pandemic, with 11,181 new infections, a 65% jump on the 6,766 cases recorded on Wednesday two weeks ago. France detected over 400,000 new cases for the second day in a row. Northern Ireland will cut self-isolation from seven to five days from Friday, following suit from new isolation rules in England. St Petersburg in Russia detected record cases, as the country clocked over 33,000 infections. Hana Horka, a Czech folk singer, died on Sunday after deliberately exposing herself to Covid. Her son said she was a victim of the antivax movement. Authorities in Beijing, China announced another piece of infected international mail, local media reported, amid doubts from experts that such events are extremely rare. Portuguese voters with Covid or isolating will be allowed to vote in person on 30 January. Asia: Japan is is set to widen Covid restrictions to cover half its population as the Omicron variant drives record infections. Children aged 5-11 in Malaysia will be jabbed starting February with the Pfizer vaccine. Americas: The US government will make 400m non-surgical N95 masks free to the public from next week, the White House said. In the US, Starbucks has suspended the requirement for its 220,000 employees to be vaccinated or regularly tested after a Supreme Court ruling. US actor John Malkovich was turned away from a luxury hotel in Venice, Italy last week after failing to present a Covid vaccination pass. Brazil has reported 204,854 new confirmed cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, breaking the country’s previous record for the second day in a row, the health ministry said on Wednesday. Australia and New Zealand: Australia’s health body the Therapeutic Goods Administration has granted provisional approval to two oral Covid-19 treatments, Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir + ritonavir) and Lagevrio (molnupiravir). The TGA also gave provisional approval to the protein-based Novavax Covid-19 vaccine. The interval for a booster shot will be reduced to three months in Victoria, New South Wales, South Australia and the ACT amid unprecedented strain on hospitals as Omicron cases surge. New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said restrictions will be tightened if there is a community transmission of Omicron. Novak Djokovic is the controlling shareholder in a Danish biotech firm aiming to develop a treatment for Covid-19 that does not involve vaccination, it has emerged.Adele has been forced to delay her three-month Las Vegas residency after Covid hit the production. “I’m so sorry, but my show isn’t ready,” the singer announced in a tearful Instagram post. “We’ve been absolutely destroyed by delivery delays and Covid. Half my crew … are down with Covid – they still are – and it’s been impossible to finish the show.” The residency, titled Weekends with Adele, was due to begin on 21 January at the Colosseum in the Caesars Palace casino, celebrating her highly lauded album 30, which topped music charts in the UK, Australia and the US. Its first single, Easy On Me – an appeal to her ex-husband and young son for grace after she ended her marriage – broke records upon its release, becoming Spotify’s most-streamed song in a single day. “I can’t give you what I have right now and I’m gutted and I’m sorry it’s so last minute,” Adele told fans. “We’ve been awake for over 30 hours now trying to figure it out and we’ve run out of time. I’m so upset and I’m really embarrassed and I’m so sorry to everyone that travelled to get [here]. “We’re going to reschedule all of the dates, we’re on it right now and I’m gonna finish my show and I’m gonna get it to where it’s supposed to be.” Tickets to the show cost between $85 (£62) and more than $5000 (£3684) for platinum packages – before travel and accommodation in Nevada. Tickets in premium seating areas were selling for tens of thousands on resale websites. Fans voiced their annoyance with the last-minute decision. “Not Adele rescheduling after already buying plane tickets, show tickets &amp; getting a hotel room,” wrote one. Another tweeted that “cancellations are written into her set list... Wembley, now Vegas. What about Hyde Park? Putting a show like this on in a pandemic and without a plan B wasn’t strategic.” A British fan named David tweeted: “‘Christmas gift gone pear shaped as my wife and daughter are on the way to meet me in Vegas and unfortunately Adele has had to cancel.” But Adele’s Instagram post also received support from sympathetic admirers. BBC Radio 1 DJ Greg James quoted “Adele’s own advice when she was on the radio with me a few months ago”: “Trust the process, go with your gut, it’s also Friday, so it’s the weekend! Cheer up! Wayyy ayyyy!” The poet Amanda Gorman commented: “We love you – thank you for doing what is right even when it isn’t easy.” Glennon Doyle, the self-help guru whose work proved revelatory to Adele after her divorce, posted: “Covid is killing us mentally because no one is showing us how to adjust our expectations of ourselves and others. We are killing ourselves trying to make things work like they worked in the old world and we can’t do it. We cannot make things work but it feels like we aren’t allowed to say that. Because no one is brave enough to say: No. this cannot be done right now. Enough. But you did, and it is going to free people, I swear to God. You are a beautiful leader even when you don’t know you are leading. Go easy on you.” Other singers including Adam Lambert, the country star Reba McEntire and Pink also voiced their support. “Sweetheart I have been there,” Pink wrote. “The pressure is immense and I’m gutted for all of you. It will come together and it will be amazing when it does.” Adele’s residency has been highly anticipated by fans and critics. The Guardian described her as a “slyly subversive fit for a Vegas residency”, bringing an album about the aftermath of blowing up her life to a “place synonymous with light entertainment and celebrating adult milestones”. She joins a lineage of artists including Elvis Presley, Celine Dion and Britney Spears to take up the Vegas mantle. Vegas will also mark a shift towards more intimate shows for an artist known for her chatty, conversational style of touring, with the residency taking place in a relatively small 4,100-seat venue compared with Adele’s previous world tours. In 2017 she revealed to a stadium audience in New Zealand that “touring isn’t something I’m good at … I don’t know if I will ever tour again”.When the La Trobe University lecturer Dr Yves Rees was told their gender affirmation surgery would be cancelled, they were devastated. “It was impossible to contemplate,” they said. Rees’ procedure was scheduled for November, during the Delta wave, and was later reinstated when elective surgery was reintroduced in Victoria. But at the time, Rees was told there would be an eight-month wait for the procedure. “There can be a perception gender affirmation surgeries are a choice, something people would prefer to do rather than not,” they said. “That’s not correct; the reality is these are very much medically necessary surgeries …this can be the difference between a life of constant gender dysphoria and acute stress and anxiety, and a life of feeling good.” Health experts warn delaying elective surgeries in Victoria, including gender affirmation procedures, will see blown out waiting lists spiral into a “massive healthcare crisis”. On 5 January, the Victorian government announced elective surgery – except for “emergency and urgent” procedures – would be temporarily suspended to ease pressure on public and private hospitals amid the Omicron wave. The changes came into effect from 6 January across Melbourne and major regional cities for a three-month period – to help hospitals manage record Covid-19 patients. But on Thursday, IVF procedures were exempted from the restrictions following a social media backlash, with hospitals scaling up to resume procedures from 25 January. Royal Australasian College of Surgeons president Dr Sally Langley said the recurring ban on elective surgery in Victoria had a “profound effect”. She wants a return of short-stay surgery in adequately-equipped hospitals and facilities. “Across the board, all specialties have been affected. Urgent surgery too has seen waiting times longer than ideal because of staff shortages, staff illness and staff furlough,” she said. “Victoria has already been through this with the bans on elective surgery in the last couple of years. There’ll be an even longer waiting list for important surgery and [patients] may well deteriorate.” Langley said the term “elective surgery” encompassed “serious pressing” surgeries including painful mobility and arthritic problems that would be “significantly worse” within 30 days. “We do know surgery can go ahead in a hospital that’s adequately staffed, where people are free of Covid,” she said. “Surgeons and their teams should be working to keep up their skills. The longer periods of time they’re away from work, there’ll be some anxiety about maintenance of skills.” A Victorian anaesthetist employed in the public and private sector said he welcomed the return of IVF but the current shutdown in clinical work had left him with a “very nasty taste” in his mouth. “I don’t see a reason for the overwhelming shutdown of every sector of healthcare,” he said. “Hospital and ICU beds are in short supply … so I can understand restricting surgery if those resources are required, but there’s a whole sector of day surgery procedures, where most of the patients never even see the inside of a ward or a hospital bed. Why can’t those operations carry on?” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The current national definition for elective surgery is care that can be delayed for at least 24 hours – used to distinguish between emergency care which requires action within that timeframe. The banner includes a wide range of procedures from cataract extractions and endometrial procedures to coronary artery bypass grafts, full hip and knee replacements and some cancer procedures. The department of health said further advice was being sought about other services that could resume without a “critical impact” on workforce capacity. It said the state’s chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, provided advice to the acting health minister, James Merlino, that the “specialist nature” of the workforce, facilities and equipment used in IVF weren’t “imperative” to support the pandemic response. Merlino said he was “deeply sorry” for the distress caused by affected services in recent weeks and was “working to have other services restored as soon as we can”. There are three “clinical urgency” categories for elective hospital care – the highest with the potential to become an emergency within 30 days. Category two recommends admission within 90 days for a condition causing “pain, dysfunction or disability”, while category three recommends admission is “unlikely to deteriorate quickly” or become an emergency. In New South Wales – a state with comparatively higher hospitalisations and ICU bed occupations – less urgent day procedures like cataracts, routine endoscopies and minor surgeries are able to continue. “The nursing staff for such procedures are generally highly skilled in their relevant fields and, as such, probably wouldn’t be able to easily be redeployed to a Covid streaming hospital or ICU without some very intensive training,” the anaesthetist said. “As a result, we have thousands of staff sitting idly by, while the rest are absolutely struggling to cope with their workloads. Is it any wonder that nurses are resigning, not renewing their registrations and moving on to other fields of work?” The anaesthetist said no new or extra requests had been made to private hospitals since Victoria’s coordinated code brown was announced, leaving the “vast majority” of staff forced to take leave due to restrictions. “It’s been two years. We cannot keep shutting down other parts of the hospital to cope with increased hospitalisations. This was fine as a short-term gap measure but is not sustainable long term.” In Victoria, according to September figures, there were 67,596 people on the waiting list for category two and three elective surgeries. In NSW, the figure was even higher, at 90,123 people. In Queensland, 53,933 people were waiting for elective care. “There needs to be a better plan moving forward, as we are going to have a massive healthcare crisis in Victoria in the years to come,” the anaesthetist said. “We have one of the lowest rates of hospital and ICU beds per capita in any developed country. How have we let this happen?” On Friday, the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said plans to resume non-urgent surgery in his state would be reviewed in the middle of February, aligning with the Victorian approach “Obviously, it is highly dependent on … hospitalisations so the next week or two will be critical in terms of making a decision,” Perrottet said. “For urgent surgery, and during the Delta wave, 100% of surgery was completed on time and we continue to operate on people each and every day and the thing we’ve kept going is day surgery procedures. We will absolutely be turning surgery back on as soon as we possibly can.” For Rees, the trans community had already been disproportionately impacted by the ripples of the pandemic. They said while all elective surgery was important, unlike having a broken leg, they had to undergo years of internalised transphobia and an extensive process to prove their procedure was medically necessary. “It’s enormously stressful,” they said. “I’ve been contacted by many online who are at their wits’ end at the thought of having waited so long for these surgeries and having to wait again.”An internal review into Swimming Australia’s treatment of girls and women has recommended the organisation drop skinfold tests and the term “physique”, and to adopt a quota for female coaches. The report lists 46 recommendations, including urging SA to issue a statement acknowledging “the practice of assessing body composition is harmful to swimmers” and to rethink its approach to coaching. One recommendation said SA should “challenge the misinformed view that lean body mass predicts performance” and that it should develop “training in using humanising and non-objectifying language in managing body image concerns.” “The term ‘physique’ has meaning and consequences, including overvaluing body shape and size in terms of their impact on performance,” the report reads. The report goes on to recommend banning “unjustified routine periodic screening”, saying body composition assessments should only be conducted twice a year unless there is a “justified need”. It says SA should “demonstrate clear leadership” by banning “the use of surface anthropometry, specifically skin folds, as a measure of body composition at any stage of a swimmer’s career”. It recommends SA integrate training on how “to be an ally”, to “increase the capacity of all coaching staff, but especially the male coaches, to understand the impacts of bullying and exclusion of female coaches and enhance opportunities for creating meaningful change for gender equity.” The report also addresses SA’s complaints process, recommending it adopts a “character test” for selecting coaches and support staff for teams, which will consider active and previous complaint information, and urging SA to adopt a quota for “female representation among advanced and performance coaches”. It also references World Rugby and AFLW as models for female inclusion among coaching staff. “Swimming Australia [should] show cultural leadership by prioritising behavioural standards over a coach’s performance standards. The athletes’ welfare must be the primary driver for coach selection.” It says SA should commit to “never again selecting an all-male team for national and international competitions and ensures that a minimum number of women coaches are included – no less than two women when four or more coaches are selected and at least one woman where there are three or less coaches selected”. The report was commissioned in June 2021, after a series of accusations of sexual abuse and misconduct rocked the organisation. Swimmer Madeline Groves, a silver medalist at the Rio Olympics, withdrew from the Tokyo Olympic trials as a “lesson to misogynistic perverts and their bootlickers”. “You can no longer exploit young women and girls, body shame or medically gaslight them and then expect them to represent you so you can earn your annual bonus. Time’s UP,” she tweeted. Groves has since alleged she was sexually abused from the age of 13 by someone still working in the sport. It also came after gold medallist Cate Campbell said female swimmers have been subjected to body shaming, in a book she wrote with her sister Bronte. She said the attitude of many male coaches was that “the skinnier the better,” with girls given smaller plates so they would eat less and many criticised in front of other swimmers if they gained any weight. Swimming Australia president, Kieren Perkins, said in a statement that the SA board “acknowledges” their responsibility in making changes. “The Swimming Australia board acknowledges the ultimate collective responsibility and commitment in addressing these recommendations rests with the board and the executive team in delivering and committing to meaningful and enduring change, being transparent and regaining and earning the trust of our athletes and our entire community.” In the same statement, SA said it welcomed the report, reflecting on the fact that 60% of their participant base was female. “The feedback was open and frank and there were experiences recounted that were difficult to read,” it said. “Broadly, the review found that Swimming Australia must address the coaching gender imbalance, coaching culture, education and accreditation, governance structures, and the complaints process.” The panel also recommends SA release the report in full, which it has rejected, citing privacy concerns. “While we cannot release the full report due to the confidentiality guaranteed to participants, the themes of the report are clear in the recommendations and provide public accountability for our steps forward.”New South Wales has again recorded its deadliest day of the pandemic, with 46 people succumbing to Covid-19 as the state’s chief health officer warns of more to come. A total of 359 people have now died from the virus in the first 20 days of 2022 in NSW, more than half the total number of deaths recorded throughout 2021. Premier Dominic Perrottet struck a defiant tone at a press conference on Friday, saying updated modelling showing hospitalisations and people in ICU remain below best-case scenarios released by the state’s health department at the beginning of this month. There were 2,743 Covid-positive people in hospital and 209 in intensive care on Friday, the second day in a row that those figures have fallen. “In difficult times, these are reassuring and pleasing signs in relation to our health system,” Perrottet said. “We were expecting more than 3,000 people in our hospitals with Covid and in a worst-case scenario, 6,000 people … the figure today provides some reassurance in terms of the situation here in NSW.” Along with the updated hospitalisation modelling, the NSW chief health officer, Kerry Chant, on Friday gave a detailed breakdown of the 28 people under the age of 65 who had died from Covid in the past week. Of the 28, 13 were not vaccinated, while one person had received one dose. Only four of the 28 did not have a significant underlying health condition, and three of those people were unvaccinated. The other 24 had a series of health conditions including 10 with significant heart or valvular disease, seven with diabetes, six with obesity, six with chronic lung disease, four with severe liver disease and four with cancer. Many of the conditions were overlapping. Chant also warned the number of people dying from the virus in NSW was “likely to remain high” for some time given the lag in case numbers and hospitalisations. “Unfortunately, the death numbers will be likely to remain high,” she said. But she said a “variety of indicators” pointed to the outbreak having slowed in recent days, with officials becoming increasingly confident the first Omicron wave had plateaued. Drops in hospitalisations, the number of workers in isolation, and case positivity rates pointed to declining transmission, she said. “That all gives us a sense that the spread of Covid is slowing and it is pleasing to see,” she said. Perrottet has continued to come under fire over decisions made since he became premier in October, including scrapping an indoor mask mandate on 15 December before being forced to reintroduce the policy as cases surged in the week leading up to Christmas. But he insists he does not regret that decision, and the decision to push ahead with the loosening of restrictions. On Friday he began to push back on suggestions he had gone further than other states in reopening the economy by pointing to a similar level of restrictions in the Labor-held states of Victoria and Queensland. “We’re not going our own way in NSW, we are following the national plan with every other state along the eastern seaboard,” he said. “This view is false that is being perpetrated that somehow NSW is taking a different approach. NSW is taking the national approach just like Victoria and just like Queensland. “If you look right across the country, we’ve all taken this approach [although] there are different approaches obviously in Western Australia.” It comes as the death of a baby with Covid last month was referred to the coroner, and the Australian federal police launch an investigation into reports of price gouging of rapid antigen tests. Health authorities have confirmed the baby had tested positive for Covid-19 and died in hospital last month. In a statement, the Hunter New England Health District said it had referred the case to the coroner “given uncertainties as to the cause of death”. “The coroner and forensic pathologists are working hard to get the answers that, most importantly, the family wants and the clinicians want, in terms of this child and the contribution that Covid may or may not have made to its death,” Chant said on Friday.For airline staff, navigating the pandemic has meant grappling with a surge in bad behavior, ranging from temper tantrums to punching flight attendants in the face. In the latest incident, 129 passengers paid a remarkable price: a maskless “disruptive customer” forced American Airlines’ flight AAL38 flying from Miami to London to turn around and go back, the New York Times reported. The reversal occurred off the North Carolina coast, after the flight had traveled about 500 miles. The customer, described by police as a woman in her 40s, was “refusing to comply with the federal mask requirement”, American Airlines said in a statement to the newspaper. “Once the plane made it to the gate, the passenger was escorted off the plane by MDPD officers without incident. The passenger was then dealt with administratively by American Airlines staff,” a police detective said, according to CNN. Though the outcome was dramatic in this case, such unruliness has become commonplace. “This is happening every day now,” Sara Nelson, president of the national flight attendants’ union, told the Guardian in October after a man, asked to wear a mask and stop talking on his phone, flew into a rage, stormed out of his seat and threatened to break someone’s neck. In fact, it’s happening about 16 times a day. That’s according to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, which lists 5,981 unruly passenger reports last year. A total of 4,290 of those were listed as “mask-related incidents”. This year – mere 20 days old – has already seen 151 incidents, 90 of which were mask related, though the FAA says the figure has dropped by about half since early 2021. Last year’s incidents included a woman, who swore at flight attendants and was asked to leave, reportedly punched another woman holding a baby on her way out; a man who was duct-taped to his seat after allegedly groping a flight attendant; and a man who allegedly left a flight attendant with a concussion after punching her in the nose. Another flight attendant, who wished to remain anonymous, described the situation in stark terms to the Guardian in September: “I go to work now and I always worry what’s going to happen, what’s going to trip somebody up, trigger their anger. It’s a whole new ballgame out there right now and it’s a different type of passenger we’re seeing.” But there have also been moments to offer hope for better behavior: this month, an American woman noticed her throat hurting while flying from Chicago to Iceland. She went to the restroom, took a Covid test and found she was positive – so she stayed in the bathroom for the rest of the flight, she said.I grew up next to the swooshing, murky tea-coloured Waipā River in Ngāruawāhia. Always risk-averse, childhood myths of Taniwha and the idea of the snapping teeth and slither of monster eels terrified me a bit, so I never swam in rivers. Meanwhile, the promise of an unexpected brush against slimy seaweed and the thrash of the open, vast and unknowable ocean are at once beguiling yet nerve-racking to me. Calmer than the pummel of the sea or the dark magic of rivers, lake swimming appeals. Tucked away in Central Otago is the charming historic township St Bathans, a former goldmining town now with a population of fewer than ten. A prominent feature of the town is the sublime Blue Lake which remains a breathtaking sight no matter how many times you see it. Starting in 1864, miners sluiced through the quartz rock of 120 metre high Kildare Hill. By 1933 at 168 metres deep, it was the deepest mining pit in the southern hemisphere. But because it was encroaching on the township, mining ceased and the pit filled with water from the surrounding hills. The lake’s stunning hue which veers from dazzling emerald to a soft turquoise is due to the mineral rich water. The surrounding white quartz tailings lend an otherworldly lunar-like appearance. Timeless, placeless and atmospheric, it looks like an alternative utopian film set from an Andrei Tarkovsy film. Quietly spectacular, the Blue Lake is 800 metres long and 50 metres deep. Slipping into it, the silky water makes me think of Cleopatra’s bath and offers respite from the scorching hot dustiness of the summer heat. A place of extremes, the weather in St Bathans can reach searing temperatures in summer, and freezing cold in winter. Gliding through the luminous water, hemmed in by the science fiction-like tailings, I think of the music video for a 1994 David Kilgour song, the heartstopping Beached, shot around the Blue Lake and St Bathans. In over-exposed, rinsed-out honeyed tones with Kilgour plaintively singing, “where do you come from? Where do you come from?” – it looks like it was filmed on another planet. A place steeped in rich heritage, St Bathans is a dreamy spot for heritage heads. The historic hotel built in 1882 is aptly named Vulcan Hotel and is rumoured to be haunted. There’s a 90-minute track that loops right around the water offering sensational views of the lake and township. A shorter option of about 30 minutes offers a glimpse of the old sluicings and the goldmining machinery which converted Kildare Hill into the Blue Lake. With its sensuous sublimity, the Blue Lake offers swimming as a way of dreaming. It feels restorative, a word which absurdly turns my mind to those old folk in the 1985 film Cocoon in which a group of elderly people are rejuvenated by aliens via a swimming pool of water which has been charged with “life force”. In my hazy memory of the film, the colour of the lake is the same hue as the Cocoon pool, are the lake minerals revitalising? As a lifelong North Islander accustomed to subtropical lushness, the South Island with its vast landscapes, singular light quality, and spots like the Blue Lake with its esoteric eerie oddness, forever holds an alluring mystique. Kiran Dass is a Whanganui-based writer and reviewer who covers books, music and culture What’s your favourite wild place? If you would like to contribute to the series tell us about it in 200 words and send it to newzealand@theguardian.comThe last two weeks of the Omicron outbreak have been the deadliest of the entire coronavirus pandemic, with four of the five highest daily death tolls all in the past week alone, figures reveal. However, despite the rising numbers, experts say we still don’t know enough about who is dying and why. Here, we’ve pulled together the information we do know about deaths from various government sources. The data shows that for Australia’s third large Covid wave, older Australians continue to be overrepresented in the death toll, even as younger Australians record far more cases. And in New South Wales, where more detailed data is available, the protective effect of vaccines remains clear, with serious outcomes – deaths and ICU admission – far less likely for vaccinated people with Covid, across every age group. There were 1,653 deaths across Australia from the beginning of the pandemic up to 27 November, which is when the first recorded case of Omicron in Australia was announced. Since then, with a mix of the Delta and Omicron variants circulating over this time, there have been over 1,100 deaths: There were 78 deaths reported on Tuesday alone this week. Before the current wave the highest daily death toll was in September 2020, when Victoria recorded 59 deaths. Those aged 70 and over accounted for almost 80% of the deaths in the initial waves up to August last year, and once again make up a similar share of deaths in the current wave: Data from the federal Department of Health shows that the skew in deaths towards older age groups is happening despite younger Australians representing a much larger proportion of infections: The government does not publish the number of booster vaccinations by age group in its daily statistics, so it is unclear what proportion of older people are protected by a third vaccine dose or not. In NSW, which publishes much more detailed information than the federal government or other jurisdictions in its weekly surveillance reports, we can see how the risk of serious outcomes changes with both age and vaccination status. Figures from the report show the number of deaths or ICU hospitalisations – called “severe outcomes” in the report – as a proportion of total Covid cases, split up by age group and vaccination status. So, for example, of 780 unvaccinated Covid cases in the 70-to-79 age group, there were 171 people who either died or ended up in ICU, giving a severe outcome rate of 21.9%, compared with a rate of 1.8% for vaccinated people. These numbers show that older people face a higher rate of serious cases even while vaccinated. However, importantly, they also show vaccinated people of all age groups are less likely to die or require treatment in intensive care: The NSW data defines an unvaccinated person as anyone who has not had a single dose of a Covid vaccine and so includes those who were ineligible. The NSW Health surveillance report also shows that the vast majority of deaths up to 1 January 2022 have occurred in hospitals. Relatively fewer people have died in aged care or at home in NSW. Notes and methods: Covid deaths by jurisdiction and age scraped daily from the federal health department’s Covid statistics page since the beginning of October by Guardian Australia. Data preceding this was scraped by Ken Tsang Daily and weekly Covid death calculations used data from CovidLive.com.au The health department defines a Covid death as a death in a probable or confirmed case where there is no clear alternative cause of death, such as a car accident. There should be no period of complete recovery from Covid-19 between illness and deathAnd so Sundance 2022 begins with the curtain drawn back by Jesse Eisenberg, an actor who’s long been linked with the festival, with films such as The Squid and the Whale, Adventureland, Holy Rollers, The End of the Tour and last year’s Wild Indian all premiering. His on-screen persona – jittery, insecure, fast-talking, intelligent – made him an ideal poster boy not just for Sundance but the independent scene at large, a writer’s schtick made so believable on screen that it felt inevitable he would soon head behind it. He went from writing short stories to writing plays and now he’s writing and directing his first film, the so-so festival opener When You Finish Saving the World, based on his audio drama from 2020. Eisenberg doesn’t star but he’s cast Stranger Things’ Finn Wolfhard to fill the role, the actor doing a successful cover version without leaning into cheap impersonation. He’s Ziggy, a high schooler who devotes his time to his music which he livestreams to an audience of over 20,000 people worldwide, a number he’s endlessly proud of. His mother Evelyn (Julianne Moore) is less impressed, her time focused on the more noble act of running a shelter for victims of domestic abuse. As the two grow ever distant from each other, they both try to find ways to replace a love that’s grown sour. Ziggy ingratiates himself with the more politically minded chapter at school, motivated by a crush on classmate Lila (13 Reasons Why star Alisha Boe) while Evelyn tries to redirect her maternal instinct to Kyle (Billy Bryk), a teen who’s moved into the shelter with his mother. What drives them both toward these new pursuits is not just a need to replace some warmth that’s cooled at home but to feel like they’re doing something good and through that process that they might then become good people. Eisenberg isn’t trying to insist this is The Film We Need Right Now (thank heavens) and his characters don’t directly address the specifics of the time we’re living in (it’s a Covid-shot movie that mercifully doesn’t exist in a Covid-afflicted world) but after two years of us all descending further into an uncontrollable form of global hell, it’s hard not to see an added resonance to his characters’ quest. Who hasn’t tried just that bit harder of late to feel like they’re helping, whether it’s on a micro or a macro level, whether it’s actually achieving anything or not? What Eisenberg’s script quickly realises is that there’s really no such thing as a selfless act, that helping others is most often a way of helping ourselves. Ziggy’s ignorant callousness can perhaps be chalked up to his youthful naiveté (his thrill at singing political songs is equally matched by his thrill at the money it makes him) while Evelyn’s unhealthy obsession with Kyle is mostly driven by a need to feel needed. Eisenberg pokes fun at the cushioned liberalism of the family (a dinner table that allows for a father to lecture his son about the cultural appropriation of blues and a son to tell his father to shut the fuck up without consequence) and the safe midwestern pocket they live in, yet never with the specific, unsparing sharpness that, say, Noah Baumbach would have brought (a writer-director whose shadow looms large over the project). It’s a film of people telling themselves they’re making a difference without really doing much of anything and it’s hard not to feel similarly unmoved by the time it’s all over. The fraught mother-son dynamic feels uneasy and believable (two difficult people struggling to move past the too-comfortable roles they’ve grown out of), and Moore and Wolfhard certainly give it their all, but there’s some added texture missing from who these people really are and in the film’s brief 87-minute runtime it’s left to the heavy lifting of Emile Mosseri’s score to bring any real heft. The ending is particularly, frustratingly rushed, as if we were fooled into thinking this was a novel but it was actually just a short story. As a first-time director, Eisenberg is at least refreshingly restrained and gimmick-avoidant (this does not look like an A24-funded debut movie), but as a writer with some experience, albeit on stage and on the page, it feels a little anemic. A rocky start. When You Finish Saving the World is showing at the Sundance film festival and will be released later this yearShortly before the 1996 election, Paul Keating warned the country that “when the government changes, the country changes”. With both major parties entering this year with a commitment to reaching net zero emissions by 2050, none of us should be fooled that this means there is barely a crack of daylight between them when it comes to tackling the climate crisis. That is because the climate policies of each of the two parties put us on track for a vastly different country as soon as the end of this decade. And while there is a tendency to only focus on international targets and timelines when it comes to the fight against climate change, the reality is that these fundamentally affect what kind of economy, society, and environment we want to live in. There are five clear areas where the divergence between the two major parties is most stark and will shape what life in Australia will look like by 2030. First, when it comes to the cost of electricity that will power our households and businesses. Australia might lead the world when it comes to individual rooftop solar power systems, but we lag behind when it comes to the penetration of renewables into our electricity grid. Only a quarter or so of our grid is currently fuelled by renewables, with close to two-thirds of our electricity still coming from coal. Tipping this balance isn’t just a quixotic ideal, it’s essential if we want lower electricity prices and enhanced productivity. It affects everyday life. If we get the balance right, the average electricity bill could be more than 25 % cheaper by the end of this decade. For most Australians, the choice should therefore be seen less as about renewables versus coal, and more about the cost of electricity. But tipping the balance also takes time. In the last 15 years, renewables have increased around 20 % — largely as a result of a mandatory renewable energy target. Thankfully, both sides of politics now believe we can increase the share of renewables by almost a further 50 % by the end of this decade if we start now. The difference is the government would do so by relying on the policies of the states and territories to get there, whereas Labor would seek to go further through rewiring the electricity grid, and installing community batteries plus local solar banks. Even more stark is the question of what kind of cars we will be driving by 2030. Electric vehicles currently account for just 2% of new car sales in Australia. By 2030, Labor wants this to be close to 90%. That would take Australia from effectively last place on the podium of comparable nations to somewhere near the top. By contrast, the government hopes electric vehicles will account for just under a third of new car sales by the end of this decade despite the fact some European countries have already reached more than double that. The difference is between becoming the developed world’s dumping ground of immovable combustible engine vehicles, or benefiting from what will by then likely be the cheaper electric alternatives. This brings us to the third point of divergence between the two parties. The path we choose at home will also play a part in determining how we are seen on the international stage. Whatever your view of the Cop26 outcome last November, one thing is clear: Australia emerged as a diminished global power that seemed hell bent on continuing to bury its head in the sand when it comes to climate change. We showed up with simply a pamphlet as opposed to policies. We allowed our national pavilion to be sponsored by the oil and gas industry. We blocked critical parts of the negotiating text. And then we trashed the outcome before the ink was even dry by flat out refusing to take another look at our lacklustre 2030 emissions reduction target over the next year. This did real damage to brand Australia. Reclaiming the mantle of international climate credibility requires us to not just show up, but to sign up to the climate fight. Actions speak louder than words when it comes to how the international community engages with this issue. And with climate change becoming a critical foreign policy and national security priority for governments, it also means we face the real risk of the imposition of carbon tariffs by the end of this decade if we do not. That would only mean a higher cost of living for most Australians. But by far the biggest and most important difference between the two parties’ climate policies goes to what kind of economy we want at the end of this decade. And what kind of jobs that follow – especially in our regions. The government’s insistence over the summer that somehow Cop26 did not ring the death knell for coal has been like watching the Black Knight in Monty Python insist he just has a flesh wound. To be clear: for the first time, almost the entire world was prepared to sign up to a commitment to phase out coal, including Australia’s own negotiating team. China and India may have only been willing to go so far as committing to a phase down, but both countries’ net zero plans will require them to wean themselves off coal in the next two decades. That includes Australian coal. The hard truth is that coal may be Australia’s second largest export but it clearly won’t last forever. The government’s own “modelling” admits coal will at least halve in price by the middle of the century. So we either begin the hard work to find a replacement for our trade balance sheet or we do not. That’s not about killing an industry overnight, it’s about not cutting off our nose to spite our face. If the government was serious about climate action and serious about protecting our coal workers, the regions and our national economy, they’d have a plan to begin to transition this workforce rather than continuing to provide its workers false hope. Thankfully, we are blessed with a perfect storm when it comes to the alternative: the best climate for renewable technologies to thrive, a thirsty Asian market for green energy exports such as hydrogen, and a workforce that will need a just transition away from coal precisely where many of these massive renewable energy powerhouse projects would need to be constructed. As the Business Council of Australia and the ACTU have said, up to 395,000 new clean energy export jobs could be created in the coming decades if we choose wisely. Instead, the government is clearly banking in the short term on the fact that for many Australians seeing a future without coal is hard. And it’s true: fossil fuels still have a deep place in the Australian economic psyche long after the mining boom. As the Climate of the Nation report demonstrates, most Australians think the coal industry accounts for close to 10% of the workforce when in fact it only makes up 0.4% with fewer than 10,000 workers nationwide. More Australians work at McDonald’s. While it is true that Australia’s contribution to global emissions cuts will not in and of itself bend the curve of individual climate impacts, if every country did what Australia was doing, the Great Barrier Reef would disappear. Either way, by 2030 these climate impacts will become more frequent and intense as a result of our collective inaction, and even worse if we squander the rest of this decade. While this is the hardest to measure, it is yet another cautionary tale for the path we choose to follow. With both sides of politics now committed to net zero emissions, voters will hopefully reward those that can actually spell out how we can get there and how we can transition our workers and our economy in the process and deliver a lower cost of living. Not those that want to have their cake and eat it too. And this might mean that if anyone is now wedged politically on climate, it is the government. Voters should choose carefully. What kind of Australia we want to live in, and what kind of Australia we want our children and grandchildren to inherit is firmly on the ballot. Thom Woodroofe worked as a diplomatic adviser in the Paris agreement negotiations. He is chief of staff to the president and CEO of the Asia Society, Kevin Rudd. Twitter @thomwoodroofeFormer Afghan interpreters and other colleagues left behind by the Australian government after the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan now face a high risk of brutal reprisals, a Senate inquiry has found. A damning new consensus report said Australia had asked Afghan nationals to “stand in harm’s way with Australian personnel” but had “left them standing in harm’s way”. “It is dishonourable,” said the inquiry’s interim report, which was written by the Labor chair, Kimberley Kitching, and not opposed by government members of the committee. Australia’s last-ditch evacuation mission – launched on 18 August days after Kabul fell to the Taliban – lifted 4,168 people out of the Afghan capital over the course of nine days. Those carried on the 32 Australian flights included 167 Australian citizens and 2,984 Afghans with approved visas. Shortly after the report was tabled in parliament on Friday, the government announced it would provide at least 15,000 places for Afghan nationals through the humanitarian and family visa program over four years. Alex Hawke, the immigration minister, said the increased allocation included 10,000 places for Afghan nationals within Australia’s existing humanitarian program and at least 5,000 visas within the family stream. He said priority groups would include former locally engaged employees and their immediate families. “Today’s announcement of 15,000 places follows our initial allocation of 3,000 places to Afghanistan in August 2021, which as we indicated then, was a floor and not a ceiling,” Hawke said. “The government will continue to monitor processing numbers and reserves the right to increase the program in future years.” The report by the Senate’s foreign affairs, defence and trade references committee described this evacuation effort by Australian defence force personnel and other Australian officials as “immense and heroic” – expressing gratitude to those who had worked in dangerous and high-pressure conditions. But the committee said it had also heard “distressing evidence about those who attempted to access the evacuation mission but were unsuccessful”. It said there were process-related delays in the lead-up to the evacuation and “a large number of individuals and their families remain in Afghanistan at high risk of brutal reprisals from the Taliban because of their association with Australia”. The report, published on Friday, said “loyalty to mates” was essential to the Australian ethos, and Australian policymakers “need to keep true to that ideal, lived every day by the heroes who risk everything to defend us”. “There is an enduring duty of loyalty owed by Australia to the interpreters and other Afghans who risked their lives in the service of the Australian defence forces when they were in Afghanistan,” the report said. “That loyalty was shown by the brave Australian men and women who served in Afghanistan. It must be shown by the government that sent them there.” The report said there had been about 425 Afghan locally engaged employees (LEE) with visas or applications in process, in Afghanistan at the time of the evacuation operation in August. While it was not known how many of these individuals managed to secure places in the Australian evacuation, the report said “a significant number of individuals” who had helped Australia were ultimately unable to secure a visa during the operation. “Tragically, there have now been reports that some LEE applicants have been injured or killed by the Taliban, with others currently in hiding due to their association with Australia.” The Senate committee said it saw evidence that, in July 2021, Defence “was still issuing rejection letters to LEE applicants due to technicalities (such as applicants not having applied within six months’ of ceasing employment) despite the dire security situation”. The committee also cited evidence, as of 21 August, that some LEE applications were rejected by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade “due to its approach to the eligibility criteria relating to the private contractors”. The report said there was no “recourse for these at-risk individuals other than joining the general humanitarian visa application process”. It said that it was not until 22 August, five days into the Australian evacuation operation at Hamid Karzai international airport, that the government decided to consider emergency subclass 449 visas for those who had applied for the LEE program but were not certified. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Those delays meant that “many who were issued 449 visas were ultimately unable to access the Australian evacuation effort”. “These issues resulted in the inevitable situation that a large number of individuals and their families remain in Afghanistan, at high risk of brutal reprisals from the Taliban because of their association with Australia.” The report was also critical of how the government handled the extension of these emergency visas for people associated with the LEE program who were still in Taliban-ruled Afghanistan after the evacuation mission ended. It says the Morrison government only announced extensions to those visas on 18 November, “the day before these visas were due to start expiring”. The committee heard Defence was still processing 70 LEE certification applications as of late October. The committee urged the government to complete these as quickly as possible and in a favourable light, given the “likely impossibility” that such people would be able to remain safely in Afghanistan. “There is no excuse for bureaucratic delays when lives are literally at stake,” the report said. It said Australia’s obligations extended “beyond the moral imperative” to include “the vital national security interest of Australia” – because Australia needed to maintain a reputation for caring for those willing to help its personnel in future military engagements. The report made eight recommendations, including that the government commission “a full and thorough review” of the Afghan employee visa program to “ensure that programs of this nature are improved”. The government should also review how the Afghanistan evacuation was handled. The references committee adopted the report by consensus. Its members include Labor’s Tim Ayres and Tony Sheldon, Liberals Eric Abetz and David Van, and independent Jacqui Lambie. While there were no dissenting reports, the Greens added additional comments calling for Australia to expand its humanitarian intake. The main report urged the government to “review its policies for pathways to permanent protection visas for Afghan asylum seekers and refugees currently in Australia, and prioritise family reunification when processing humanitarian visa claims from Afghan nationals”. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has previously insisted no one who arrived in Australia by boat would gain permanent resettlement. The committee urged the government to publish a breakdown of the total cost of Australia’s engagement in Afghanistan across each year of its engagement, as well as a breakdown of costs across departments, including costs of support provided to veterans who served in the country. A final report is due in February.The Northern Territory government is under fire after a group of people taken into quarantine 10 days ago from a remote Aboriginal community were sent home on Sunday “unexpectedly” and subsequently tested positive for Covid-19. The remote central Australian community of Yuendumu has asked NT Health to explain why the community members – who had been evacuated to the Alice Springs quarantine facility as close contacts – were flown home on 16 January and sent back to their homes without being tested on arrival, with local authorities saying they had not been informed of their return. A number of the group were Covid-positive when later tested by local health workers in the following two days. “The people got off the plane and were able to go to their respective homes, and then tested positive once the emergency response team realised they were here,” Johanna Ward, the CEO of the Warlpiri Youth Development Aboriginal Corporation (WYDAC), said. “There were a number of people who were positive. We haven’t been provided with that number. So the community is very angry.” Ward said relations with the government were already fraught, with Yuendumu residents angry at what they see as being blamed for a relatively low vaccination rate. Last week, the NT deputy health minister, Nicole Manison, described the township’s vaccination rate of 65% first vaccination and 41% double vaccination for people over 16 as “disappointing”. Ward said the unexpected return flight had clearly contributed to the rapid rise in Covid cases in the community, and would like an explanation and an apology from the NT health minister, Natasha Fyles. “Given the circumstances and the relationship today between Yuendumu community being in some way blamed for not taking up vaccination adequately to combat Covid hitting here, the community are now saying, ‘We’ve been blamed for it, but now you have brought back people who are positive and infected us’. “So yes, they would like an apology, but also to be confident that it can’t happen again to us or any other community. From a systemic perspective, what’s going to prevent this from happening to another community?” According to the minutes of a meeting of the Yuendumu local emergency management Covid response group held on Tuesday, local police and health authorities were not told about the return flight. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The emergency response group includes NT police, local health workers, leading community groups, education officials as well as representatives of NT Health and the National Indigenous Australians Agency, which advises the federal minister, Ken Wyatt. The minutes, seen by Guardian Australia, said the residents returned “unexpectedly”. “Health and police were not advised prior to their arrival, [there was] no prior information on the number of people and opportunity to plan where they were to stay,” the minutes said. The response group requested that it be given “information from health on the protocols for residents to return from quarantine. Residents should be testing before arriving back to community.” NT Health confirmed three people were transferred from the Alice Springs quarantine facility to Yuendumu on Sunday 16 January. “The residents had completed six days of isolation and had no symptoms,” the department said. “They were still required to isolate in their home in Yuendumu until the end of their seven-day isolation period at noon on Monday 17 January. A Covid-19 test is not required to exit isolation. “These people were not infectious while in the community upon their return to Yuendumu.” Ward said the “stuff up” was one of several reasons the community was concerned the current health department strategy for “living with Covid” was not working. “The support that’s being provided, and the model being used, is not effective in a remote setting,” she said. “For example, people have been advised or told to isolate in their home – and they may be sharing that home with up to 20 people. At one stage, one of the quarantining homes had 23 residents. And these residents, these homes, only have one bathroom and one toilet. “We need communication about what regime we are under, we need communication with people at a senior enough level who have some authority when they’re providing information, not the people who are on the ground, who are all working hard, doing a great job, trying to deliver. “People here aren’t vulnerable, they’re neglected.” Minutes of the Tuesday emergency response group meeting also said the NT government’s current strategy is not working. “It appears that the outbreak cannot be contained by using the tools (targeted testing) and practices (quarantine/lockout/living with Covid) in place. An approach that is not working for the community and more fit for an urban mainstream environment. “Need to have an honest and transparency [sic] that it is not working and because of that it is placing everyone at risk. Futile to keep supporting an urban model.” Questions were also raised at the meeting about managing the imminent return to school of Yuendumu children, amid concerns about a shortage of rapid antigen tests for teachers and students.A record-breaking heatwave in Western Australia has days to run before it shifts eastwards, combining with moisture left over from ex-tropical cyclone Tiffany to create some clammy days and nights for southern cities. Perth on Friday reached 40C for a fourth consecutive day, matching the record sequence reached in the WA capital on only three previous occasions, including around last Christmas. The Bureau of Meteorology was predicting a fifth 40C-day for Saturday. Thursday’s top of 40.5C was the eighth day above 40C this summer, beating the previous record of seven for the season in Perth and with more likely, Ben Domensino, a senior meteorologist at Weatherzone, said. Just after noon, local time, the temperature topped 40C for the ninth time this summer and peaked at 41.7C. “It could get to 10 by the end of this week, and then we’re staring down the barrel of another five weeks of summer,” he said, adding another heatwave looked set to build in about a week’s time. The presence of a low-pressure trough off the west coast is critical for stoking the high temperatures. “The trough helps delay the sea breeze,” Domensino said. “And we’ve got a very intense air mass inland that’s causing the temperatures when they are hot to be extremely hot. “And then, underpinning all of that is climate change, which is making extreme heat like this more likely,” he said, adding maximum temperatures in south-western WA had warmed 1.4C since 1910. The current set-up is also linked to last week’s 50.7C at Onslow in WA’s Pilbara region. That reading matched the hottest temperature ever recorded in Australia, according to the preliminary data. Two other sites notched 50C-plus temperatures, a level only previously reported three times on standardised equipment. “In the last few weeks, there has been a lack of monsoon cloud,” Domensino said. “So the tropics have been active over the Northern Territory, in the Kimberley, and northern Queensland but not over the Pilbara. It’s been very cloud-free this summer.” Some of the heat roasting Perth will make its way east in coming days. The mixing with tropical moisture over the Nullarbor and elsewhere, though, will make for some unusually muggy days for Adelaide and Melbourne. Temperatures will feel a few degrees warmer than the forecast tops, with those attending or playing at the Australian Open likely to find the humidity taxing, particularly early next week. “It’s the kind of heat that can surprise people,” Domensino said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The bureau’s forecast for the Victorian capital is for a week of days reaching 30C or more. Sydney, though, is in for a continuation of its mostly muggy and damp days, with humidity levels well above the norm for January. Along with those sultry days, there’s more rain on the way. Parts of South Australia should collect a summer’s worth of rain in a week, Domensino said. “Between now and Sunday, it’ll be wet in central and southern Australia, and then as that trough carries moisture east from the beginning of next week, we’ll see rain spreading over New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria,” he said. “We could see weekly accumulated totals next week getting upwards of 50 or 100mm … so we could see some renewed flooding.” Remote towns, such as Tilpa on the Barwon-Darling River in NSW, were among the areas where floods were under way. The area was expected to have major flooding on Friday, about two years after a multiyear drought broke, when the river ceased to flow leading to mass fish kills. Prior to this summer, the only other times Perth has notched four days in a row of 40C or warmer weather came in February 1933 and February 2016. Generally, February is Perth’s hottest month, said Robert Lawry, a senior hydrologist at the bureau’s WA office. The previous summers with seven 40C days came in 2006-07, 2015-16 and 2019-20, a tally already exceeded this summer. “There’s a pretty obvious trend there,” Lawry said. “They’ve all happened in the last 20 years.” The odds of enduring very hot temperatures have already increased substantially as a result of climate change, he said, adding, “this kind of thing is what you can expect to happen more frequently”.The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has backed Boris Johnson, saying he is doing “a fantastic job” as prime minister, that he has her “100% support”, and should remain in Number 10 “as long as possible”. Truss, in Sydney for a series of ministerial talks with her Australian counterpart, was asked on Friday whether the prime minister’s leadership remained tenable, given the unfolding anger over a series of parties in Downing Street while the UK was under a strict Covid lockdown. “The prime minister has my 100% support. He is doing an excellent job,” Truss said during a press conference in Sydney. “I want the prime minister to continue as long as possible in his job. He is doing a fantastic job.” Truss, seen a potential leadership candidate should Johnson be forced out, did not answer a question about whether she would run for prime minister if a leadership ballot was held. “There’s no leadership election,” she said. Asked about the rising anger across Britain over No 10’s apparent consistent defiance of Covid lockdown laws, Truss said Johnson had acknowledged the error and that the British people were focused on the country’s economic recovery. “The prime minister apologised and said mistakes were made. He is working to open up the economy and deliver for people across Britain and that is what is important … and that is what people are focused on.” Truss was also asked about allegations of blackmail by Tory whips, accused of intimidating rebel backbench MPs who had spoken out against Johnson or defied the party line on votes. “I’ve already commented on the situation in the United Kingdom,” Truss said, “and I do not have any information about what is happening on the subject you raise.” Truss was in Sydney, along with defence secretary Ben Wallace, for the annual “Aukmin” talks between with Australia’s defence and foreign ministers. Truss said the UK and Australia, as historic allies, were “facing global challenges with multiple aggressors”. “We are seeing increased economic coercion from China, we are seeing increased aggression from Russia, we are seeing Iran in danger of obtaining nuclear capability and we need to work with all of our friends and partners around the world, and Australia is an absolutely crucial ally and friend.” Australia’s defence minister, Peter Dutton, said UK submarines will be making more trips to Australia and the Indo-Pacific. “We will see greater rotations, as we’ve already seen from the strike carrier group and from the nuclear sub visit out of the UK,” he said. “We will see more, not just from the UK, but from the United States. We’re seeing greater interest, of course, from even the Germans and other European nations, more people that understand what is happening in terms of the coercion and bullying taking place within the Indo-Pacific.”Australia will export its first load of liquefied hydrogen made from coal in an engineering milestone which researchers say could also lock in a new fossil fuel industry and increase the country’s carbon emissions. Under the $500m Hydrogen Energy Supply Chain (HESC) pilot project, hydrogen will be made in Victoria’s LaTrobe valley from brown coal and transported aboard a purpose-built ship to Japan, where it will be burned in coal-fired power plants. Carbon capture and storage will be used in an attempt to reduce the carbon emissions associated with making the hydrogen and supercooling the gas until it forms a liquid before it is loaded aboard the Suiso Frontier vessel. The first shipment is due to depart from Hastings in the coming days. The project is being led by a Japanese-Australian consortium including Japan’s J-Power, Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Shell and AGL. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said on Friday the development was a “world-first that would make Australia a global leader” in the budding industry. “A successful Australian hydrogen industry means lower emissions, greater energy production and more local jobs,” Morrison said in a statement. “The HESC project puts Australia at the forefront of the global energy transition to lower emissions through clean hydrogen, which is a fuel of the future.” Morrison also announced an additional $7.5m to support the next stage of the project, which has a goal of producing 225,000 tonnes of carbon-neutral hydrogen each year and an additional $20m towards the next stage of the CarbonNet project which aims to produce commercial-scale carbon capture and storage. According to government estimates, this will reduce emissions by 1.8m tonnes a year. But Tim Baxter, a senior researcher for climate solutions at the Climate Council, said the assumptions were questionable as the reliance on “fossil hydrogen” meant government needed to “come back with a zero emissions hydrogen plan”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Hydrogen derived from fossil fuel sources, like what is being shipped out of the LaTrobe Valley, which is derived from some of the world’s dirtiest coal, is really just a new fossil fuel industry,” Baxter said. “Fossil hydrogen is a whole new fossil fuel industry, regardless of whether carbon capture and storage is attached to it. It results in extraordinary greenhouse gas emissions. It’s not a climate solution.” Though “clean hydrogen” has become central to the government’s emissions reductions plans, hydrogen produced by fossil fuels is more expensive, will release more greenhouse gas emissions and comes with greater risk of creating stranded assets. Dr Fiona Beck, an engineer with the ANU Institute for Climate, Energy and Disaster Solutions, said Friday’s announcement did mark an engineering milestone as it showed it was technically possible to liquefy and store hydrogen for transport, as this was more difficult to do than with LNG. However, Beck, a co-author of a recent peer-reviewed paper published in the Journal of Cleaner Production that examined the emissions that will be created out of the proposed Japanese-Australia hydrogen supply chain, said if hydrogen made with fossil fuels became the norm, Japan would be transferring its emissions to Australia. Japan, which has limited options for onshore wind projects, has been looking for ways to reduce its CO2 emissions. One way is by burning ammonia, which is made with hydrogen, in its coal-fired power plants – which are also powered with Australian coal. Under current CO2 accounting standards by which emissions are measured, Japan would slash its emissions while shifting them across to Australia owing to the CO2 emissions involved in creating, processing, transporting and shipping the hydrogen. “If you’re importing hydrogen made from coal, essentially the emissions are going to be worse in Australia rather than it would be by just taking that coal and burning it in Japan,” Beck said. “There’s no policy pressure or economic reason why Japan would buy low-emissions hydrogen when it gets the same benefit by buying cheap, high-emissions hydrogen.” Beck said that while current government planning stated its intention to reduce emissions associated with creating hydrogen “there’s very few actual mechanisms to do this”. “Unless Australia has some strong policy to keep its carbon emissions down, we could see a rise in emissions in Australia due to this hydrogen trade.”It was dark and pelting down with rain as Sameer Parishwadi ran along the railway tracks. Up ahead, as torches darted across the tracks, they shone on to a pair of feet. A few metres away, sliced clean from the body, was a head, one that he recognised. It was Arbaaz Aftab Mullah, his cousin and best friend from childhood. Parishwadi turned over his cousin’s body and saw that his hands were tightly bound. “I knew then that this was 100% a murder,” he said. “He had been tortured and then cruelly killed.” Wiping his eyes, Parishwadi added: “He had not committed a crime by loving someone, yet he paid the ultimate price.” Mullah, a 24-year-old Muslim man from the southern Indian state of Karnataka, was killed in September – allegedly for falling in love with a Hindu girl. In India, interfaith marriages have always carried a social stigma and faced resistance by all faiths as they often require religious conversion. But, in recent years, since the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) came to power, such unions – particularly between Hindu women and Muslim men – have become a dangerous political flashpoint due to a discredited but pervasive conspiracy theory known as “love jihad”. Those who believe in the theory claim that Muslim men are luring Hindu women into marriage on false pretences, in order to convert them to Islam and ensure Muslim dominance over the Hindus in India. According to India’s national investigation agency, there is no evidence for “love jihad”, nor is it reflected in India’s population data, where Hindus continue to make up about 80% and Muslims 14%. But what was once a fringe extremist theory has now been brought into the political mainstream and, last year, numerous BJP-ruled states, including Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, passed legislation to clamp down on conversion for interfaith marriages – laws colloquially known as the “love jihad” laws. While the legislation covers all religions, over the past year it has predominately been used to target minorities as well as emboldening rightwing Hindu vigilante groups to halt interfaith marriage. In Uttar Pradesh, Muslim men who have attempted to marry consenting Hindu women have been violently attacked, forced into hiding or sent to jail. Of the 208 people arrested under the new anti-conversion law between November 2020 and August 2021, all were Muslim. None have been convicted so far. Asif Iqbal, who runs Dhanak For Humanity, an organisation that assists interfaith couples facing hostility, said he had seen a rise in those seeking help in the past year. “They fear society, they fear their families, they fear they might get killed by these fanatic groups and now they have the added fear of false police cases being filed,” he said. In Bareilly, the area of Uttar Pradesh which has had the highest number of love jihad arrests since the new law was passed, Ashu Agarwal, 52, a local leader of one of the most active rightwing Hindu groups, Vishva Hindu Parishad, claimed families approached them “day in, day out” for help in preventing interfaith marriages and love jihad cases. “For the last 50 years, we have known about love jihad but we weren’t able to express ourselves and the issue was swept under the carpet,” said Agarwal. Agarwal pointed to a recent case of an alleged internationally funded “love jihad syndicate” in Bareilly, led by a local Muslim man, Syed Nizam, as proof of the problem. But Nizam’s family said the case was trumped up and being used to punish him for getting involved with an older Hindu woman. Nizam was allegedly kidnapped and beaten by the woman’s relatives, then handed over to the police, beaten in jail until he made a video confession that he was accepting money from abroad to rape and convert Hindu women. Nizam has now been behind bars for more than five months. “He was a father of three and was [not] involved in conversions, he wasn’t even very religious. This is a false case but we are Muslim, we can’t do anything,” said his mother, Latifan Begum. Karnataka is one of the states also proposing to bring in a “love jihad” law, but, in the interim, rightwing Hindu groups have been active themselves. It was one such group, Shri Ram Sena Hindustan, that got wind of the relationship between Mullah, a Muslim, and Shweta Kumbhar, a Hindu, in the city of Belgaum. Mullah and Kumbhar lived opposite each other and became romantically involved in 2019. She would bring tiffin boxes of food over to his house, and they would go on long walks together. Though they knew their love was frowned upon, they felt no need to be discreet: their phones were filled with selfies of each other and Mullah would talk of her often to his friends. Mullah’s mother, Nazima Shaikh, tried desperately to intervene. “I told him to stay away from the girl, that it was dangerous,” she said. When he refused, Shaikh moved the family to a new house. But still the couple organised secret meetings and spoke regularly on the phone. But last year, Mullah began to get threatening phone calls, allegedly from Kumbhar’s family and then from members of Shri Ram Sena Hindustan. On 26 September, two leaders of the group summoned Mullah and his mother to a meeting on a bridge, where they warned him to end the relationship and sever all contact, or face the consequences. They broke Mullah’s sim card and deleted all photos of Kumbhar from his phone. Two days later, while his mother was away travelling, he tried to call Kumbhar again. According to police, that night two members of Hindu Shri Ram Sena Hindustan were paid by Kumbhar’s family to murder their daughter’s Muslim lover. They allegedly stabbed him to death, then transported Mullah’s body to the railway tracks in Khanapur, where they dismembered it to make it look like he had jumped in front of a train. Ten people have been charged, including at least two known members of Shri Ram Sena Hindustan and Kumbhar’s parents. Ramakant Konduskar, the founder and leader of Shri Ram Sena Hindustan, denied any involvement of his organisation in the killing. “Those who were arrested were doing great work for Hindutva [Hindu nationalism] and that’s how they got trapped in this case,” he said. Konduskar alleged there was “big conspiracy of conversions happening across the country”, and said that while Mullah’s case was “tragic … everyone should love their own religion and not act against the religion of others”. Shaikh said she would fight for justice for her son until her last breath. “How are there such hard-hearted people in this world? He didn’t do any wrong to anyone and yet they cut him into pieces,” she wept. “I cannot sleep, I cannot eat, my son’s image is always with me.” Mohammad Sartaj Alam contributed reportingLike many middle class Chinese, the 26-year-old banker from Beijing spent the first two weeks of January celebrating the new year. She visited Dior, shopped at Walmart and lunched at Quanjude, the city’s best-known Peking roast duck restaurant. One evening, she watched a standup comedy show. And on one weekend, she drove with friends to a ski resort on the outskirts of the capital. Last week it was announced she was Beijing’s Omicron “patient zero”. Authorities released a detailed account of her itinerary dating back to 31 December, and her mundane – if a little extravagant – lifestyle became the talking point of China. Authorities also noted that she had been triple vaccinated with Sinovac. In a country striving to “eliminate” coronavirus, this meant that more than 13,000 people, and all the places visited by the young woman in Beijing – including the ski resort – have been swiftly tested. Her block of flats and workplace were also sealed off. In press conferences, officials urged caution to residents in the city of more than 20 million as they reassured them of the efforts they were taking to keep them safe. Omicron is unlike previous variants. Chinese public health officials, like western scientists, admit it is highly transmissible and difficult to detect. At least nine cities across six provinces in mainland China have reported Omicron cases. Since 15 January, Beijing has reported fewer than 10 local infections of the Delta and Omicron variants. They are a tiny case count compared with the rest of the world but enough to raise alarm in the Chinese capital. The reporting of cases in Beijing has come less than three weeks before the opening ceremony of the Winter Olympics on 4 February. On Monday, China’s president, Xi Jinping, vowed in a virtual speech at the Davos World Economic Forum that his country would present “a streamlined, safe and splendid Games to the world”. There is a clear sense of urgency in the Chinese capital, partly because of the lunar new year celebrations, which begin on 1 February. The official holiday travel period began on Monday, and is expected to be busier than the previous two years but still nowhere near pre-pandemic levels. People have been asked not to travel, but few mandates are in place. Instead, there are myriad rules and regulations, which students and migrant workers, in particular, are furiously studying to see if they can get home for the holiday. Some worry they will be blocked from returning to Beijing after the holiday, or sent into unaffordable hotel quarantine. A 39-year-old delivery driver, who gave the pseudonym Zhang Wei, said he had heard of the calls to stay in place for the holiday but didn’t know specifics. His company has offered overtime pay and other subsidies for those who stay back and work. Zhang told the Guardian he has lived as a migrant worker in Beijing for 14 years, and sometimes wouldn’t get home for a year, but this year will be the third year in a row he hasn’t made it home for Spring Festival. “Of course I miss [my family], but my job requires me to stay here, I don’t have any solutions,” he said. “My home is close to Xi’an, and Xi’an has a serious situation. If we pass by Xi’an, our health code might become yellow and we might have to be quarantined. There is a lot of inconvenience, but (the policy) is necessary.” The outbreak was scary, he said, but he thought it was being well controlled in Beijing. Authorities are showing little tolerance, suspending flights and rail routes, and cancelling Olympic ticket sales for the general public. Some cities and provinces have also banned some entrants coming from virus hotspots, while others have enacted mandatory testing, entry applications, or other measures. “There have been no epidemics in the places I’ve stayed or the street I live on, and I’ve done a nucleic acid test more than 10 times,” said one netizen hoping to travel home from Shaanxi province. “Why can’t I go back yet, still?” On Monday, Beijing authorities blamed the city’s first case on a package from Canada and urged citizens not to order goods from abroad, a claim that public health officials in Ottawa and numerous scientists dismissed as “extremely unlikely”. Regardless, officials went on to say they had found the virus on six other packages sent from Toronto. It is still unclear whether Beijing will avoid an outbreak such as in nearby Tianjin in the next few weeks. Instead, it once again puts China’s zero-tolerance Covid containment strategy under a renewed international spotlight. In the past two years, this controversial method achieved much success – although the personal and societal cost was high. “[The] detection of Omicron variant in many cities in China including Beijing shows how difficult it could be to maintain the zero Covid policy,” said Prof Jin Dong-yan, of Hong Kong University’s School of Biomedical Sciences. Without changing course (and it is probably already too late before the winter Games), experts expect more extreme measures to be announced in the coming weeks. Earlier this month, the Beijing municipality’s traffic management authority asked people to stay away from the special vehicles used to ferry athletes to and from the Winter Olympics venues in the event of a car incident. Jin said that because the winter Games would be conducted in a “bubble” – meaning athletes will not be allowed to leave venues and tickets will only be distributed to a selected few – Omicron “might not affect the Winter Olympics significantly”. In the long run, however, the zero tolerance policy is “not sustainable and unnecessary, and the arrival of Omicron might make it even more challenging”, he said. “But China is too big a ship to change direction. It does not have the wisdom or capability to do it as neatly as Hong Kong or Taiwan. It is challenging and costly either to maintain it or to give it up.” Chen Xi, a public health expert at Yale school of public health, said that although China kept insisting on the “zero Covid” policy, the authorities were also hedging their bets. “Many think China is only using the zero tolerance policy, but in my view, it is also waiting and seeing,” he said, adding that Chinese experts have realised the nature of the disease is also evolving. “In fact, a number of Chinese thinktankers are now watching closely to (see) what extent this new variant would result in the damage of the health system, and how prepared China would be in meeting the challenge should it spread,” he said. “It is important to have such data before Beijing eventually decides to gradually open up.” In the last few weeks, Chinese experts have been urging citizens to receive their booster jabs. In a widely publicised speech early this month, Zhang Wenhong, one of China’s best-known infectious diseases experts, explained why vaccines helped reduce hospitalisation and death. “We should allow arguments over inoculation, but we should also realise that the role of the vaccines should not be underestimated,” he told an audience in Shanghai. “If we do not actively get vaccinated and build a strong immunity barrier, we’d return to the pandemic that occurred in 1918.”Papua New Guinea has repealed the death penalty 30 years after reintroducing it, with prime minister James Marape saying it was “not an effective deterrent to serious crime”. Offences such as treason, piracy, murder – including sorcery related violence – and aggravated rape will now be punishable by life imprisonment without parole or parole after 30 years. The last execution in Papua New Guinea took place in November 1954 in Port Moresby. The country abolished capital punishment in 1970 but reintroduced it in 1991, though there have been no executions since then. In 2013, Papua New Guinea took steps to revive capital punishment, broadening the number of crimes to which it could be applied and also amending legislation to include harsher punishment for other crimes. Presenting the bill to parliament, justice minister Bryan Kramer said there were 40 prisoners on death row. But he said the state lacked the “necessary administrative mechanisms and infrastructure” to carry out the penalty in a humane way. Marape said the death penalty had “been in our laws for many years, but consistent with other global trends and studies, it is not an effective deterrent to serious crime and offences. “For us as a Christian nation, in my view – the notion of ‘thou shall not kill’ still prevails.” God should be the judge, he said “Instead of the death penalty, offenders will serve life sentence without parole – I think this is better.” Members of the Catholic church, which has previously spoken out against capital punishment, welcomed the repeal. “The Catholic church in PNG has always opposed and still stands opposed to death penalty for it being un-Godly and unchristian, inhumane, morally wrong and against the inherent human right to life of every person,” Paul Harricknen, president of the Catholic Professionals Society, said. “If we claim to be a nation of Christians we have to walk the talk. Our laws must reflect moral and Christian values, and death penalty is against that.”It’s the coldest night of the winter. Just hours ago, the world was agleam with wet cold, now – with the dark – it’s solid cold. Things that rustled now rattle, and the grass is in a beautiful rigour of felty frost. It catches the moonlight and sparkles, a miracle that turns the colourless and drab suddenly starkly beautiful under the light of the dark. Clear winter nights like this are wonderful for stars. That, and to just go out and feel the cold and its tight silence around you. I stand and breathe deep, exhaling stiff, granular steam. And I start to feel it as it works its way in. Fingers, feet, nose. Then deeper, like an alarm of rising volume. Stand still enough for long enough and it takes hold of your core, a sickly pain, that – left long enough – will stop your life. In my life I’ve been hypothermic, been frostnipped, yet still crave cold places and seasons. I feel the cold more than I used to. I have to walk quicker, and dress thicker, to stave it off. But it’s one of the reasons I love Britain: that I can stand in the same place at the poles of the year breathless with either heat or cold. Stark nights like this scratch any winter blues to raw white, a kind of elemental reset, however modest. There is cold that is invigorating, restoring. Then there is cold that is a warning. Your body keens with it, reeling from an assault it can’t deal with for long. Find shelter. Get warm. It’s an anxious feeling, but a good one. A perspective. Some associate the cold with a sensory numbing; to me it’s the opposite. It’s an affirmation of feeling. The frost is so bright in the moonlight that my eyes can’t adapt for the stars. The ground is shimmering more than the sky, and the cold is becoming enough, now. So I go back across the grass, each blade a sculpture that cracks underfoot. It feels almost wrong to walk on it. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryAfter remaining Covid-free for the entirety of the pandemic, Kiribati has reopened its borders – only for two thirds of the passengers on the first international flight to arrive in ten months to test positive for the virus. The island nation is now set to impose a four-day lockdown from Monday after the virus was found to have spread into the community. All 54 passengers, 36 of whom were diagnosed with Covid after arriving from Fiji last Friday, have now been quarantined and are recovering well, according to authorities. But after a security guard at the quarantine centre also tested positive on Tuesday, the island nation introduced a two-week curfew and other public health measures such as mandatory mask-wearing, social distancing and vaccine passes for travel outside of the capital, Tarawa. The security guard and two of his close contacts were also quarantined while his home village was placed under a two-week lockdown. A further two positive cases were detected in the community on Thursday, prompting the government to announce that a full lockdown would begin on Monday, with schools closed and people only allowed to leave their homes for essential services. News of the Covid-positive arrivals and the security guard caused locals to panic, especially as it was leaked to the public rather than being officially announced. “As parents, we are worried about our children because unlike us, they are unvaccinated and have no access to one [a vaccine] on the island,” said Kareaua Nawaia, a 32-year-old schoolteacher and father of three. The arrival of Covid-19 was inevitable, he noted, but added that the timing was avoidable considering Fiji is battling a third wave of the coronavirus. Others expressed concern about the delay in imposing the lockdown. Dr Tabutoa Eria, the first person to receive the Covid vaccine when it arrived in Kiribati in May 2021, wrote on Facebook that it “might [be] too late if you [the lockdown] come next week. Our beloved n beautiful pple pliz avoid unnecessary movements. Virus won’t move if we don’t.” Questions have also been asked about how the passengers contracted the virus. All had been in pre-departure quarantine for two weeks before the flight and had undergone regular testing. They were only allowed on the flight after returning negative tests. Last month the Kiribati government said that 93.4% of the population aged 18 and over has had their first dose of Covid vaccine but only 53.1% had had a second dose.Former soldier Ben Roberts-Smith has lost a court bid to have his former wife questioned about allegations she accessed his private emails, with a judge ruling his case relied upon “possibilities and suspicions” that were in many cases “ill-founded”. Roberts-Smith was ordered by the federal court justice Robert Bromwich to pay the costs of Emma Roberts, his former wife, in Friday’s judgment. The former special forces soldier had been seeking to have Roberts cross-examined about whether she had accessed emails from a joint account the couple both had access to when they were married. The couple separated in January 2020. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Roberts-Smith argued confidential information of his had been obtained by Roberts from the email account and given to media organisations he is suing for defamation in separate court proceedings. In those proceedings, he claims a series of reports published by the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times in 2018 are defamatory because they portray him as someone who “broke the moral and legal rules of military engagement” and committed war crimes including murder. Roberts-Smith has consistently denied the allegations, saying they were “false”, “baseless” and “completely without any foundation in truth”. The newspapers are running a truth defence to their reporting. Roberts-Smith had wanted Roberts to be cross-examined about the email address, but also to provide a new affidavit to the court about every person she had given access to the account, and every person to whom she had disclosed the contents of the account. He had also applied to have Danielle Scott, a close friend of Roberts, and Scott’s husband added to the court proceedings. Roberts and Scott are both expected to be called as witnesses by the newspapers in the defamation case. But on Friday, Bromwich ruled that Roberts-Smith had provided little evidence to justify his application. “The material relied upon goes no further than bare possibilities and suspicions, with many such assertions in relation to Ms Roberts being shown to be ill-founded as against her, and equally ill-founded as against Ms Scott,” the judge said. Roberts-Smith said in his affidavit that the email account that was the subject of the court case had been set up in December 2012 to handle paid public speaking engagements through a company known as RS Group. Roberts-Smith, his accountant and Roberts, as directors of RS Group, all had their own individual email accounts, but also had administrator access that allowed them to read all emails that came to RS Group accounts. Roberts-Smith said in his affidavit that after the publication of the alleged defamatory articles, he no longer received requests for public speaking engagements but continued to use his personal RS Group email address from the end of 2018 until about 20 April 2021. He said this included corresponding with his legal advisers in relation to the defamation proceedings and the Afghanistan inquiry being conducted by the inspector general of the Australian defence force, and corresponding with people from his employer, the Seven Network, “all of which was confidential and some of which included legal advice”. But Bromwich said the media outlets in the defamation hearing had not included any material in their case that had come from Roberts, and that the examples Roberts-Smith had provided of correspondence between Roberts and Scott – which he argued indicated the emails had been accessed improperly – were not conclusive. One such 2020 exchange, in which Scott tells Roberts she has found four chapters of a book Roberts-Smith wrote and a “graphic email” from his ghostwriter, referred not to Scott having access to the email account, Bromwich found, but to her finding copies of emails that Roberts had sent her months previously. “The inference sought to be drawn that this statement was a reference to a privileged document was weak to non-existent, whereas the explanation that Ms Roberts gives is logical and coherent and supported by the terms of the email chains produced, which I am satisfied are authentic for the reasons already given,” Bromwich said. “This conclusion also bolsters the reliability of Ms Roberts’ affidavit evidence and correspondingly detracts from the reliability of Mr Roberts-Smith’s affidavit evidence.” Bromwich did find that Roberts had accessed the account on one occasion after they had separated that had not been disclosed in her original affidavit – when she had opened an email sent to Roberts-Smith regarding a purchase he had made with airline loyalty points. Bromwich accepted that she had accessed the account and the email for legitimate reasons and had been “candid” in disclosing how this occurred and why she shared the contents of the email with Scott. The case is listed to return to court again for a management hearing on 28 January, with the defamation trial, which has been delayed by the pandemic, expected to resume on 2 February.If you happened to be gazing idly from a window of New York City’s J train crossing the East River on the Williamsburg Bridge, most days between the summer of 1959 and the autumn of 1961, you might have glimpsed a lone saxophonist huddled into a cranny of the gigantic steel skeleton. Travellers on the footway might have got close to the sound of him, too: an astonishing tumult of fast tumbling runs seeming to echo the chatter of the wheels on the subway tracks, honking low-tone exclamations exchanged with the hoots of the riverboats, snatches of blues, pop hits, classical motifs, calypsos. Few witnesses to those torrential monologues will have shrugged him off as just another busker; this was an intuitive master of his instrument who, for some reason, had chosen to tell this multitude of stories to the sky instead of a rapt roomful of fans. “What made me withdraw and go to the bridge was how I felt about my own playing,” reflects that saxophonist today, 91-year-old Sonny Rollins. “I knew I was dissatisfied.” He climbed the steep iron steps within two blocks of the apartment he shared with his wife, Lucille, at 400 Grand Street in Manhattan, and was thrilled by the space, light and noisy solitude they led to. Rollins was 28 and already one of the undisputed giants of the subtle and sophisticated modern-jazz advances known as bebop that had taken off in the 40s – even though Miles Davis, John Coltrane and Ornette Coleman were close on his heels with radical new approaches to how melody, harmony and rhythm could dance spontaneously together. Between 1956 and 1958, after a series of brilliant small-band albums including Saxophone Colossus and Way Out West, Rollins was acclaimed by the New Yorker’s Whitney Balliett as “possibly the most incisive and influential jazz instrumentalist since Charlie Parker”, while the jazz/classical musicologist Gunther Schuller wrote that the thematic fertility and coherence of the young genius’s off-the-cuff improvisations “held together as perfect compositions”. In the summer of 1959, though, Rollins disappeared from the radar and stayed off it for the next two years – instead playing the saxophone on the bridge day and night, rain or shine, in solitary sessions of sometimes 15 hours or more. This month is the 60th anniversary of his return to the recording studio, when he entered RCA Victor’s Studio B in New York on 30 January 1962 with a classy rhythm section and an even classier frontline partner in Jim Hall – one of the subtlest jazz guitarists of the era. That January session, and another a fortnight later, produced Rollins’ eagerly awaited comeback album, The Bridge. Down the phone from his home in upstate New York, Rollins sounds as sprightly as he has in the handful of conversations we have had down the years – always curious, sharp of memory and generous about everyone who makes music. He hasn’t played the saxophone since 2014, due to a respiratory condition. But memories of the long days and changing seasons on the bridge are vivid, as are the reasons that propelled him there, when logic suggested staying in the public eye. “I was getting a lot of publicity for my work at that time, but I wasn’t satisfying my own requirements for what I wanted to do musically,” he says. One of his neighbours at the time was an expectant mother, so “there was an immediate reason, too: it was difficult to practise a loud horn like the tenor saxophone in my apartment without disturbing somebody”. Rollins had withdrawn from jazz before, in the early 50s, when heroin addiction had taken him into a stretch of hard-labour rehab at the Lexington Narcotics Farm in Kentucky. In 1956, the year after he got clean, the exultant Saxophone Colossus session emerged. So Rollins understood the liberating potential of focused, relentless hard work, away from gigging and hanging out. But he also knew how fresh and different the new music of Coltrane, Coleman and Davis was sounding by 1959 (the year in which those three made the groundbreaking albums Giant Steps, The Shape of Jazz to Come and Kind of Blue) and felt he needed to provide answers of his own. Did he worry about the disappointment his withdrawal might bring to his fans? “Am I playing music for other people, you mean?” Rollins inquires. “Yes I am, in a way. But I’m playing for myself. I have to sound good. I don’t want to make my public feel I’m great if I don’t feel like that. Also, I’ve always loved practising – as much as I did performing. Wherever I was, on tour or whatever, I always wanted to find some place to practise, because that’s in my DNA, to keep improving myself.” Every scrap of music Rollins heard from his youth in jazz-steeped Harlem onwards seemed to get stored in the random access memory of his mind, to be inverted and reshuffled on the fly in performance. His neighbourhood friend Thelonious Monk would smuggle him underage into clubs, he would pass the world-famous Cotton Club on his walk to school, and he would internalise it all, plus snatches of his siblings’ classical practice, jukebox hits and more. Reappraising and digging into all that material in his head, away from the pressures of gigging and travel, seems to have been a trigger for Rollins ascending to the bridge. “I just happened to be out walking and I saw some steps and I thought: let’s see what’s up there,” Rollins says. “And when I got up to the top, I just saw all this fantastic open space. No one was up there. It was busy, sure – the subway trains and cars were going over and the boats going underneath – but there weren’t many people walking on it in those days; it’s much busier now. There were a lot of pillars and abutments back then, where I could find spaces where people couldn’t see me, though they could hear me. The only people who could see me were the few who were walking across the bridge. And not many of them would stop to talk. I guess they mostly thought: who’s that crazy guy?” Presumably calls of nature and inhospitable weather must have intervened now and then? “Well, I would play for a long time every day, often 14 or 15 hours. Of course, sometimes I’d come down to go to the bathroom, or I’d go to a bar I liked where I might have a cognac, but then I’d go right back up. If it was cold, I’d play with gloves on; that was not a problem. “It was so wonderful to be so close to the sky up there, any time of year. Maybe this might sound a little bit corny to people, but it was a spiritual feeling to me. Years later, I remember playing an open-air concert, somewhere in Buffalo or Maine, and I looked up at the sky and felt that communion with some kind of spiritual element. It felt great to me – that distance thing, reaching out to something beyond the people.” Rollins felt ready to return to the stage in autumn 1961, concerned that Lucille was bearing the brunt of supporting them both in her secretarial job at New York University. When The Bridge came out the following year, it didn’t reveal the radically reinvented Rollins, possibly leaning toward free jazz, that some of his admirers were anticipating. But nonetheless, this was not the same Rollins as the ruggedly freewheeling one of three years earlier. His own compositions, the staccato, exclamatory John S and the balefully stripped-down title track, mixed brittle short-note themes (resembling percussion patterns) with clusters of dense melody, opening out into improvisations that suggested his rival Coltrane’s Giant Steps had not gone unnoticed. But his handling of the 30s Billie Holiday ballad God Bless the Child harked back to the muscular lyricism of the tenor sax pioneer Coleman Hawkins, albeit with a characteristically Rollins-spiced sardonic bite. His tonal range seemed broader, his ear for telling detail sharper. Rollins then made some uneven but intriguing recordings for the free-jazz-oriented label Impulse! in the mid-60s, before taking a second sabbatical in 1968-71 for philosophical study, Zen meditation and a retreat to a monastery in India. As he entered his 40s, the restless self-inquisitor then seemed ready to concede a middle ground between his own improvisational wilfulness and his audiences’ hopes for a catchy tune. From the early 70s to his retirement in 2014, Rollins explored bop, swing, funk, Latin and Caribbean music, striding the world’s sold-out concert stages with “the greatest living improviser” emblazoned on the posters outside – a line endorsed by seamlessly flat-out, unaccompanied sax improvisations that would pull cheering crowds to their feet. No more than a handful of jazz musicians since the emergence of the genre in the early 20th century had enjoyed such acclaim. Seemingly unstoppable, Rollins hurtled on into his 80s, but, although he endured the initial effects of the rare lung-scarring disease pulmonary fibrosis, he was finally forced to concede in 2014. I ask him if he had considered less full-on approaches to performance at that point. “In my case, it was that I couldn’t play at all,” he says. “Blowing the horn made me sick. Believe me, I tried to play for a long time before I realised I just couldn’t play any more. “People suggested electric instruments, but I just wanted to blow into the horn the way Coleman Hawkins did, Charlie Parker, John Coltrane, Lester Young, all of these great people whose music still makes them feel alive to me, even though they’re not here in the flesh. And I had that for a good portion of my life and I have accepted it now. But at first I was very distraught. It took me quite a while to find a way where I wouldn’t end up in the insane asylum. Because all I ever wanted to do was play. It took me a while to find another reason for living, and I found it in meditation and eastern philosophies.” Was the thought that he had given so many people pleasure, and inspired many fine musicians to play, a help in this search? “Well, if somebody has heard me playing and it gave them an inspiration to do something, then I’m happy about it for them,” Rollins says. “But I’m not happy about it for me, because I’ve always just been trying to get my act together, so to speak. You know what I mean? But, of course, I realised that I had to be grateful that I’ve had the opportunity of playing for a long time in some of the greatest music of my era, and that perhaps there are people whose playing I maybe inspired somehow, so I shouldn’t be mad at the world because I had to stop. So I was eventually able to deal with it, and my meditational practices and spiritual interests did help me not to feel sorry for myself.” As we part, I ask a cheesy question I know that, as a believer in reincarnation, he will have been asked many times: does he want to come back as a musician in his next life? This occasions his deep, rumbling chuckle. “I try to envision the eternity of the universe,” Rollins says. “I guess that’s bigger than thinking of coming back as a musician again, maybe next time around just playing a little better. I think it’s that this life made me think more about what it means to be a human being, a good person. I was taught the golden rule as a boy: do unto others what you would want them to do unto you. “I didn’t always do that when I was young. In the jazz world back then, Charlie Parker was into drugs – and a lot of people that were following him started to use drugs because he did. That was the worst thing that Charlie Parker felt about himself; it was what destroyed him. He was so torn up by all the young guys that were following him into using drugs. I know that, because I experienced it from him. “But I think, while a lot of us did stupid things, once you’re playing music, there’s something special you’ve been given by the gods above, or whatever it is.” Like Rollins on that bridge, his peers also were playing to the sky. “I’ve heard people saying: ‘No, he’s not a good human being,’ about some of the musicians I’ve known, but I never found that. Every one of them – Monk, Miles, Coltrane – was good to me, and I realised that they were all spiritual people and great human beings.”Picks of the week Wild Things: Siegfried &amp; Roy In 2003, the stage career of flamboyant German illusionists Siegfried and Roy was halted when one of their tigers nearly killed Roy in front of a 1,500-person audience. This excellent eight-part series goes into depth on the details of that night, as well as profiling its subjects’ outrageous career in compelling detail. Think cheetah smuggling, tigers in swimming pools and the most bizarre police investigation you’ve ever heard of. Alexi Duggins Conflicted This hugely insightful, engaging podcast about the Middle East returns after a two-year hiatus to reopen its discussion on Afghanistan. With one of the hosts being an al-Qaida jihadist turned MI6 double agent, it’s packed with incredible, eye-opening detail. Just don’t expect it to flatter the US and UK. AD The Roxane Gay Agenda Fans of Hear to Slay will be glad that cut-to-the-chase cultural commentator Roxane Gay is back with a solo offering. She bills it as “the bad feminist podcast of your dreams”, and with frank, much-needed conversations on race, pop culture and politics with passionate guests, she’s going to deliver. Hannah Verdier Stephen Fry’s Inside Your Mind “Off-white, rubbery, wrinkled like a walnut and about the size of a small melon” is Stephen Fry’s first impression of the brain in his 12-part series devoted to the mysterious organ. As he explores further, he has many questions to answer on evolution, gender and consciousness, but he does know the brain weighs the same as a MacBook Pro. HV Fairy Meadow Journalist Jon Kay first heard about the Cheryl Grimmer disappearance case while covering the story of Madeleine McCann. “In some ways the cases are hauntingly similar,” he says. This eight-part series sees him travel to Australia, where three-year-old Cheryl vanished on a beach while out with her family in 1970. It is a deeply sad but fascinating listen. Hollie Richardson Producer pick: Lacey &amp; Flynn have Sex Chosen by Elena Morresi In the pilot of their podcast, Lacey and Flynn talk about creating something new, not porn or sex education. ‘Porncation’ is the neologism they land on while they record themselves having sex in their living room. At the start of episode 17, Lacey gives a trigger warning, and after listening and skimming through all 38 episodes of the podcast so far, I wish it had come earlier. Lacey and Flynn Have Sex is about heteronormative sex. They speak of feminine and masculine energy, caveating that this is not gender based. In this relationship, though, it does appears to be. Lacey, the cis-female in the marriage, shames herself for not matching her husband’s libido; “poor you” she says at one point, when discussing turning her husband’s advances down, and cis-male Flynn accepts his heroism in standing by her while missing out on orgasms across their 10 year relationship. This red flag has dragged the podcast to the bottom of my listening list. But here are some other observations: the podcast can be cringey with new-age rhetoric and challenges to modern medicine, it is peppered with adverts promoting their pay-to-attend courses, the audio quality is perfect, and let’s face it, sex sells. Normalising sex is healthy, and Lacey and Flynn’s teachings definitely entice many listeners and probably de-stigmatise talking about sex. But before you delve in, approach with caution, fact check, and heed my trigger warning. Talking points Who says that being a librarian isn’t a cutting-edge, tech-focused job of the future? Certainly not the occupants of what might be one of the coolest-sounding jobs we’ve ever heard of: podcast librarians. It’s a role involving organising, categorising and helping users discover podcasts – like a normal librarian, but with audio. And in the last couple of weeks, podcast discovery service Podchaser, appointed one of their very own. The occupant is seemingly the second ever holder of the job title, following on from Ma’ayan Plaut, who had the same job at podcast promotion company RadioPublic from 2016-2019. Why not try: Evil Genius With Russell Kane | Our Voices Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureHundreds of NHS consultants are shareholders in profit-making joint ventures with private healthcare firms, in arrangements that have generated more than £1bn in revenues since 2015, it has emerged. The Centre for Health and the Public Interest (CHPI), an independent thinktank, has identified 481 consultants in England with shares in 34 private ventures set up in partnership with providers ranging from the huge US healthcare firm HCA to Specsavers opticians. The vast majority of these consultants – 73% – are NHS doctors. In a report published on Friday, CHPI claimed the arrangements were often opaque, and that the financial incentives created by these joint ventures could lead to conflicts of interest. It is calling on regulators to investigate, saying the Covid-19 pandemic has “turbo charged” the share of NHS budgets spent in private clinics. “The large number of consultants who own shares in private hospitals through joint venture arrangements and the very large financial benefit which they derive from these arrangements is a significant matter of public interest,” said David Rowland, CHPI director. The report found no evidence of wrongdoing, and there were no instances of patients being put at risk. But Rowland said lack of scrutiny and public understanding of these arrangements meant there was “potential for abuses to occur”. Between 2015 and 2020, the last full year for which accounts are available, joint ventures with consultants generated nearly £260m in operating profits. While the majority of this cash went to the private firms, consultant shareholders extracted an estimated £31m in dividends, CHPI said. The average dividend was £11,600 a year, but the highest earning consultants were estimated to have received £172,000 a year. These dividends were paid on top of any fees for treating private patients and NHS salaries. Some consultants received no dividends, but CHPI said this was because many of the joint ventures were less than three years old and do not yet pay out to shareholders. The number of joint ventures is increasing, as more private healthcare companies enter the UK market. The fast-growing Australian firm GenesisCare, which specialises in cancer clinics, has set up three joint ventures with 41 consultants. Genesis is owned by investors including the US private equity firm KKR and the Chinese state conglomerate China Resources. “The effect of joint ventures could be to pull consultants away from NHS work,” said Rowland. “There’s a finite pool of consultants to do all the hip operations, all the cancer care, there isn’t another pool out there that comes with the private sector. “By virtue of doing more private care at the expense of doing NHS care, you drive up waiting lists and the consequence is that you create more demand for private care. It’s a negative loop from the perspective of the patient and the NHS, it’s a profitable, positive loop from the perspective of the companies and the consultants.” Delays in NHS treatment have hit record levels during the pandemic, with 6 million people in England now waiting for routine hospital treatment. Many NHS trusts are turning to the private sector to help bring down waiting lists, and private hospitals are increasingly looking to pick up NHS work. “The Covid pandemic has ‘turbo charged’ these strategies,” the report claimed. Private hospitals received more than £2bn from the NHS in the year to March 2021, as ministers encouraged the use of private facilities. Up to £10bn has been earmarked for the private sector to deliver NHS services over the next four years. CHPI expressed concern about conflicts of interest after finding some NHS trusts paid for services with companies that have joint ventures with their own consultants. The thinktank, which is not politically affiliated, is calling for a regulatory overhaul, with responsibility for policing the financial arrangements of medical consultants handed to the Care Quality Commission (CQC). One of the private healthcare firms that has received NHS cash while running joint ventures with consultants is HCA, which is the largest private provider in the UK. NHS hospitals employ 342 consultants who are members of 15 separate joint ventures with HCA. Those ventures have paid out nearly £26m in dividends to doctors since 2015. After HCA, the group with the second-largest number of joint ventures is the US-owned Aspen Healthcare, which runs private hospitals across the UK. It has five joint ventures, with 51 consultants. Specsavers has established five joint venture arrangements with 18 NHS ophthalmologists through its subsidiary company Newmedica. CHPI compiled the numbers using accounts filed at Companies House by private healthcare providers and the transparency data, which they are required to publish by the Competitions and Markets Authority. The thinktank’s report calls on the public spending watchdog, the National Audit Office, and NHS England to examine the “full extent” of taxpayer money flowing to consultant joint ventures, and the potential conflicts of interest. A spokesperson for HCA Healthcare UK said: “Our work to support NHS trusts is entirely separate to and independent of any co-investment consultants may have with us in any of our private clinics or practices. Any suggestion that the two are linked is wholly inaccurate and misleading, as is any suggestion that HCA UK incentivises doctors to refer into our hospitals.” They added: “We work with NHS trusts on an individual basis and in response to their requests for support.” All companies named as holding joint ventures with NHS consultants were contacted for comment. Circle Health Group, which acquired BMI Healthcare in early 2020, referred queries to the industry body, while Spire Healthcare declined to comment. An Aspen Healthcare spokesperson said the company complied with the regulations set out by the CQC and the CMA. A spokesperson for the Independent Healthcare Providers Network, an industry body, said: “As CHPI make clear, there is absolutely no evidence that joint ventures put patients at risk or that that any wrongdoing has arisen through joint venture arrangements. Additionally, GMC [General Medical Council] guidance clearly states that healthcare professionals in both the NHS and the independent sector should not allow any financial interests to influence the care they provide to patients.” A spokesperson at the Royal Marsden NHS foundation trust said: “Consultants with a private practice at the Royal Marsden are required to disclose any conflicts of interest and only refer patients to other providers if there is a clinical need to do so.”Train announcements are to be given a formal hearing by government officials so that those deemed “repetitive and unnecessary” can be axed. Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, has commissioned a cross-industry review and called for a “bonfire of the banalities”. Announcements that are tipped to fall foul of Shapps’s cull include instructions to passengers to have their ticket ready when leaving the station, as well as public address calls to keep the volume down in designated quiet carriages. Limits for the frequency of announcements will also be set. Shapps said: “Train passengers are all too often plagued by an endless torrent of repeated and unnecessary announcements. “That’s why I’m calling for a bonfire of the banalities to bring down the number of announcements passengers are forced to sit through and make their journey that little bit more peaceful.” The Department for Transport (DfT) said it would ensure passengers continue to receive important information, and officials making the changes would work with accessibility groups. However, early indications are that some of the biggest bugbears will remain, if they are deemed to play a “safety critical role”. That could include “See it. Say it. Sorted”, widely regarded as one of the most irritating announcements, but commissioned and launched by rail ministers in conjunction with British Transport Police in 2016. The DfT said the move to control onboard announcements was part of the Williams-Shapps plan to improve the rail industry for passengers – although review chair Keith Williams also found that railways were bedevilled by government micromanagement. Jacqueline Starr, of the Rail Delivery Group, representing operators, said: “We know people want the most relevant and timely messages on their journeys and to help with this, train operators are continuing their work to improve customer information, including cutting unnecessary onboard announcements.” Labour said the move showed Shapps was out of touch with priorities. Louise Haigh, shadow transport secretary, said: “Tannoys aren’t the only thing that have fallen silent – ministers have literally nothing to say about the Conservatives’ cost of living crisis facing passengers as they hike up rail fares this year. “What hard-pressed passengers want to hear more than anything else is a plan to help them.” Meanwhile the RMT union questioned the need for the review. A spokesman said: “The last thing we get is passengers complaining they have too much information. “You do need to be careful about assuming everyone’s heard it all before. We’d be deeply concerned if this was another ruse to remove staff from trains as part of the government’s wider cuts agenda.” • This article’s headline was changed on 21 January 2022 to clarify that the plans relate to England only, not the whole of the UK as an earlier version indicated.The first few minutes of As We See It (Amazon Prime) show a remarkable demonstration of how auditory processing can be difficult for some people on the autism spectrum. Harrison, a man in his 20s, is carefully coaxed out of his Los Angeles apartment by his live-in aide, Mandy. She calls him on his phone, so that she can talk him through his walk around the block, and slowly, carefully, he begins. Traffic might be a little loud, she warns him. He worries that a woman with a crying baby is looking at him. With each step, Mandy reassures him that it’s fine. And then a dog appears, starts barking, and chaos ensues. Harrison flees back indoors. Each noise and potential trigger is cleverly pushed in the mix, to give viewers who may not understand Harrison’s fears a chance to experience them. This new drama follows three roommates on the spectrum, all played by actors who are on the spectrum themselves. Their families pay Mandy (Sosie Bacon, last seen as the mother of Kate Winslet’s grandson in Mare of Easttown) a salary to live in as their support worker. Harrison barely leaves the flat, while Jack has a job as a programmer, and Violet works at a fast-food restaurant (it’s a real chain, and it gets a lot of mentions). All three are living with Mandy in order to work towards greater independence, and all have goals they are supposed to achieve each week, whether that is making new friends, or asking how a relative is feeling about a difficult emotional situation. This is a well-done, soapy drama that has its heart fully on display. Based on an Israeli series, On the Spectrum, it was developed, produced and partly written by the writer of American football drama Friday Night Lights, Jason Katims, whose son is autistic, and the passion behind the project is evident. It is very sweet. Mandy loves her roommates, so much so that her re-application to medical school is forcing her to question her priorities. Should she pursue her dreams, or is she happier where she is? Will she follow her boyfriend to university, or will she find love in closer quarters? There’s certainly a spark between her and Violet’s harried brother Van. But its warmth is part of a far more complex picture, and this is careful to strike a balance between its more saccharine instincts and what its three leads have to navigate on a daily basis. Harrison begins to make friends with a young boy living upstairs; the boy’s mother sees this in an understandable, but inaccurate, light. Jack is anxious and blunt with his assessments of certain situations, telling his boss that he believes him to be of inferior intelligence when asked to redo his work. And Violet wants a boyfriend, as she tells Van, in great detail, but her literal-minded approach to finding love leads her into scrape after scrape. The only solace in one episode comes from a robotic vacuum cleaner. It makes the point, again and again, that the world is not always built for people on the autism spectrum, and that sometimes life will be tough. People are often cruel, both deliberately and inadvertently. One of its most important scenes, I think, shows Van losing his patience with his sister, whom he loves very much, berating her for not being “normal”. He immediately regrets it, of course, but it shows that this is not just pushing a simple idea of what it would take for that situation to change. Netflix’s comedy Atypical recently came to an end after a charming run, Love on the Spectrum was a lovely look at dating with autism, but it feels like the perfect time for a drama like this to come along. (It appears to be billed as a comedy on Amazon, but, based on the first three episodes, I’m not sure that sets a fair expectation.) Yes, it can be a little sweet at times, but it is so generous and genuine that it is hard to judge it for that. As fans of Friday Night Lights may well already know: clear eyes, full heart, can’t lose.In January 2021, as London buckled under the weight of treating thousands of Covid patients, the medical directors of the main NHS hospitals wrote to their medical consultants, pleading with them to stop doing non-urgent private work and to turn their attention to high-priority NHS cases. Under the 2003 NHS consultant contract, there should have been no reason to issue such a plea. NHS consultants can only do paid work in the private sector with the permission of their NHS employer and only if it does not cause a detriment to NHS care. In doing so, the medical directors publicly acknowledged something many people have long suspected, namely that the lure of highly lucrative private work, particularly in large cities, can pull a sizeable number of NHS consultants away to focus on those who are prepared to pay. As NHS waiting lists have soared during the pandemic, so has the demand for fee-paying private work, with waiting lists for treatment now also occurring in the private sector, a further pull on the loyalties of NHS medical consultants. In 2021, for the first time since 1948, more orthopaedic activity – such as hip replacements – took place in private hospitals than in the NHS. This fact can only mean that last year a significant number of consultants were doing more hip and knee replacements privately than for their NHS employers, since there is only one pool of (mainly) NHS consultants to treat both NHS and private patients. It also means that since the pandemic hit, access to certain operations is being determined not by need, but ability to pay. The private hospital companies have for many years clocked the need to keep NHS consultants close to them, showering them with lavish corporate hospitality and offering them financial incentives, such as share ownership schemes and joint ventures to encourage them to do work in their hospitals. Under such schemes the more private work they do, the more the business benefits and the greater the dividend pot which the consultants can draw from. Similar schemes are also in operation in the more controversial area of private cancer care. The current strategy of many of the healthcare multinationals operating in the UK is to exploit the dire state of NHS cancer services and to use financial incentives to lock in NHS consultants to do work for them. It is a strategy that is succeeding – in 2017 cancer care became the biggest earner for private hospitals in London for the first time. Yet the growing role of for-profit cancer care in the UK is something parliament and the public are yet to engage with. As cancer treatment is given to patients who are often very vulnerable, the existence of the profit motive in this form of care requires a robust system of regulation to protect patients from harm. The very worst form of abuse happened in for-profit cancer care when the now jailed breast surgeon Ian Paterson deliberately misdiagnosed cancer in hundreds, potentially thousands of mainly female patients and as a result carried out mastectomies and other surgery for financial gain. However, to date, the government has made only the very scantest of efforts to reform private healthcare in the light of this scandal by failing to act on the Paterson inquiry recommendations. That NHS consultants are benefiting financially from the demand for private treatment caused by the pandemic is a highly sensitive issue the medical profession too often dodges. But the backlog of NHS care can only be addressed if NHS consultants are compelled to give priority to NHS patients and if the financial incentives used by multinationals to encourage them to do private work are fully disclosed with any potential conflicts of interests affecting patient care firmly prohibited. • David Rowland is director of the Centre for Health and the Public InterestEmergency, a comedy thriller about three college friends – two Black, one Latino – navigating a downpour of bad optics and decisions, traffics in several established lanes: the raucous one-last-epic-party romp a la Booksmart, where everything that can escalate will in the course of a single night; the hijinks-filled buddy road trip comedy albeit this time around campus; and the socially aware thriller in the shadow of Get Out, where every move is weighted by the looming threat of anti-Black racism in America. In other words, a ride somehow both warm and stressful, and an inviting mashup of familiar beats made fresh by a trio of grounded, endearing performances. The film, adapted from the 2018 Sundance short by screenwriter KD Dávila and director Carey Williams with distribution by Amazon, opens in party comedy mode: best friends Kunle (Donald Elise Watkins) and Sean (RJ Cyler) determined to become the first Black students at fictional Buchanan College to complete a “legendary tour” of exclusive frat parties. The two are a classic yin-yang: Kunle the strait-laced and straight-A striver studying biology (the “Barack Obama of fungus”, Sean ribs), Sean the laid-back stoner with zero future plan but a tight party schedule. They’re also minority students in a mostly white space. Dávila has a sharp ear for the self-aggrandizing paternalism of liberal arts colleges – in the opening minutes, a white British professor of “blasphemy and taboos” repeats the N-word in class and dials in on Kunle and Sean for their response in a “safe space”; after class, a white classmate offers to take up their “cause” at student council. But where some campus films could turn didactic, Emergency smartly sticks to the bristled, deep friendship behind the partying: an aimless Sean wants to make his mark on Buchanan before he leaves, and Kunle, secretly considering a PhD at Princeton that would separate them, doesn’t want to disappoint Sean. When the two return home to pre-game and find a white girl (Maddie Nichols) passed out facedown in their living room, Kunle, the voice of reason, suggests they call 911. Sean, stoned and buzzed, balks at calling authorities. Two Black guys and their stoner Mexican-American roommate Carlos (Sebastian Chacon) with an unconscious blonde girl in a house that reeks of weed? What are the odds they’ll be believed? The specter of police misreading a situation to potentially dangerous ends is a Chekhov’s gun – the more strenuously the trio tries to avoid it through increasingly paranoid but well-intentioned means, the more they court suspicion and reason to find themselves apprehended by officers likely to afford them the least possible generosity. Compounding the risk is Maddy (Sabrina Carpenter), a ticking timebomb of concern, self-absorption and explosive indignation, looking for her lost sister Emma with friend Alice (Madison Thompson), who is white, and Alice’s white-passing party crush (Diego Abraham) succinctly described as “from my Arab-Israeli conflict seminar!” Dávila’s script and Williams’s tight direction deftly render the group as both a lifeline on a collision course with the boys, and a trap – their concern is legitimate, their biases dangerous. By the film’s midpoint, the accumulation of miscommunications, wrong place wrong time coincidences, and simply idiotic decisions begins to wear; Emergency is a comedy of errors whose steep price never escapes awareness, including that Emma clearly needs help, and at a certain point I found myself silently pleading with Sean, Kunle and Carlos to just call for help already. But thanks to standout lead performances, you can never fully blame one character for holding out on sense for plot’s sake. Cyler, as Sean, embodies a different type of American Blackness than Kunle, the son of immigrant doctors dressed somewhere between country club and substitute teacher. Sean is full Gen Z, slang-inflected speech and vape in hand, and Cyler plays his pitched, paranoid awareness of the racial sinkholes in every situation as a bruise clearly formed by personal experience. A lesser film would have careened into the sensational or bluntly traumatic as the plot steps on the gas and both the optics and Emma’s prognosis worsen, but Emergency sticks the landing. Like Get Out, it relies more on the specter of anti-Black policing than actual violence; simply visualizing a potential tragedy, understanding its possibility, is enough. There’s still catastrophe. In the film’s climax, Williams assumes Kunle’s perspective for a gut-punch, slow-motion shattering of innocence. Watkins is excellent at conveying the nuclear fallout of Kunle’s disillusionment; in a standout conclusion, Williams hovers the camera on his face, and the waves of emotional devastation – humiliation, shock, fear, disappointment at the futility of truth against decades of biases – are their own kind of searing death. But darkness and light go hand in hand in Emergency, which also features one of the sweetest straight male friendship heart-to-hearts I’ve seen on screen in awhile. Emergency toggles between styles, from playful to suspenseful and back, but Kunle and Sean remain consistent anchors throughout, as two young men carrying the weight of prejudices but buoyed up by a different inescapable, mutable force: a best friendship in flux but in no need of a 911 call. Emergency is showing at the Sundance film festival and will be released on Amazon later this yearOnly two of the government briefings held at the height of the coronavirus pandemic were led by a female politician, and in both cases it was the home secretary, Priti Patel, a report into gender representation across the UK’s top jobs has shows. The 2022 Sex and Power Index, compiled by the Fawcett Society, a charity campaigning for women’s rights, showed equality is still “decades off”, as men continue to dominate the top ranks of law, politics and business. The biennial report also highlighted the complete lack of women of colour in senior roles and what it lamented as a “glacial” pace of change. Women account for just 8% of FTSE 100 CEOs, none of whom is a woman of colour. Jemima Olchawski, CEO of the Fawcett Society, said: “The pandemic has laid bare deep-rooted inequalities across the UK. Yet it is women who have borne the brunt and often largely invisible from debate and excluded from decision-making.” Of the 56 daily press conferences, when the government makes significant announcements about coronavirus, 43% featured an all-male lineup with no female politician or expert present, the index showed. Only a third (92 of the 274) of members on Covid-19 advisory boards are women. Research by Kings College also found female voices to be missing from public debate. Its analysis showed that women made up only a fifth of the top 20 most frequently mentioned British politicians in media coverage of the pandemic. Nevertheless, in journalism, the proportion of women editing national newspapers has doubled from last year to 42%. While the gender split in parliament has barely progressed – the proportion of female MPs inched from 32% in 2017 to 34% at the 2019 election – outside Westminster, there have been “seismic shifts” towards equality. In Scottish parliament, women now make up just under half of MSPs under the leader, Nicola Sturgeon. At the May 2021 election, Kaukab Stewart became the first woman of colour elected to the Scottish parliament, and Pam Gosal was elected as the first Sikh MSP. The six minority ethnic MSPs make up 4.5% of the Scottish parliament, which is in line with the percentage of minority ethnic people in the country’s population. “Men continue to dominate most senior roles,” Olchawski said. “That’s not only bad for the women who miss out on opportunities to thrive, but it’s bad for us all, as we miss out on women’s talent, skills and perspectives. “What is most alarming about today’s data is that it shows an unacceptable lack of women of colour in senior positions. It is appalling that in 2022, women of colour are missing in leadership positions from some of our key institutions and organisations.” Women are outnumbered 2:1 in the 5,166 positions of power in society. Only two justices on the 12-member supreme court are women, and no person of colour has ever taken up the role. The next tier down is more representative – a quarter of the 37 court of appeal judges are women. “Put simply, this gives the lie to the idea that we live in a meritocracy or a society of equal opportunity,” Olchawski said. “Structures, culture and often individuals continue to create barriers that prevent women and women of colour in particular rising to the top.” Responding to the findings, the Fawcett Society called on the government to set targets to increase the number of women in senior roles and improve pay gap reporting, including reducing the threshold for reporting to employers with 100+ employees, and publication of mandatory action plans.Virgin Orbit has conducted its third successful commercial launch using a rocket strapped to the left wing of a modified 747 aircraft. The flight took off on 13 January from the Mojave Air and Space Port, California, at 1339 PST (0939 GMT). It then flew to the launch site above the Pacific, about 50 miles (80km) south of California’s Channel Islands. Virgin Orbit’s LauncherOne rocket weighs about 26 tonnes. Once the aircraft, named Cosmic Girl, was in position and final checks were complete, the rocket was released from the wing. Five seconds later, it ignited and climbed out of the Earth’s atmosphere. About 55 minutes later, the seven small satellites in its nose cone were deployed into orbits approximately 310 miles in altitude and inclined to the equator by 45 degrees. The satellites are mostly experimental devices to test novel communication, navigation and propulsion techniques, detect space debris and monitor agriculture on the Earth. Four have been flown as part of the US military’s Space Test Program. The other three are from commercial enterprises. In light of this success, Virgin Orbit plans five more launches this year, including two in summer that will take off from Newquay airport in Cornwall, England.Members of a cross-party China human rights group have accused Britain’s cybersecurity agency of “failing to respond” with help after their website was taken offline this week in an attack they fear came from Beijing. MPs from the Inter Parliamentary Alliance on China (Ipac) said the incident took place on Tuesday, days after the group had said publicly it was “deeply disturbed” by reports that an Anglo-Chinese lawyer had been trying to improperly influence parliamentarians in the UK. They complained the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) did not engage or show interest in investigating the episode, the second time in under a year the website of the campaign group of international parliamentarians had been knocked out. Conservative MP Tim Loughton said: “It is unacceptable that the NCSC is failing to respond to reports of suspected cyber-attacks from Chinese state backed actors. The British government must be doing its utmost to protect parliamentarians and activists working on these issues from further attacks and intimidation.” Ipac’s website was taken offline for three hours by a denial of service attack – where a host is flooded with requests and can no longer function. But without any help from NCSC, Ipac will not be able determine who was behind it. Labour’s Afzal Khan said: “In light of the cyber-attack and last week’s events, it is clear that this government must act to ensure its cybersecurity is up to scratch. The government cannot ignore those at the sharp end of the Chinese Communist party’s intimidation campaign.” NCSC said it was aware of the denial of service attack, and had made contact with Ipac. As far it was aware the issue had been resolved. A spokesperson added that “Ipac have not directly raised any concerns about the NCSC’s response to this issue but we would welcome any further engagement with them.” Last week, MI5 took the rare step of issuing an “interference alert” to MPs and peers, in which the spy agency accused a lawyer, Christine Lee, of seeking to improperly influence parliamentarians on behalf of China’s ruling Communist party. Lee had been photographed meeting former prime minister David Cameron in 2015 and had given £584,177 to help fund the office of Labour MP and former shadow cabinet member Barry Gardiner. Members of Ipac include legislators from the US, India, Japan, France and the UK, and the group aims to encourage democratic countries to give “due prominence to universal human rights” in their dealings with China – and to insist that Beijing hold to the “standards of the international legal order”. Beijing has responded with hostility. Five British members of the group and several more from the EU have been sanctioned by Beijing for speaking out about the treatment of the Uyghur Muslim minority, including Loughton and Labour peer Helena Kennedy. Last October, Ipac held a meeting on the margins of the G20 summit in Rome to protest against the presence of the Chinese foreign minister, Wang Yi, and urge leaders not to let China off the hook over human rights abuses in return for cooperation on the climate crisis. China normally denies allegations of hacking or cyber interference, accusing the US and its allies of engaging in smear campaigns, although the topic is a subject of growing diplomatic and intelligence agency concern in the west.Death in Paradise 9pm, BBC One If the idea of jumping out of a plane makes you feel queasy, look away now. Tonight’s episode of the beloved detective drama follows the case of a skydiver who appears to have been murdered in mid-air. In order to solve the case, Neville (Ralf Little) and his team must explore the cut-throat world of social media – and we all know it’s far from paradise there. Hollie Richardson Monty Don’s Adriatic Gardens 7pm, BBC Two It’s the last in the series of Don’s journey around the Adriatic Sea. The final leg takes him to Greece’s greenest island, Corfu, where he visits a spectacular garden made by an Englishman. Then, via Athens, he signs off from Hydra – an island to which he has a personal link. HR George Clarke’s Amazing Spaces 8pm, Channel 4 This week’s impressively compact gaffs include an old ambulance turned into a mobile ski chalet by Kay from Stockport, and an oil-rig lifeboat owned by a man who wants his partner to live on it with him, but will need to complete a fine renovation first. Plus, Will Hardie’s tour of the UK takes on an African flavour in the Midlands. Jack Seale A Discovery of Witches 9pm, Sky Max There’s a lot of zany fun to be had as this supernatural series nears its end. Matthew (Matthew Goode) and Marcus (Edward Bluemel) hope to connect with the latter’s children in New Orleans, while Diana (Teresa Palmer) and Phoebe (Adelle Leonce) hunt for the Book of Life’s missing pages at the British Library in London. Henry Wong New York Homicide 9pm, Sky Crime This isn’t the first crime documentary to bolster the idea of New York City as a neon melting pot teeming with fascinatingly gritty villains and cops, but it’s unusually direct about it. The premise is simply that it rounds up some of Manhattan’s worst murders, making the case that they couldn’t have happened anywhere else. JS The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Kenneth Branagh, actor and director of upcoming film Belfast (sure to be an awards magnet), joins Graham in the studio tonight. Plus, live music from Scottish singer Emeli Sandé, who performs her new single, Brighter Days. HR Film choices Munich: The Edge of War (Christian Schwochow, 2021), Netflix We are in prime Robert Harris territory here. The author’s interest in the second world war and the spy game is served well by Christian Schwochow’s film of his novel, as George MacKay’s fictional civil servant Hugh Legat crosses paths with real figures, principally Neville Chamberlain. Revolving around the prime minister’s dealings with Hitler on the eve of the conflict, it’s a stirring tale of derring-do and political manoeuvring, with Legat and his old friend, German foreign office official Von Hartmann (Jannis Niewöhner), trying to expose Hitler’s belligerent ambitions. Simon Wardell A Hero (Asghar Farhadi, 2021), Amazon Prime Video This involving Iranian drama deservedly won a major prize at Cannes last year for its director, Asghar Farhadi. Amir Jadidi’s sign painter Rahim, an ambiguous smile forever flickering on his face, is in prison for non-payment of a debt. While on temporary release, he’s given a handbag containing gold coins found by his secret girlfriend. After returning it to the owner and being publicly feted for the selfless act, he discovers that no good deed goes unpunished, as his little white lies – told to simplify matters – put him into a hole he can’t dig himself out of. SWTop story: PM says he has seen no evidence of threats Happy Friday morning to you all, Graham Russell here to bring you a selection of today’s news and other treats. The row over allegations that Tory whips threatened rebel MPs to secure their support looks set to continue apace after Labour called for an investigation and a report that some rebels were considering releasing texts or recordings of their conversations. The Guardian has been told of at least five MPs who have expressed concerns about the government threatening funding for their constituency or encouraging damaging stories to be published in newspapers. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said the alleged threats to force support for Boris Johnson were “disgusting” and Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, said Johnson was “now in full scorched earth mode”. Johnson has said he had “seen no evidence” of threats, and a No 10 spokesperson said: “If there is any evidence to support these claims, we would look at it very carefully.” Allies of Johnson believe a no-confidence vote after the forthcoming release of Sue Gray’s report on the “partygate” scandal is now almost inevitable, though some are increasingly confident he will survive it. One cabinet minister said: “When you start to put it to people that the prime minister who got us this huge majority might have to go over cheese and wine – well it starts to look ridiculous.” Liz Truss, a potential leadership contender who is in Sydney to promote defence ties, said overnight that Johnson had her “100% support”, though she sidestepped a question about whether she would stand in any leadership contest. Amid the continuing speculation, our political correspondent Peter Walker has put together a handy guide to the competing, but sometimes cooperating, factions inside the Tory party. And sketch writer John Crace homes in on the baby-faced assassin who has Johnson in his sights. * * * Private concern – More than 300 NHS consultants have shares in profit-making joint ventures with private healthcare firms, sparking concern that the financial incentives they create could lead to potential conflicts of interest. The thinktank that gathered the data, the Centre for Health and the Public Interest, found no evidence of wrongdoing but urged regulators to investigate the often opaque arrangements, saying the pandemic has “turbo charged” the share of NHS budgets spent in private clinics. The arrangements have generated more than £1bn in revenues since 2015, it has emerged. * * * Ukraine warning – Liz Truss has invoked the Soviet-Afghan war and conflict in Chechnya to warn Russia that any invasion of Ukraine would only lead to “a terrible quagmire and loss of life”. The foreign secretary urged Vladimir Putin to “desist and step back from Ukraine before he makes a massive strategic mistake”. Her comments come after the US accused Russian intelligence of recruiting current and former Ukrainian government officials to take over the government and cooperate with a Russian occupying force. * * * ‘Shameful shambles’ – The state pension payment system “is not fit for purpose”, a committee of MPs has said in a scathing report, after it emerged that it had underpaid an estimated 134,000 pensioners, mostly women, a total of more than £1bn. The public accounts committee lambasted the Department for Work and Pensions for its “complacency” and accused it of not having been “sufficiently transparent” to parliament about the problems. In February 2021 the Guardian featured the case of Angela Jenner, now 79, who was getting only 86p a week as her state pension but, after making a claim, saw this increased to £80.45 a week, and also learned she was owed £42,700. * * * ‘I’m gutted’ – Adele has postponed her three-month residency in Las Vegas, which was due to start today, saying the production has been “absolutely destroyed” by Covid-related delays. Clearly upset, she apologised profusely in an Instagram video to fans who had already made the trip to see her. The residency, titled Weekends with Adele, was intended to celebrate her highly lauded album 30, which topped music charts in the UK, Australia and the US. “I’m gutted and I’m sorry it’s so last minute,” Adele said. “We’ve been awake for over 30 hours now and we’ve run out of time.” * * * Denied a platform – Transport secretary Grant Shapps has called for unnecessary train announcements to be cut as part of a “bonfire of the banalities”. Announcements that could be culled as part of a review include instructions to have your ticket ready when leaving the station, as well as calls to keep the volume down in quiet carriages. Limits for the frequency of announcements will also be set. Today in Focus podcast: The fight for the future of the BBC The latest skirmish between the BBC and the government is part of a running debate over who the BBC serves, which dates back to the organisation’s earliest days. But this time, the stakes are higher. Lunchtime read: India’s ‘love jihad’ conspiracy theory turns lethal Sameer Parishwadi turned over the body of his cousin Arbaaz Aftab Mullah and saw that his hands were tightly bound. “I knew then that this was 100% a murder,” he said. “He had been tortured and then cruelly killed.” Mullah, a Muslim man from the southern Indian state of Karnataka, was allegedly killed for falling in love with a Hindu girl. Interfaith marriages have always carried a social stigma but, in recent years, since the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party came to power, such unions have become a dangerous flashpoint due to a discredited but pervasive conspiracy known as “love jihad”. Sport Liverpool surged into the final of the Carabao Cup and will face Chelsea at Wembley next month after a brace from Diogo Jota put paid to Arsenal. Jürgen Klopp hailed Jota as “world-class” as the club seeks to win the trophy for a record ninth time. The final isn’t for over a month, so here are 10 things to look out for this weekend. Former world No 1 Victoria Azarenka has become the first player through to the last 16 of the Australian Open after despatching 15th seed Elina Svitolina 6-0, 6-2 on Friday, keeping alive her hopes of winning a third title at Melbourne Park. Current No 1 Ash Barty and Naomi Osaka play their third-round matches later, while Rafael Nadal headlines the evening session in the men’s draw. Thursday was a day of disappointment for the UK, with losses for Emma Raducanu and Andy Murray – here’s what they had to say. Tahlia McGrath, the 26-year-old all-rounder who has displaced Ellyse Perry in the Australian lineup, has guided her side to a nine-wicket victory in the opening encounter of the Women’s Ashes. On Thursday she cemented her status as one of the world’s premier all-rounders, with an unbeaten 91 off 49 balls and a return of three for 26 with the ball. “Something just clicked tonight,” she said. In rugby, Henry Slade appears likely to take part in England’s entire Six Nations campaign after he was declared available for Exeter’s trip to Montpellier this weekend. Slade was among England’s best performers in the autumn. There were fears the away matches against Italy and France could prove tricky for Slade, who has previously expressed hesitancy over coronavirus vaccines, but Exeter chief Rob Baxter has hinted the 28-year-old centre is now fully jabbed. Business Britain’s wind and solar farms might pay back almost £800m to consumers by the end of the winter after gas and electricity market prices rocketed above their set subsidy levels. The move could help reduce household power bills by £27 a year, but that could have been a lot more if the renewable energy rollout had taken place sooner, the industry has said. The government is to invest £100m to help Britishvolt build Britain’s first large-scale “gigafactory” in north-east England. The company is hoping to build the plant rapidly with the aim of supplying a large part of the UK car industry’s needs. In China, Evergrande’s finance woes continue, with news that bondholders have hired a law firm and threatened action after receiving “little more than vague assurances of intent” from the property developer. The pound is buying $1.359 and €1.200 at time of writing. The papers The alleged intimidation of some Tory MPs is covered by several of today’s papers. The Guardian says “Tories ‘using dirty tactics to get MPs to back Johnson”, focusing on Christian Wakeford saying he was told he would not get a school for Radcliffe if he “did not vote in one particular way”. The main picture shows a bevy of commuters as the return to the office looms large. The i says “Tory civil war over future of Johnson” and carries its own polling showing 71% of the public believe the prime minister will not make it to the next election. The Mirror focuses on Wakeford’s claim, alongside the headline “lowest of the low”, while the Metro says “Blackmailed to back Boris”. The Times looks ahead with a report that some Tory rebels are considering publishing exchanges they have had with the whips to back claims of threats. “Tory rebels retaliate in row over ‘blackmail’” is the headline. Also, a very large picture shows the Duchess of Cambridge clearly enjoying holding a cockapoo. Others look to Covid-related stories. The Telegraph says “Schools defy PM over masks in class” alongside an image of a dejected Emma Raducanu after her Australian Open exit. Columnist Fraser Nelson’s view, that “Boris deserves one last chance”, features across the top. The Mail focuses on union anger at Johnson’s efforts to get civil servants back at their desks as an example of the return-to-the-office ethos. The Express reports millions could be in line for help with their fuel bills under a “radical idea” being considered by Rishi Sunak. The FT looks further afield, with the headline: “Biden hardens warning to Russia after Kyiv says no attack is minor”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.TikTok wrote to Australian political parties in November last year warning them against attempting to pay influencers or engage in any other sort of advertising on its platform, Guardian Australia can reveal. Just months out from the next federal election, the letters were sent after Crikey reported a US-based marketing agency had emailed a campaign brief to a TikTok user offering $300 for the user to make and post a video on the theme of “Scott Morrison is too slow and always late”. When the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, was asked on Thursday about the November report, he told radio station 6PR he wasn’t familiar with it. “Well, it is the first I’ve heard of it. But it wouldn’t be too hard for people to post TikTok videos along that theme. Because that is a theme that is characterised by this government. That is what we hear back,” he said. He argued politicians wouldn’t need to pay people to post that kind of content. “You don’t need any incentive to encourage people to put things on social media of a partisan nature against the PM, against me, against Clive Palmer, against anyone. That’s one of the facts of what happens with social media.” While politicians are allowed to use TikTok, they are not allowed to advertise on the platform under TikTok’s branded content policy. Unlike other platforms such as Facebook and YouTube, TikTok does not allow advertising for political content. “Our advertising policies are strict. On TikTok in Australia, we do not allow ads for alcohol, gambling or political parties and causes,” Brent Thomas, TikTok’s director of public policy in Australia and New Zealand, told a parliamentary committee on social media and online safety on Thursday. This policy was questioned at the hearing by United Australia Party leader, Craig Kelly, whose party has been spending millions in advertising on other platforms. Thomas replied that TikTok is primarily an entertainment platform, and while political commentary is allowed, political advertising is not. “We want to make sure that as long as the content that is uploaded adheres to our community guidelines, it’s absolutely OK. But where it is a paid political advertising component? That’s where we draw the line.” “So I could advertise McDonald’s, but I couldn’t advertise the Republican party in the US?” Kelly asked. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Our advertising policies are transparently explained and there are a number of different aspects … which we don’t allow advertising for; that includes alcohol, gambling, weight loss programs and supplements and political advertising,” Thomas replied. TikTok has invited the committee to the company’s transparency centre to get an understanding of how the platform recommends videos to users. However, deputy chair of the committee, Tim Watts, called on the company to provide reports on what videos are getting the most engagement in Australia, similar to the reports available through CrowdTangle about Facebook. People who accept money for advertising political parties in any media in Australia without adequate disclosure or political authorisation can be fined up to $26,640 by the Australian Electoral Commission.Scott Morrison has so little love for the scrutiny of parliament that his government scheduled as few as 10 sitting days before the May election. Anyone watching the Prayer and Pushback web conference on Friday, a beauty parade of anti-lockdown, anti-vaccination mandate MPs and senators drawn from the crossbench and Coalition backbench, could see why. In addition to Labor questions on free rapid antigen tests in question time, Friday’s event confirmed Morrison can look forward to a bin fire of pandemic policy dissent when parliament resumes in February. The One Nation leader, Pauline Hanson, and senator Malcolm Roberts both said they would refuse to vote for Coalition bills until the federal government intervenes to roll back state-based vaccination mandates and border restrictions. In November, One Nation’s anti-mandate bill attracted five Coalition senators to cross the floor. On Friday, Hanson said Liberals Alex Antic and Gerard Rennick intended to continue their stand not to support government bills, which Rennick confirmed to Guardian Australia. Minor parties used the event as a curtain-raiser for fresh demands leading into the election, in a bid to win support from voters who feel, despite the surge in Omicron cases, hospitalisations and deaths, that governments have overreacted. Hanson wants a royal commission into the Covid response (so far so good, more scrutiny couldn’t hurt given the stonewalling of the Senate Covid committee) … because, she says, Australians have been “lied to” about the number of Covid deaths. Oh dear. The United Australia party leader, former Liberal MP Craig Kelly, was serving Drain the Swamp vibes with his promise to “clean out” government bureaucracies within 24 hours of election. Then he demanded a bill of rights to stop “tinpot dictators, the premiers, egged on by the PM” from ever taking away freedom again. The Nationals MP George Christensen, who earned a rare rebuke from Morrison this week for his advocacy against giving children Covid-19 vaccines, promised he would continue to “prod the powerful” after he leaves parliament at the next election. “I’m not leaving politics … we’re all involved in politics as citizens. I’m going to be in the fray. I was a journalist before I was in politics … I’ll probably step back into that in the future, in some way, shape or form.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The fearmongering and exaggerations about life-saving vaccines piled up. Christensen cited “anecdotal but not verified” reports of adverse events in children in Australia before arguing that “one death” from vaccines is too many because “healthy children don’t die of Covid-19”, it’s more like a case of the “sniffles”. Roberts said people were being injected with vaccines that “can kill them and [are] killing them”. This is despite just 11 deaths linked to Covid-19 vaccines in Australia after 46.1m doses which, along with lockdowns, have given us one of the lowest death rates from Covid in the world. The Nationals senator Matt Canavan was a relative voice of reason, noting he had received the vaccine and it had helped reduce hospitalisations and deaths. He took aim at Labor for labelling him an anti-vaxxer “for the crime of standing up for others’ rights to work”. Antic was on hand to warn Australia was “drifting into soft totalitarianism”, reiterating his belief he needed to draw a “line in the sand” by crossing the floor on vaccine mandates. Antic accused the “mainstream media” of not telling the truth about the Covid pandemic, arguing it was important to develop new platforms to communicate with supporters. Pat Mesiti, the former Hillsong preacher who organised the event, noted it was supposed to be going live on YouTube, Facebook and Instagram Live. Instagram Live wouldn’t start the broadcast and Facebook shut it down mid-stream. Christensen said this reinforced the need for supporters to follow him on Gab, Parler and Telegram, and for parliament to support his private member’s bill against de-platforming. Kelly had come fresh from the parliamentary inquiry into social media which he has used to take Google and Facebook to task over the removal of his party’s videos from YouTube and his ban from Facebook for pushing unproven treatments for Covid-19. For one section of voters, the election promises to be a contest of narrowcast views about their greatest fears of pandemic politics and continued loss of freedom. But when parliament resumes, the Star Wars Cantina bar of characters will share a stage with Morrison, and he’ll have to answer for their views and the long stretches of inaction against them.Tonga has turned back an aid flight from Australia due to a positive Covid case on board, despite assurances from the Morrison government that humanitarian relief from the volcanic eruption and tsunami could be offered in a Covid-safe way. Tonga is Covid-free and has a strict border control policy, requiring contactless delivery of aid that began arriving by plane on Thursday. The Australian aid flight left Brisbane on Thursday afternoon but was turned around mid-flight after being notified of the positive Covid case, an Australian defence spokeswoman said. All crew had returned negative rapid antigen tests before departure, but PCR tests later showed the positive result. The supplies were moved to another flight that took off on Friday. The Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano eruption last Saturday triggered a tsunami that destroyed villages, resorts and many buildings, and knocked out communications for the nation of about 105,000 people. Three people had been reported killed, authorities said. On Monday the Australian minister for international development and the Pacific, Zed Seselja, told the ABC that Australia had developed protocols “for how humanitarian supplies can be delivered in a Covid-safe way” by minimising person-to-person contact. Seselja committed to “comply with whatever requirements the Tongan government has for anyone entering the country”. “We absolutely respect the need and the desire for the Tongan people to make sure that they don’t have Covid come into the country, even if it’s through humanitarian flights,” he said. Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, spoke to his Tongan counterpart, Siaosi Sovaleni, on Wednesday, reassuring him that Australia was “placing the highest priority on delivering support in a Covid-safe way”. Almost a week since the eruption, Tongans are struggling to find clean drinking water with their island homes shrouded in volcanic ash. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “We are cleaning the ash and have been since Monday,” Branko Sugar, a 61-year-old who runs a bottle shop and fishing charter business from the capital Nuku’alofa, said. “Everything is so dusty, and we are running out of water,” he said over a patchy telephone line. “We only have the tap water, and it’s been contaminated. We’re just cleaning, cleaning, cleaning and can hardly breathe for all the dust.” The first aid flights from Australia and New Zealand landed in Tonga on Thursday with much-needed supplies of water for sanitation and hygiene as well as shelter, communication equipment and power generators. A New Zealand maritime sustainment vessel HMNZS Aotearoa carrying 250,000 litres of water and able to produce 70,000 litres per day through a desalination plant, was expected to arrive on Friday. Australia’s HMAS Adelaide en route from Brisbane is due in Tonga next week. United Nations spokesperson Stéphane Dujarric said in a briefing that Tonga had asked for urgent assistance and the agency is in close contact with the authorities. “Assessment teams have reached most parts of the country, including remote and isolated islands,” Dujarric said. “We remain seriously concerned about access to safe water for 50,000 people throughout the country. Water quality testing continues, and most people are relying on bottled water,” he said. Some 60,000 people have been affected by damage to crops, livestock, and fisheries due to ashfall, saltwater intrusion and the potential for acid rain, Dujarric said. There are also reports of fuel shortages, he added. Australia’s foreign minister Marise Payne said on Friday cash donations to Tonga for immediate humanitarian supplies – Australia has donated $1m – would need to be followed with more substantial support for rebuilding. “The impact of this volcanic eruption and the subsequent tsunami and the damage the inundation is causing will be an ongoing challenge for Tonga, particularly in relation to infrastructure,” she said. Telephone links between Tonga and the outside world were reconnected late on Wednesday, although restoring full internet services is likely to take a month or more. Tongans have turned to social media to post images of the destruction by the tsunami and give accounts of their shock after the massive explosion. Nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center has said the force of the eruption was estimated to be the equivalent of five to 10 megatons of TNT, or more than 500 times that of the nuclear bomb the United States dropped on the Japanese city of Hiroshima at the end of World War Two.All plan B measures in England will be lifted next week, meaning an end to compulsory mask-wearing in shops, vaccine certificates for entering venues, and guidance to work from home. But are the public ready to embrace these freedoms just weeks after Covid cases in the UK hit a record high and with daily deaths higher now than when the measures were introduced? Some are likely to feel more than ready to cast aside restrictions that have been financially and personally cumbersome, while others may fear things are moving too quickly. Regardless of the range of attitudes, changing the rules will shift behaviour. “The research so far has shown that it has been rules that have been the dominant feature in driving behaviour,” said Prof Robert West, a behavioural scientist at University College London (UCL). “When you take the rules away, it won’t happen immediately, but what we’ve seen previously is a gradual erosion of protective behaviours even when attitudes are not changing that much.” West points to a steady decline in the number of people adhering to advice to wear masks once it is not longer a requirement. “People still said they thought it was a good idea, but fewer and fewer people were actually doing it.” West said that indications that the government would allow the legal requirement to self-isolate to lapse did not necessarily mean that people would jump the gun and change their behaviour in advance of this rule change. “From data earlier in the pandemic we did not see substantial rule-breaking ahead of relaxations but in any event the adherence to self-isolation requirements has been low – one of the reasons why we have done so badly in the UK,” he said. “Thinking about other relaxations of legal restrictions, such as changes to cannabis laws in the US, I am not aware of major changes to behaviour ahead of the change.” Once a certain threshold is crossed, the social norm can shift, hastening an overall change in behaviour. However, society does not move as a cohesive group, reflecting the very wide differences in risk faced by different groups and also shaped by personal experiences during the pandemic. “You’ve got many groups of people, including about a quarter who are clinically vulnerable because of their age and/or health status,” said Prof Susan Michie, the director of the Centre for Behaviour Change at UCL. “Many have stopped going out to restaurants and bars and are living very restricted lives. That’s not to do with the rules, it’s to do with the level of infection that has been allowed to surge and stay high over many months.” By contrast, Michie said, young men have been the least likely to adhere to rules and are the group most likely to shift to less cautious behaviour once rules are lifted. People also respond to messaging as well as the letter of the law. Simon Williams, a senior lecturer in people and organisation at Swansea University, said that on this front people may have been left feeling uncertain about what behaviours were now recommended. “As the government mentions, caution is still important, since, despite the positive trend, rates are still high,” he said. “However … the problem with the general advice to ‘be cautious’ is that it is too vague and conflicts with the message that is sent by the removal of all policy measures and protections. “Throughout the pandemic there has been a feeling amongst many that there have been ‘mixed messages’ – often a result of policies and messages not matching up.” Prof Stephen Reicher, a behavioural scientist at the University of St Andrews, noted that behaviour depends not just on people’s eagerness to be out and about, but also on the extent to which choices are available. If working from home is no longer government guidance, it may no longer be an option for many employees, for instance. And when the requirement to self-isolate ends in March (or before then), along with test-and-trace support grants, some of those on low incomes who relied on these payments may not feel they have a choice. “We concentrate a lot on the issue of motivation – will the public want to or not want to go out,” said Reicher. “But actually, when you say ‘it’s up to you’, it means it’s up to you if you’ve got the resources to do it; if not, bad luck.”‘We enjoyed the buzz of an office romance’ Among memories of bake sales, lunchtime walks in salubrious surroundings and debating with colleagues the optimum technique for making a cup of tea, my fondest memory of the office shall always be striking up a friendship – and subsequent relationship – with someone very special. Over a period of days, weeks and months, we bonded over shared interests and enjoyed the buzz of an office romance while being careful to maintain discretion. I sincerely hope that office romances will not become a thing of the past. We are getting married in spring. Stuart, West Midlands ‘It was years before I realised my embarrassing mistake’ Years ago, I worked for the London Evening News as an advert taker. One guy started by telling me about an amazing product that was guaranteed to help stiff joints, sore necks etc. I thought it sounded brilliant, as my mother had terrible neck problems. I asked if he would like to place a boxed advert to make it stand out and he seemed excited by this. Later that day, the sales manager flew out of his office and screamed for the person responsible for the advert. I was so pleased to tell him it was me and it was for stiff necks, but he turned scarlet and asked a colleague to take me to the ladies’ and have a word. She explained that the product was actually a vibrator, but I was young and didn’t know what that was. Nobody wanted to explain it to me and it took me years to find out – I was very embarrassed when I did! Creanna Cullen, retired, Derbyshire ‘My team had sewn up the sleeves of my jacket’ In my early 20s, I worked at a bank. I came back from lunch one day and my team members started asking if I could pop out again to get some sweets; they were feeling a bit low and chocolate or cakes would really cheer them up. I relented and took my suit jacket off my chair, put it on and promptly got stuck. At first, I was confused – I thought I must have put my arms through the lining – but when I saw all of my team laughing their heads off, it dawned on me that they had sewn up the end of both arms of my jacket. That aside, my colleagues really looked after me, always covering for me when I was feeling rough from the night before, making me home-cooked food and giving me advice on dating. I loved those days and that team. Mark Hawkins, implementation manager, Bedfordshire ‘During a difficult time, my colleagues became like family’ My favourite office memory comes from my time in Montreal. My marriage had just broken down and I was in visa hell. I don’t think I would have survived the year had it not been for my colleagues and my boss, who became like family to me during this difficult time away from my home country. I still consider several people from that office my closest friends and we remain in daily contact. We worked hard and laughed like drains. There was a true spirit of camaraderie in everything we did, whether it was laughing about an embarrassing incident or blasting Enrique Iglesias when someone’s work passed a quality check – every day was so much fun. Elizabeth Gibson, contracts specialist, Manchester ‘We never let my colleague live down the pigeon incident’ My colleague became convinced that there was a pigeon stuck inside a wall in our office. It was a listed building and we would always talk about how loud the pigeon’s “cooing” was. One day, she came into work early and, with the office being so quiet, she found the “cooing” extremely loud, so she contacted maintenance to investigate. They had a look and then called her into a corridor to show her the pigeon, sitting on a window ledge on the other side of the wall. The window was frosted and a blind had been pulled down, so she hadn’t realised that it was an external wall. We heard the maintenance person radio to say: “Yeah, well, it’s outside. I can’t do anything about it being outside.” It was hilarious – and we have never let her live it down. Charlotte, social worker, Lancashire The student was goggle-eyed at this middle-aged woman limboing under the counter’ One day, when I was working in the students’ office of a university, I was wearing a lovely green, sparkly scarf. A young chap came to the counter. As I spoke to him, I became aware that I was being pulled downwards. The man looked concerned as an unseen force began dragging me under the high counter. I looked around to see one of my colleagues doubled over laughing. As I was almost on my knees, they pointed at the industrial-sized document shredder under the counter. The fringes of my lovely scarf had gone into its rollers, which triggered the sensors to go full Jaws on me. “Do excuse me,” I said to the student, who was by now goggle-eyed, watching this middle-aged woman limbo under the counter. Fortunately, I was able to whip off the scarf and order was restored. Esther Doyle, retired, LondonBose is back with a revamp of its most popular noise-cancelling headphones, which improve the technology but keep the good bits mostly the same. The company appears to have taken an “ain’t broke, don’t fix it” approach to the new headphones, which are similar to the excellent QuietComfort 35 from 2016 but markedly different to the more modern NCH 700 that launched two years ago. The QuietComfort 45 cost £320 ($330/A$500) and are non-showy and comfortable. The design has been refined with smoother ear cushions and fewer lines and microphone holes in the ear cups for a more minimalist look, but side by side the differences with the QuietComfort 35s are subtle. The headband is now lined with smoother vegan leather rather than the suede-like Alcantara of their predecessors. The headphones are still light, well balanced and stay put on your head without needing to clamp particularly hard, aiding their long-term comfort. The construction feels robust and capable of taking a beating, similar to their longstanding predecessors that stood up very well to years of the rough and tumble of travel and my daily commute. Controls and connectivity The QC45 are a standard set of Bluetooth 5.1 headphones supporting the universal SBC and AAC audio formats, which are compatible with most phones, tablets, computers and other devices. They can connect to two devices at once, such as a phone for calls and tablet for video, and had a rock solid connection to iPhones and Android devices. You can use a cable for wired listening even when the headphones are out of battery. A sliding switch turns the headphones on and off and puts them into pairing mode, while a trio of buttons control playback and volume. A button on the left cup switches between sound modes. Unlike most high-end rivals, the QC45 do not pause the music when you take them off, however. Specifications Weight: 240g Dimensions: 184 x 152.4 x 76.2mm Connectivity: Bluetooth 5.1 with multipoint, 3.5mm, USB-C charging Bluetooth codecs: SBC, AAC Battery life: 24 hours Sound and noise cancelling All Bose headphones have a signature sound that has proven divisive in audiophile circles, typically because they heavily process sound, which means music is considered to be removed from what the artist intended. The QC45 sound generally pleasant and better balanced than rivals, producing a solid punch in the low end without it overriding other tones. Vocals are particularly clear, but the treble and highs can be over accentuated, making some punk tracks with heavy use of cymbals a little overbearing. Separation between instruments and tones is excellent, even for very complex and overlapping tracks. Despite lacking any virtual surround-sound feature, the QC45 do an excellent job of recreating the big booms, action and vocals of movies. The active noise cancelling removes more unwanted sound than almost any other set of headphones, reducing higher tones and speech more reliably and to a greater extent than most rivals. Unlike the NCH 700, the QC45 only have two sound modes: “quiet”, with noise canceling on, and “aware”, with noise cancelling turned off and the sound of the outside world piped in – useful for listing out for traffic or announcements. You cannot use them without one or other sound mode turned on. Call quality is reasonable, with my voice coming through clear if a little distant-sounding, but they let some background noise through and fall far short of the performance of the NCH 700. Battery life The QC45 last for about 25 hours of listening over Bluetooth between charges or significantly longer via cable. That’s plenty for most commutes and the longest of flights, but five hours short of their best competitors from Sony. They fully charge via USB-C in 2.5 hours, with a 15-minute charge adding up to three hours of playback. Sustainability Bose estimates that the battery will last in excess of 500 full charge cycles but it is not replaceable, ultimately making the headphones disposable. The headphones are generally repairable, and some replacement parts including the ear cushions, at £24.95 for a pair, are available. The headphones do not contain recycled materials. Bose does not publish individual product environmental impact reports but does publish annual sustainability reports. Price The Bose QuietComfort 45 cost £319.95 ($329/A$499.95). For comparison, the RRP of the Bose Noise Cancelling Headphones 700 is £349.95, the QuietComfort 35 II cost £299.95, the QuietComfort Earbuds cost £249.95, the Sony WH-1000XM4 cost £279, B&amp;W PX7 cost £349.99, Apple AirPods Max cost £549. Verdict The Bose QuietComfort 45 offer some of the very best noise cancelling and comfort money can buy. If you need a set of headphones to wear for hours on end, such as on long-haul flights or endless commutes, there aren’t many better options. They’re light, fold up for travel, feel robust, sound good, connect to two devices at once, can be used with a cable and last for about 25 hours between charges. But while that formula made their predecessors top dog in 2016, the QC45 lack the bells and whistles offered by the latest rivals at similar or lower prices, such as automatic pause, virtual surround sound, sound and noise cancelling customisation and support for higher quality audio formats. The Bose are still great but a bit pricy at RRP. They are frequently discounted so look for a deal or consider the still excellent QC 35 II, which are available for about £200. Note the battery cannot be replaced on the new headphones by Bose, ultimately making them disposable and losing a star. Pros: best-in-class noise cancelling, super comfortable, 25-hour battery life, good sound, Bluetooth can connect to two devices at once, fold up for travel, cross-platform companion app, can be used with a cable. Cons: expensive, voice mic lets in background noise, no higher-quality audio format support, no equaliser, no variable noise cancelling levels. Other reviews Bose Noise Cancelling Headphones 700 review: less business, more modern design Bose QuietComfort Earbuds review: just shy of noise-cancelling greatness Sony WH-1000XM4 review: Bose-beating noise cancelling headphonesPick of the week The Afterparty A comedy-drama from Christopher Miller (21 Jump Street) that offers a snarky take on the mystery whodunnit. Set in the aftermath of a high-school reunion, there’s been a murder but also a lot of flirting, old rivalries rekindled and amnesia-inducing levels of drunkenness. Starting with gauche, likable Aniq (Sam Richardson), Tiffany Haddish’s detective Danner interviews each partygoer in turn – including Chelsea (Ilana Glazer) and Jamie Demetriou’s Walt. It’s a little too delighted with its own conceit at times, but there’s the making of an involving through-line in Aniq and Zoe (Zoe Chao) and what happens with their romantic chemistry. Apple TV+, from Friday 28 January *** Getting Curious With Jonathan Van Ness “I still can’t believe that dragonflies have two penises.” It’s a crazy world out there, and in his podcast of the same title, this Queer Eye star has been exploring it engagingly. Transferring the formula to TV was the natural next step and the result is thoroughly watchable. Ranging from gender identity to snacks, the aesthetics of insects to the practicalities of ice dancing, his curiosities are somewhat random. But he’s funny and easy to warm to, never pretending knowledge he doesn’t have, and asking the right questions. TV as an unusually entertaining Wikipedia binge. Netflix, from Friday 28 January *** Cherry Valentine: Gypsy Queen and Proud Fans of RuPaul’s Drag Race UK will remember Cherry Valentine, who came out to the world as a Gypsy drag queen in season two last year. Cherry was born and raised as George Ward in the Traveller community in the north-east of England. However, George didn’t feel accepted and moved away, only maintaining contact with his mother. In this documentary, George is returning to his roots to see how easily queer and Gypsy identities can become compatible. Expect some painful home truths and, hopefully, a touch of redemption, too. BBC Three, from Tuesday 25 January *** Split Up in Care: Life Without Siblings An affecting documentary following reporter Ashley John-Baptiste as he gets to know his brother. John-Baptiste grew up in foster care and believed himself to be an only child until he was contacted by his sibling in his mid-20s. The film widens its perspective to show that this isn’t all that uncommon – there’s a shortage of foster carers willing to take more than one child so it isn’t always easy to keep siblings together. Alongside his own, hugely emotional voyage of discovery, John-Baptiste explores the realities of a creaking system. BBC Three, from Wednesday 26 January *** Simeone: Living Match By Match Another documentary series that treats a successful football team with an almost mystical fervour. It explores the “life, work and miracles” of Atlético Madrid’s manager Diego Simeone and is centred on his team’s La Liga triumph in the 2020-21 season. But there’s plenty of room for reflection on Simeone’s career as a famously robust midfielder, perhaps best remembered in England as the Argentinian provocateur who played a central part in David Beckham’s pivotal World Cup dismissal in 1998. Boo hiss! Amazon Prime Video, from Wednesday 26 January *** The Woman in the House Across the Street from the Girl in the Window What would you do if you were a heartbroken heavy drinker, who regularly mixed booze with pills, and you witnessed what might have been a murder? This is the conundrum facing Anna (Kristen Bell) whose dismal and repetitive life is interrupted by an apparent homicide across her suburban street. This new series works as both a mystery and an endearingly silly parody of a “woman driven mad by domesticity” pseudo-psychological drama. Netflix, from Friday 28 January *** All of Us Are Dead The latest TV sensation out of South Korea shares a certain brutality with Squid Game – and a plot that hinges round events so outlandish that no one in authority will believe they are happening. In fairness, if as a police officer you received a phone call from a teenager claiming his school was being overrun by zombies, you might be forgiven a certain scepticism. Accordingly, the handful of non-undead kids are on their own – their erstwhile classmates and teachers are pursuing them and no help is coming. Utterly daft; good fun. Netflix, from Friday 28 JanuaryFor a little over a year, America has faced a democratic crisis unlike any it has seen in recent history. As Republicans have spread lies about the 2020 presidential election, confidence in it remains staggeringly low and about 1 in 3 Americans now believe Joe Biden was not legitimately elected. Republicans who claim the election was stolen are trying to grab key election administration roles, prompting unprecedented alarm that a future election could be overturned. And after an election with record participation, Republicans have pushed a wave of new laws making it harder to vote, placing new restrictions on longstanding policies that went unquestioned for years. “We’re facing the most significant test of our democracy since the civil war,” Biden said in July. On Wednesday night, Democrats’ biggest hope of blunting that threat failed in a historic defeat as Republicans used the filibuster – a technical senate rule that requires 60 votes to advance most legislation – to block a sweeping voting rights bill from passing. For months Democrats had offered the legislation as an antidote to the anti-democratic sickness that is plaguing America. The bill would have been the most dramatic expansion of the right to vote in a generation. It would have outlawed partisan gerrymandering, protected election officials from partisan interference, required early voting and same-day registration, and restore the pre-clearance provision at the heart of the Voting Rights Act. Politically, the loss was extremely bruising for Biden, who has spent an enormous amount of his political capital in recent weeks only to end up on the losing side. And – even worse – though the measure was blocked by 50 Republicans who refused to even negotiate around it, the moment was one of clear weakness for Democrats. The party has control of both chambers in Congress yet appeared helpless as two of its conservative senators joined with Republicans to preserve the filibuster and doom the legislation. But the deeper stakes of the failure go far beyond politics. It was a moment in which an American government system, crippled by deep partisanship and an arcane rule, turned its back on a rising threat of a dangerous anti-democratic tide. It’s a moment that future historians will be mystified by, a group of scholars warned in November. “To lose our democracy but preserve the filibuster in its current form – in which a minority can block popular legislation without even having to hold the floor – would be a short-sighted blunder that future historians will forever puzzle over,” they wrote. What happens next isn’t exactly clear. Biden suggested the 2022 elections could be illegitimate absent congressional action, a claim the White House quickly walked back on Thursday. “He was explaining that the results would be illegitimate if states do what the former president asked them to do after the 2020 election: toss out ballots and overturn results after the fact,” Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, tweeted. Cliff Albright, a co-founder of the group Black Voters Matter, said the vote Wednesday was “disappointing”, but said that his group would continue to push for significant voting reforms. He noted how successful pressure from his group and others had been in getting Biden and other Democrats to support changing the filibuster and pointed out that historic past campaigns to pass the Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights Act required continued pushing after setbacks. “Those debates and those votes were important, to put them on record. So that’s a victory for movement,” he said. “I don’t think this moment will be forgotten.” Tiffany Muller, the president and executive director of Let America Vote/End Citizens United, similarly pledged her group would “regroup” and “keep going” to push voting reforms. “We’re going to take that fight to the states. And we’re going to continue to elect champions down the ballot who will prioritize our democracy, and we’re gonna make sure that we’ll hold Republicans accountable at the ballot box in 2022,” she said. “There is no doubt about it that last night’s vote makes the best option on the federal level not available to us anymore. But we’re still gonna look at ‘are there ways to get other pieces of legislation passed on the federal level?’” Politically, Democrats have pledged to fight on. Previewing what could be a midterm message to frustrated voters on Thursday, Jaime Harrison, the chair of the Democratic National Committee, said the failure in the Senate was evidence for why there needed to be more Democrats in the US Senate. “We can send more Democrats to the US Senate and give President Biden and Vice-president Harris the votes they need to pass voting rights legislation. We can show those who stand in the way of voting rights that their actions have consequences,” he said in a statement. Senator Jeff Merkley, an Oregon Democrat who laid out a plan for a talking filibuster, said in a statement he would continue to push to reform the rule. “We fell short. But this is not the end of the story,” he said. “When I came to the Senate, 48 senators voting to change the filibuster seemed like a distant dream, something that would never happen. We’re not there yet, but we’re closer than we’ve ever been.” With broad voting reform stalled, there appears to be some bipartisan appetite in congress for changing the Electoral Count Act, a confusing 19th century law that sets out the procedures for counting electoral votes. Trump’s legal team planned to use ambiguities in the law to try and overturn the election, and election scholars for years have said that it needs to be fixed. “There’s a good win there,” Manchin said after the vote on Wednesday. “I mean, my goodness, that’s what caused the insurrection.” But Democrats have rejected fixing the law alone as an acceptable solution, saying it’s unacceptable to fix the way votes are counted if the rules of voting are rigged. It would be a bit like deciding to fix an unreliable scoreboard in a game of basketball where the rules are rigged against one team. Muller also said she was skeptical of how sincere Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader, was in his wish to change the law. “We are supportive of reforming the act. But that’s not going to be nearly enough to protect voters in all of these states. It does nothing to fight back against these voter suppression laws,” she said. Meanwhile, congressional inaction is also likely to encourage those seeking to undermine democracy to be even more aggressive, Sherrilyn Ifill, the director-counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, told Congress on Thursday. “In 2021, we saw a repeat of history – a steady drip of old poison in new bottles. Whereas in a bygone era, discriminatory intent in voting restrictions was dressed up in ideals such as securing a more informed and invested electorate, the new justification is fighting imaginary voter fraud, a phantom conjured only to attack,” she said, according to prepared remarks. “With no pushback from Congress, those intent on subverting the next election by continuing to raise doubts about 2020 are becoming more brazen, not less,” she added. Eric Foner, a historian at Columbia who studies the Reconstruction era in US history, said it was difficult to predict how future historians would remember this moment. He said there were parallel moments in history when congressional efforts to protect voting rights were thwarted by the filibuster, such as in 1890 when federal voting protections backed by Henry Cabot Lodge were defeated after a filibuster in the senate. “Historically, the filibuster has been used for one reason: that is to prevent legislation supporting the rights of Black people,” he said. “Let’s not try to glorify the filibuster as having any reasonable reason for existence other than allowing a minority to rule over a majority.”FBI agents and the House panel investigating the January 6 attack on the Capitol have both learned of an alleged plan by allies of retired army Lt Gen Michael Flynn to gather “intelligence” on top Republicans to “move” them to back election audits in key states Trump lost, said ex-whistleblower Everett Stern who talked to the panel and the FBI. Stern, who runs the intelligence firm Tactical Rabbit and is a Republican vying for a Senate seat in Pennsylvania, in multiple interviews with the Guardian said two Flynn associates with the rightwing Patriot Caucus group enlisted his help in April in a scheme to seek potentially damaging information on two Republican members of Congress to prod them to back an audit of the 2020 vote that Joe Biden won. Stern told the Guardian he spent several hours in November telling House panel investigators about the alleged drive by Flynn associates who sought campaign finance and other dirt on Pennsylvania’s Senator Pat Toomey and Congressman Brian Fitzpatrick to win their support for an audit to bolster Trump’s debunked charges that Biden’s win was fraudulent. A long-shot candidate to succeed the retiring Toomey, Stern said he alerted the FBI in June when he learned more details of the bizarre drive by Flynn allies to specifically target the two Republicans, both of whom backed impeaching Trump after the January 6 insurrection. The efforts by Flynn’s Patriot Caucus allies were launched after Trump failed to block Biden from taking office, and are part of a wider drive by Trump loyalists and Flynn to help boost Trump’s political fortunes via more state audits nationwide into false charges that Biden’s win was rigged, and elect like-minded candidates in key states to top electoral offices. Stern provided text messages, emails and other documents revealing he had multiple contacts with one of the Patriot Caucus members, Velma Anne Ruth, and two other influential Flynn allies, Houston real estate mogul Al Hartman and former army Green Beret Ivan Raiklin, who were pushing audits in several key states. Stern said Flynn’s Patriot Caucus associates first approached him in Pennsylvania for possible help after an April Republican party event, and soon after told Stern in phone calls they worked with Flynn and the Patriot Caucus, and planned to recruit “former domestic and foreign intelligence officials” to facilitate their scheme. The plan by Flynn’s allies alarmed Stern, but as a former whistleblower involved in exposing a large bank money laundering scandal by HSBC in 2012, he told the Guardian he decided to play along for a few months to glean information to expose the Trump allies’ scheme. Stern expressed dismay that Flynn’s Patriot Caucus associates “don’t understand that Biden is the president. They wanted to collect information through Tactical Rabbit and my campaign” to turn up the heat on Toomey and Fitzpatrick to back an audit which Stern viewed as potentially “extortion”. Stern gave the Guardian a voice mail he received in which Hartman talked about leaning on moderate Republican “Rinos” in Pennsylvania to gain support for an audit of that state’s vote which Biden won by over 80,000, and Hartman said a similar drive in Michigan was needed. Stern said Hartman wanted to use Tactical Rabbit’s intelligence gathering tools and his campaign to dig up potentially embarrassing campaign finance information and other dirt about the Pennsylvania members, plus Republican political figures in Michigan who were also resisting audits. Hartman and Raiklin also talked with Stern about meeting Flynn, Trump’s disgraced ex-national security adviser, and proposed compensating him for his information via campaign donations, said Stern. In an April exchange of Hartman text messages seen by the Guardian, Hartman asked a Flynn scheduler to help “connect” Flynn with Stern whose Senate campaign and credentials he touted highly, calling Stern a “strong believer”, in their cause. Although Stern tipped off the FBI in June about what he deemed a threat to national security and he said he met with agents again in November, it’s not clear if his allegations are still being pursued. Stern’s allegations have echoes of Flynn’s scheming with Trump and other loyalists in late 2020 to thwart Biden’s win, efforts that included a White House meeting with Trump where Flynn proposed declaring martial law in several states Biden won and then rerunning the election there. In November, the House panel investigating the January 6 Capitol attack subpoenaed Flynn who Trump had pardoned post-election even though he had pled guilty twice to lying to the FBI during the Russia investigation. In response to the subpoena to testify and turn over documents, Flynn sued the panel but a judge quickly dismissed his lawsuit last month. John Sipher, who was in the CIA’s clandestine services for 28 years, shares Stern’s view of Flynn, who he knew in the military and shortly thereafter. “I am appalled by what he has become,” Sipher said in an email. Asked if he thought the FBI was pursuing Stern’s charges, Sipher said: “I would hope and assume they are taking this seriously.” While Fitzpatrick and Toomey were the main “targets” Stern said other Pennsylvania officials including judges were also being targeted by the Flynn allies as they sought to ramp up pressure for an audit in the state. Neither Fitzpatrick or Toomey’s offices replied to multiple requests for comment. The Patriot Caucus, a coalition of Patriot and other rightwing groups in some two dozen states with which Raiklin and Hartman have ties, according to Stern and documents, has worked with Trump loyalists like Flynn to push audits in key states Biden won, and backed Trump allies for governor, and other top posts in states like Pennsylvania and Arizona Trump lost. Flynn himself on 7 January publicly endorsed another Trump ally and election audit promoter, Doug Mastriano for governor in Pennsylvania, at a campaign rally also attended by Raiklin. Flynn has also endorsed two Trump backed candidates in Arizona: Kari Lake, an ex-Fox News figure, for governor, and Mark Finchem, a state representative who attended the January 6 Stop the Steal rally, for secretary of state. To coordinate national efforts, Raiklin and Hartman on 3 July spearheaded one of a series of “Election Integrity” calls with Trump loyalists, lawyers and donors to discuss the status of audits efforts in several states and other plans to cast doubt on Biden’s win, according to an Arizona senate document shared by the watchdog group American Oversight. “Join us every second Saturday for SITUATION UPDATES and COLLABORATION from active leaders in the election remediation process at state level – attorneys with Mike Lindell and Patrick Byrne, data analysts, state legislators, gubernatorial candidates, and grassroots activists whose goal is completing a cyber forensic audit in their state,” the Arizona document reads. A who’s who list of Trump loyalists and groups invited to join these calls included the America Project and America’s Future, both of which Flynn played key roles with as they poured some $2m into a discredited audit of Arizona’s largest county, plus the Patriot Caucus’ Velma Anne Ruth, Finchem and Byrne, the millionaire chief financier of the Arizona audit. Hartman in emails with Stern obtained by the Guardian invited him in June to attend a religious far-right meeting known as Ziklag in Dallas where he could meet separately with Flynn. Stern said Hartman told him a “private meeting was going to be arranged with Flynn” who Stern was told wanted to meet him. After indicating to Hartman he would attend, Stern opted to cancel at the last minute after his lawyer indicated there could be legal repercussions from a meeting with Flynn. “I thought it was extremely dangerous to meet with a three star general who I believed had broken the law. “They planned to give my campaign funds to help me” develop damaging information on Toomey and Fitzpatrick, Stern claimed. “It was like a wink, wink. Hartman is the man behind the curtain. He’s an operative and financier,” promoting audits. Hartman has long been a donor to the right. He is on the advisory council for the pro-Trump Turning Point USA and has been active in the conservative donor network led by oil billionaire Charles Koch. Raiklin, an army reserve officer who reportedly has known Flynn since 2014, is facing an internal army reserve investigation into possible violations of rules barring partisan political activity, according to a military official who spoke to Reuters last month. Raiklin in December 2020 outlined a wild scheme in tweets and a podcast to thwart Biden’s win, charging a vast conspiracy that included Pence, intelligence, China and Big Tech, as Reuters reported. Raiklin told Trump to “activate the emergency broadcast system” and deployed the hashtag #FightLikeAFlynn, stressing that “we the people are going to force this plan on them”. Neither Hartman or Raiklin replied to multiple calls seeking comment. A Flynn scheduler did not respond to questions for the story. Velma Anne Ruth with the Patriot Caucus, who was photographed with Stern at a June event in Pennsylvania where she wore a tank top that said General Flynn, called Stern’s charges “delusional, fabricated and defamatory”, in a text message. Stern said he shared the photo and other documents involving exchanges he had with Ruth with the FBI. Senior ex-prosecutors and intelligence officials say Stern’s allegations merit law enforcement attention. “Stern’s allegations suggest serious crimes,” said ex-prosecutor Paul Rosenzweig, who worked on Ken Starr’s team during the impeachment of Bill Clinton. “If his allegations were corroborated by extrinsic evidence they clearly would warrant investigation.” Former CIA official Sipher, who has spoken with Stern before, said: “Everett is someone with a strong sense of right and wrong, and willing to suffer the consequences of doing the right thing. We would be better served to have more people like Everett in public life.”Nestlé has withdrawn a special range of KitKats in India which featured images of sacred Hindu deities on the wrapper, after accusations of hurting religious sentiments. The limited range of the well-known chocolate bar had been launched as part of the global “KitKat travel breaks” range, where photos of artwork by local artisans were printed on the wrappers. But the Indian version of the range, which was designed to celebrate the crafts of the Indian state of Odisha, provoked an online backlash as they featured images of Hindu deities Lord Jagannath, Balabhadra and Mata Subhadra. Many expressed outrage that the wrappers might end up in “dustbins, drains, gutters” or trodden underfoot, which would be disrespectful of the gods and the Hindu faith. As Hindu nationalism has been on the rise in India, there has been a heightened sensitivity towards the depiction of the Hindu faith in the public sphere and recent accusations of hurting religious sentiments have been levelled at books, films, TV shows and advertisements. Nestlé said the intention had been to “celebrate the culture of Odisha with designs on packs representing ‘Pattachitra’, an art form uniquely identifiable by its vivid imagery”. Nestlé said that as “pre-emptive action”, it had now recalled the KitKat range from the market. “We wanted to encourage people to know about the art and its artisans. We do understand the sensitivity of the matter and regret if we have inadvertently hurt people’s sentiments,” the company said in a statement. It is not the first time the KitKat travel range has landed Nestlé in hot water. Last year Nestlé apologised for packaging that incorrectly depicted Lamjao National Park to be in the state of Meghalaya rather than Manipur, and featured a red panda, a species not found in the park.The amount of money Guatemalans living abroad send home to their families reached record levels in 2021. Remittances rose to more than $15bn (£11bn) in 2021, an increase of 35% on the previous year. The unprecedented rise prompted experts to question the political will to tackle the migration crisis when remittances from the US contribute so much to the Guatemalan economy. The Biden administration has maintained pressure on the governments of Central America to resolve the causes of migration, launching a plan to invest $4bn over four years in the Central American country, along with neighbouring Honduras and El Salvador. “[The political elite] don’t go for migration, they won’t stop it,” said Paul Briere, a former congressional representative in Guatemala who once headed the country’scongressional commission on migration. “They won’t make the effort to stop migration, they won’t make the effort to combat corruption, they will not make the effort to combat inequality, they will not make the effort to combat poverty, because they need that to be the situation. They need these people to leave Guatemala.” Guatemala continues to have an extremely low minimum wage when compared with the cost of living, forcing many to depend on remittances for survival while elites benefit from low labour costs. “The worst thing is that we are becoming a remittance dependent country,” Briere said. “It is a perverse system. [Migrants] are our largest export item, when it should be, in my opinion, an embarrassment.” “It is an indicator of the grand exodus from the country to the United States that has existed in the last 20 years,” added Pedro Pablo Solares, a lawyer and migration expert. Remittances have especially contributed to maintaining the Guatemalan economy during the Covid pandemic. In December 2021, the Guatemalan Chamber of Industry issued a press statement celebrating the “historic” economic growth of 7.5% in 2021, of which remittances were the largest growing sector. The next largest growth area was exports which increased by 15.4%. Since 2014, the number of Guatemalans seeking to migrate has increased significantly in part due to the structural inequalities and the lack of job opportunities. According to Mario Arturo Garcia, a Guatemalan remittances analyst, in the past few years banks have seen increases of between 200,000 to 250,000 new users each year and between 2 and 2.5 million remittance transactions every month. There are an estimated 2.9 million Guatemalans living in the US, according to the Guatemalan Ministry of Foreign Relations. For Guatemalan families living in poverty the money sent home means they are able to survive and provide housing and education for their children. Brenda Pérez, 25, lives in the village of Llano de Pinal on the outskirts of Guatemala’s second largest city, Quetzaltenango, with her two daughters, aged nine and five. Her husband, Carlos, migrated to the US in 2019 hoping to earn enough money to build his family a home and provide his two daughters with an education. “The money he sends has helped us a lot,” said Pérez. “Here we could not do anything, because of how little we are paid.” Before he left, Pérez’s husband earned 25 quetzales (about £2.40) a day working in agriculture, when there was work to do. Since migrating he has sent about 3,000 quetzales home every month from his job in a restaurant. Pérez has supplemented the money her husband sends with weaving that she sells for between 25 and 60 quetzales. The money sent from the US has also helped the family pay for an internet connection so that the girls can attend school online as well as buy food which has risen in price. “The price of everything has risen a lot,” said Pérez. “Even electricity has become more expensive.” While frustration with the increase in cost of living grows in Guatemala, remittances and migration relieve some of the pressure on the government. They mean that the Guatemalan state does not have to meet the social needs for education, quality infrastructure, or healthcare in the country, all of which receive low state investment. “The issue is that if people don’t have that escape valve, to emigrate, then obviously the internal conflict in Guatemala is on the rise,” Briere said. “Because by not providing even basic services to people, it obviously generates a greater discontent with local authorities and with the central government.” Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:From its title alone, you may be forgiven for thinking that The King’s Daughter is a film about a king’s daughter. It isn’t. It’s about Pierce Brosnan’s berserk quest to achieve immortality by stabbing a mermaid through the heart. True, there is a king in it; and, yes, he does have a daughter. But I have to make this perfectly clear, it’s actually a film about Pierce Brosnan trying to murder a mermaid through the heart. Clearly, there have been meetings about this. The King’s Daughter is an adaptation of Vonda McIntyre’s 1997 novel The Moon and the Sun; a novel that, it must be said, won the Nebula book award ahead of A Game of Thrones on publication. But you can’t call a film The Moon and the Sun, because people might inadvertently think they’re going to watch a film about the actual moon and the actual sun. My instinct, given the subject matter, would have instead been to call it Pierce Brosnan Stabbing a Mermaid Through the Heart. This is partly because it is a precise description of what happens in the film, but mainly because who wouldn’t want to watch a film called Pierce Brosnan Stabbing a Mermaid Through the Heart? Only the very worst kind of idiot, that’s who. But no. They went with The King’s Daughter, because one of the characters is the king’s daughter. That’s it. That’s the only reason. It’s like renaming Planet of the Apes as Charlton Heston’s Shipmate, or The Terminator as A Nice Leather Jacket. It’s pointless. I have a theory about films. The blander a movie’s title, the more it has probably been messed around with in production. Tom Cruise once made a film with the (excellent) working title of All You Need is Kill, but upon release its name was changed to Edge of Tomorrow which – just to give you an idea of its impossible blandness – is literally taken from the lyrics of the Saved by the Bell: The College Years theme tune. Remember Snakes on a Plane? That film was nearly released as Pacific Air Flight 121, which is arguably the dullest combination of words and letters in all of history. So, judging by its title, you might think that The King’s Daughter has had a similarly troubled production. And boy, has it ever. The film spent 15 years trying to get off the ground under various studios with various directors. It was finally made in 2014 with director Sean McNamara, but then – just three weeks before its original release date in April 2015 – Paramount pulled the film from its schedules without explanation. In short, this movie has sat on a shelf for the best part of a decade. It isn’t cinema, it’s a historical artefact. You can see how long The King’s Daughter has been sitting in storage just by its cast. Pierce Brosnan has long since adopted the look of a sexy silver Colonel Sanders, but here he’s still in the midst of his brunette pomp. Fan Bingbing, who plays the mermaid, has had her entire career blown up by a tax evasion scandal since shooting wrapped. Kaya Scodelario, who plays the king’s daughter, fell in love with co-star Benjamin Walker on the film’s set. They have since married and had two children together. Now, obviously, the uncertainty surrounding this film must have been galling for all involved. Vonda McIntyre didn’t sign over the rights to her book thinking that it would dissolve into such a mess. The actors didn’t want to make a film that nobody would see. Sean McNamara has remained prolific throughout, directing films such as Aliens Ate My Homework and Baby Geniuses and the Space Baby, but the whole affair must have left a mark on him. The worst thing is that The King’s Daughter isn’t even that bad. Again, I should be clear, it isn’t good. It’s the sort of film where, one hour into a movie that is entitled The King’s Daughter (and 58 minutes after the narrator has introduced the king’s daughter by calling her “the king’s daughter”), the king’s daughter reacts to news that she is the king’s daughter with palpable “who could have possibly seen this coming?” Sixth Sense twist-level shock. But, still, it isn’t that bad. The King’s Daughter is set in Versailles, and it was shot there too, so it intermittently looks very beautiful. Everyone in the cast is impossibly attractive. Brosnan plays Louis XIV as a sort of mid-70s Jagger, which is a lot of fun. This isn’t a film that’s totally without merit. And yet events have conspired against it, and it is destined to be quickly forgotten. But ask yourself this: would that still be the case if they had chosen to call it Pierce Brosnan Stabbing a Mermaid Through the Heart? Thought not.People have always dressed above their station, and other people have always minded terribly. In 1913 the American reformer Bertha June Richardson was taken aback to discover that the girls whom she encountered in the New York tenements looked smarter than she did, with “everything about them in the latest style”. Unlike many of her pursed-lipped contemporaries, though, Richardson worked hard to understand what was really going on. The Smith graduate and author of The Woman Who Spends: A Study of Her Economic Function, concluded that these immigrant girls, many of them earning no more than $6 a week in the rag trade, were enacting their particular version of the American dream, one silk petticoat and puffy sleeve at a time. One of the great pleasures of this panoramic history of getting dressed is Sofi Thanhauser’s ability to spot moments like these where human desire and material culture collide. When Molière wrote The Bourgeois Gentilhomme in 1670 about a burgher whose ambition to rise into the nobility requires him to get some fancy new outfits, audience members got the joke because they knew someone just like that and it was a relief, finally, to be allowed to snigger. A century later the script was flipped when Marie Antoinette attempted a bit of cross-class cosplay of her own. Enthralled by Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s back-to-nature philosophy, the queen built her own toy farm in the grounds of Versailles and started a fashion for peasant costume among the ladies of her court. Not only was impersonating Bo Peep in the Hall of Mirrors a tone-deaf move, it decimated the domestic silk industry, throwing hundreds of Lyonnais artisans out of work. Without meaning to, the queen’s newfound passion for imported white muslin brought her a step or two closer to the guillotine. Worn, though, consists of much more than a string of entertaining anecdotes about people raiding the dressing-up box and embarrassing themselves in the process. Its starting point is the terrible state of our current clothing industry, which, as Thanhauser describes it, exists in a nightmare wasteland of overproduction, toxic waste, choked rivers, child labour and collapsing factories. Following five threads – linen, cotton, silk, rayon and wool – she sets out to chart a deft course through material history, arguing that “there is scarcely a part of the human experience, historic or current, that the story of clothes does not touch”. In the early modern period Thanhauser paints a picture of pioneering Americans growing their own clothes, literally: taking the wool from their sheep and flax from their fields to spin and weave at home. By the 19th century, production had moved into factories, at least in Britain where Manchester had become “Cottonopolis”, a smoky behemoth that devoured cotton imported from the southern American slave states before belching out finished fabric to captive colonial markets. From here it was a short step to today’s globalised system, where cotton is harvested using forced labour in China’s Xinjiang province, processed heaven-knows-where (the supply chains are kept purposely opaque) before being pinged back in the form of limp identikit clothing to the malls and online hubs of the US and western Europe. None of this is logistically or morally simple and the great virtue of Thanhauser’s analysis is how alive she is to the difficulty of making these networks legible, even when they lie relatively close to come. As her test case, Thanhauser, who lives in New York, travels to Texas where America’s modern cotton industry is based. At first sight there may no longer be slave labour of the kind that Georgia and the Carolinas depended on two centuries ago, but the underlying patterns have not changed greatly. The workforce is overwhelmingly Latino, 75% of whom are undocumented, which means that when Parkinson’s and leukaemia start to show up as a consequence of constant exposure to pesticides, these young men have spotty access to health care and almost no legal redress. And they are young. The average life expectancy for Latino farmworkers in the US is 49, compared to 73 to 79 for the rest of the population.Thanhauser’s approach to exposing a system gone so horribly wrong is to synthesise the existing literature, add fresh insights drawn from her own fieldwork, and deliver the findings in a richly evocative narrative powered, but never overwhelmed, by a sense of righteous anger. Her methodology is very similar to that pioneered by Michael Pollan 15 years ago in his In Defense of Food: An Eater’s Manifesto. When it comes to solutions, though, Thanhauser has a harder job. Pollan’s take-home dictum, “Eat food. Not too much. Mostly plants”, works less well in the closet than it does in the kitchen. For while there’s no denying the current renaissance of craft and making in the west, it seems unlikely that many of us will ever want to spend our evenings learning how to sew bust darts or set in a sleeve. Thanhauser’s suggestions, instead, are more doable. Perhaps we could think about using local tailors to get things made. Or try becoming more committed vintage shoppers. And then there’s the simplest yet most radical approach of all, which involves performing a ruthless new year cull of our wardrobes with a view, this time, to not immediately filling them up again with yet more tat. • Worn is published by Allen Lane (£20). To order a copy for £17.40 go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.That’s all for us today, folks. It’s been another awful day in the pandemic, with Australia recording its highest death toll for the pandemic so far, following a grim two weeks of escalating numbers. That included an infant who died with Covid in NSW, and Tasmania’s first casualty of the disease for nearly two years – a woman in her 90s. You can find all the daily Covid statistics in the summary post pinned at the top of the blog. Other things that rounded off this week of news: • Queensland has reduced its booster interval from four to three months, following NSW, Victoria, ACT and South Australia. • The Australian federal police have launched an investigation into price gouging of rapid antigen tests. • Western Australia announced that its border would stay closed, but had to fend off concerns that its hospital system wasn’t ready for a Covid surge despite a long preparation time. • Peter Dutton has said there will be more visits from UK and US submarines as part of the defence deals being discussed in the annual AUKMIN talks in Sydney this week. • The federal government announced 15,000 humanitarian visas would be provided for Afghan nationals, after a senate inquiry delivered a scathing report into Australia’s treatment of former Afghan interpreters and other colleagues left behind after the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan. The announcement has also come under fire for not actually adding any new places to the humanitarian visa program. • Health experts have warned that delaying elective surgeries in Victoria will see blown-out waiting lists spiral into a “massive healthcare crisis”. • Australian naval ship HMAS Adelaide loaded with critical humanitarian supplies departed for Tonga as part of disaster relief efforts in the Pacific island nation following the devastating volcano eruption and tsunami, but an Australian aid flight was turned back from the Covid-free nation after a positive case was detected on board. Thanks for coming along for the ride this week. I hope you have a lovely weekend, stay cool and hydrated, wear sunscreen, and I’ll see you again soon! Tonga has turned back an aid flight from Australia due to a positive Covid case on board, despite assurances from the Morrison government that humanitarian relief from the volcanic eruption and tsunami could be offered in a Covid-safe way. Tonga is Covid-free and has a strict border control policy, requiring contactless delivery of aid that began arriving by plane on Thursday. The Australian aid flight left Brisbane on Thursday afternoon but was turned around mid-flight after being notified of the positive Covid case, an Australian defence spokesperson said. All crew had returned negative rapid antigen tests before departure, but PCR tests later showed the positive result. The supplies were moved to another flight that took off on Friday. Read more: Health minister Greg Hunt and home affairs minister Karen Andrews have released their official statement on the changes that mean negative rapid antigen tests will now be accepted for international arrivals, saying the changes will provide more flexibility. Interestingly, they’ve also reduced wait times between receiving a positive Covid diagnosis and being cleared to travel here. Here’s what the release says: Under the Biosecurity Act 2015 the Government will change the requirements for a pre-departure test of any nucleic acid amplification test (such as PCR tests) within three days, to allow the flexibility for passengers to instead show a negative test result through a rapid antigen test (RAT) within 24 hours of the flight departure time. These changes will come into effect from 1am Sunday 23 January 2022. While PCR tests remain the gold standard test, a RAT within 24 hours is an acceptable indicator of whether a traveller has COVID-19 before flying to Australia. This is consistent with moves within Australia to accept RATs for diagnostic purposes. In addition to this, the time between receiving a positive test result and being able to be cleared for travel to Australia will be reduced from 14 to seven days. This will reduce wait times for travellers who contract COVID-19 overseas to return to Australia in line with the new domestic isolation requirements. The pre-departure testing requirements will continue to be reviewed regularly, taking into account the domestic and international epidemiology. Travellers to Australia must still wear a mask during their flight and follow the directions of state and territory governments regarding quarantine and on-arrival testing. And from the SA Metro fire brigade: Victorian CFA chief officer, Jason Heffernan, has offered his solidarity and condolences to SA firefighters on behalf of Victoria: CFA is devastated by the tragic death of a South Australian Country Fire Service (CFS) firefighter and injury to another CFS member on the Coles fireground. We extend our deepest condolences and sympathies to the family, friends and colleagues of the firefighters. Five CFA strike teams are assisting firefighting efforts in South Australia. No CFA members were injured in the incident. Firefighting is an inherently dangerous activity and I am grateful and proud of the commitment and sacrifices that Australian firefighters make every day. CFA stands with our CFS colleagues on the fireground, and in grief. A volunteer firefighter has died and another was seriously injured when a tree fell on a truck on the fireground at Coles in South Australia. The injured firefighter was taken to hospital. The incident occurred near Lucindale, where the blaze is running uncontrolled through blue gum plantations, scrub and grassland, a Country Fire Service (CFS) spokesperson confirmed to AAP. In a statement, the CFS said: Family and other personnel have been informed and are being offered support at this time. The safety and wellbeing of our people is our highest priority and our thoughts are with our CFS family at this time. We are obtaining more information and will provide another update shortly. TikTok wrote to Australian political parties in November last year warning them against attempting to pay influencers or engage in any other sort of advertising on its platform, Guardian Australia can reveal. Just months out from the next federal election, the letters were sent after Crikey reported a US-based marketing agency had emailed a campaign brief to a TikTok user offering $300 for the user to make and post a video on the theme of “Scott Morrison is too slow and always late”. When the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, was asked on Thursday about the November report, he told radio station 6PR he wasn’t familiar with it. “Well, it is the first I’ve heard of it. But it wouldn’t be too hard for people to post TikTok videos along that theme. Because that is a theme that is characterised by this government. That is what we hear back,” he said. Read the full story here: Pivoting to federal politics again for a minute: Julian Hill, a Labor MP and a member of the joint standing committee on migration, has blasted the government’s Afghan visa announcement today: Hill said: As of today Scott Morrison has processed zero out of 3,000 visa promised, yet is trying to trick people with another rubbish announcement. 5,000 of the 15,000 places announced today are simply family visas in the existing program. Afghan-Australians have been waiting for years as the government has actively discriminated against them, failing to process their family visas. These people have never met their own children, or [have] missed their kids growing up, yet are supposed to be grateful that Scott Morrison now says he might give them the same rights as every other Australian. Not one extra refugee place has been allocated to the program. Afghans will comprise just 18% of the refugee program over 4 years – while the Taliban are hunting people down right now. Australia was more generous to Syria and Iraq, countries with which we have relatively little relationship. The government’s announcement on Afghanistan is insulting and offensive to Afghan Australians who have been here since 1860, to Afghans who risked their lives for our country who’ve been abandoned, and for Aussie veterans. For context: On the decision to retain the hard border, and the dismay from many that they won’t be able to return due to the quarantine requirements and other restrictions on who can enter, McGowan says that he did it to “protect our state from the worst excesses of what is going on in the eastern states”: And what is going on over there with massive death rates, huge hospitalisations, massive economic dislocation, businesses and all sorts of trouble, people staying home from work, kids not going to school, the army being called out, is pretty serious. Now here, we are not going through that. So what we’re trying to do is put in place the measures that will protect us as we can from that when the virus eventually has community spread here. Reporter: You say the hospital system is as ready as it can be. But not all the hospital beds will be ready until October. That point, it will be as ready. Right now you’re still playing catch-up. McGowan: We’ve had 300 additional beds we put in place. Obviously more roll out. Putting in place the equivalent of a new tertiary hospital in the course of 18 months is a big exercise. Normally a new hospital takes about 10 years to build. I want to go back to WA for a moment because there are prevailing concerns about the preparedness of the state’s hospitals, and McGowan is being pressed again on it from reporters on the floor. Reporter: You’ve changed quite dramatically from when it was all about ... we were facing a pandemic and we had to have our hospital system ready. You kept repeating that mantra, ‘getting us time’, ‘sorry about this’, ‘it won’t be for forever’, ‘we need to get our hospitals ready and our health system ready’. Here we are in the third year, sure, with another variant, but it’s still sending a message to the public that we’re not ready. McGowan: Our hospitals are as ready as they can be ... Last year we announced $3.2bn of additional spends on beds, doctors, nurses, and the like. But the hospital system has to deal with the staffing issues. Getting people in. I mean, a lot of our recruitment is overseas and always has been. That’s been difficult because all countries around the world are trying to do the same thing. There’s all sorts of restrictions on people coming and all those sort of things. We’re putting in place 520 additional beds. We’re having all the arrangements ready so at a certain point in time, we start to wind down elective surgery to cater for the growth in Covid cases in hospitals. That’s what every state has done. Every state is doing similar things to cope with the growth in numbers. ... it won’t be perfect. Nothing is perfect. We don’t have like in Yes Minister, hospitals sitting there with no patients, just waiting. Just to take you away from WA for a minute: Australia will now accept negative rapid antigen tests instead of PCR tests for arrivals to Australia, according to new instruments made by the health minister, Greg Hunt, under the Biosecurity Act on Friday. According to the new rules, incoming passengers can meet entry requirements with: a certificate provided by a medical practitioner that ... the person was tested for the coronavirus known as Covid‑19 using a rapid antigen test ... and ... the result of the test was negative. The test will have to be conducted under the supervision of a medical practitioner. The certificate must state: the date and time of the test the name of the person tested the type of test conducted the brand and make of the test that the specimen for the test was collected, and the test was carried out, by or under the supervision of a medical practitioner the result of the test the signature of the medical practitioner providing the certificate. The determination states that providing misleading information could be an offence or breach a civil penalty provision of the Act. On rapid antigen tests, the argument from McGowan seems to be that a large supply of RATs is something that was required for Omicron but not for Delta, thanks to PCR being the gold standard for Delta testing: Omicron arrived in Australia on December 8. [Note: this is not correct – it was November.] Prior to that, it was the Delta strain. The Delta strain testing arrangements required PCR testing, which is the swab up the nose, and it’s highly accurate. The advice with Delta was that you didn’t want to use rapid antigen testing because it’s less accurate. And PCR testing could manage the transmission rates and the number of people acquiring Delta and that was the best way of having very accurate results with Delta with low rates of transmission, comparably. When Omicron arrived – and it didn’t exist, really, before that – we had to reconsider, because the transmissibility rates of Omicron are so much higher than Delta. That’s where rapid antigen testing comes in. This all seems a bit roundabout to me, frankly – rapid antigen tests have been widely available in other countries for a long time, well before Omicron emerged, and were worked into systems as a way of managing Covid in a circumstance of limited restrictions. Reporter: Aside from pushing the third dose vaccination, what is your government going to do with this extra time to avoid the catastrophe, as you describe it, that we have seen in the eastern states? What will you do in this extra time? McGowan: As time goes on, we’ll get children vaccinated. It’s the third dose for over 18s but also ... children have only have the opportunity to get vaccinated from 10 December. I’ve been contacted with lots of parents who want the opportunity to get their kids vaccinated. Our clinics are very full. The state is bearing most of the load of the vaccination rollout in Western Australia, contrary to other states. That provides that opportunity as well. As time passes, we’ll have more rapid antigen tests come in, more hospital beds roll out. Reporter: Shouldn’t we have those things in place already, and do you admit vaccination isn’t enough? McGowan: Vaccination is very important. In terms of hospital beds, as you know, we made significant commitments last year to roll them out, including some modular beds at four hospitals. The advice I have is the hospital system is ready ... all of those things make a difference. It feels like he’s staying two things simultaneously here – that they need more time for hospital beds to roll out, but also the hospital system is ready. Those things can’t both be true, surely. McGowan says that they are reviewing “what is going on over east” so he can’t give a timeline on the border reopening. Reporter: A lot of people did what they were told. They went and got vaccinated. They have become eligible for their third dose more recently. The announcement yesterday ... they are concerned if the border doesn’t open for months their immunity will be weakened. What kind of assurance can you give that the borders will open at any point this year? McGowan: We will have a review and obviously Western Australia will open at some point in time subject to the results of that review. As I said yesterday, it is not fair for a bunch of people who are not eligible for the third dose if we open on 5 February when they are not eligible. To be frank with you, I have been contacted by many people who are very happy with the announcement we have made, I mean many people, because it gives them the opportunity to get vaccinated and it gives them the opportunity to protect the health of themselves and their loved ones. When we made the announcement in December, I said ... that it would open on 5 February unless there was an emergency or catastrophe. And deliberately seeding thousands of cases here in the first day or week, into Western Australia, would mean we just follow the exact same route of New South Wales. The WA premier is taking questions now, and he’s being asked if there will be a policy to allow overseas students in? McGowan: Not at this point in time. The unfortunate reality is we are trying to limit the spread of the virus into Western Australia. We are providing compassionate entry points for returning Western Australia, for people who are coming to visit sick relatives and the like. We will have a range of categories and ways for people to return home, subject to quarantine. All that involves some risk but we are doing our best [to allow relatives of WA residents and WA residents themselves to come back]. I know there has been a lot of commentary over the course of the last couple of days, perhaps, that we have been locked out or people have been locked up for two years. That is not actually true. Over the course of the last two years, as you will all remember, at various points in time all of the borders across Australia were open and people had the opportunity to come to Western Australia. McGowan says the state has had 151 cases of Omicron. He also goes through some of the national covid numbers – hard not to feel like he is pointing to these numbers like this by way of supporting his decision to keep the border closed: There are currently 5,147 Australians in hospital today with Covid. Fortunately none of those people are in Western Australia. There are 424 Australians in intensive care with Covid. Thankfully, none of those people are in Western Australia. And sadly, today, Australia has reported 88 deaths across the country, including 46 in New South Wales alone. This is absolutely devastating news for so many families across the country. Our thoughts are with them, it is a heartbreaking time. For some perspective, Omicron is dangerous and serious. We need to take every precaution we can and we know the third dose vaccination is key to all of this. WA premier Mark McGowan is speaking now. As usual, WA are distinguishing between “local” cases and “travel-related” cases: the total includes 7 new local cases and 3 travel cases. There are no Covid patients in hospital in WA. Australia will export its first load of liquefied hydrogen made from coal in an engineering milestone which researchers say could also lock in a new fossil fuel industry and increase the country’s carbon emissions. Under the $500m Hydrogen Energy Supply Chain (HESC) pilot project, hydrogen will be made in Victoria’s LaTrobe valley from brown coal and transported aboard a purpose-built ship to Japan, where it will be burned in coal-fired power plants. Carbon capture and storage will be used in an attempt to reduce the carbon emissions associated with making the hydrogen and supercooling the gas until it forms a liquid before it is loaded aboard the Suiso Frontier vessel. The first shipment is due to depart from Hastings in the coming days. Read the full story here: While we wait for WA premier Mark McGowan to give us the state’s Covid update after his bombshell border announcement last night, let’s take a look at the record-breaking heatwave currently sweeping that state: The heatwave has days to run before it shifts eastwards, Peter Hannam reports, combining with moisture leftover from ex-tropical cyclone Tiffany to create some clammy days and nights for southern cities. Perth on Friday reached 40C for a fourth consecutive day, matching the record sequence reached in the WA capital on only three previous occasions, including around last Christmas. The Bureau of Meteorology was predicting a fifth 40C-day for Saturday. Thursday’s top of 40.5C was the eighth day above 40C this summer, beating the previous record of seven for the season in Perth and with more days like it likely, said a senior meteorologist at Weatherzone, Ben Domensino. Just after noon, local time, the temperature hit 40C for the ninth time this summer. “It could get to 10 [days] by the end of this week, and then we’re staring down the barrel of another five weeks of summer,” said Domensino. Read the full story here: Some reaction to that announcement from the federal government about Afghanistan: Greens senator Nick McKim is saying it’s “smoke and mirrors” – and won’t create a single new place in the humanitarian visa program: Australia has a moral responsibility to do far more than this given our culpability in the invasion and occupation of Afghanistan. Of course more people from Afghanistan need protection, but this announcement means that for every person from Afghanistan who is granted a humanitarian visa, someone from elsewhere who desperately needs protection misses out. This government has drastically cut Australia’s humanitarian intake in recent years. Failing to create additional places for Afghan nationals simply adds insult to injury. The minister has left open the door for further increases and we urge him to offer at least 20,000 places to people from Afghanistan in addition to our annual humanitarian intake. The minister should also confirm that everyone from Afghanistan who was issued a 449 visa during and after the evacuation of Kabul will be granted permanent protection in Australia. We’re still waiting for the WA Covid update this afternoon but hearing that the premier, Mark McGowan, is going to pop up to give it himself very soon. We’ll keep you posted. It’s important to note that this announcement about an increase in the allocation of our humanitarian visas to Afghan nationals has been made after a damning Senate report was tabled in parliament, which found that former Afghan interpreters and other colleagues left behind by the Australian government after the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan now face a high risk of brutal reprisals. As my colleague Daniel Hurst reported earlier today, the damning new consensus report said Australia had asked Afghan nationals to “stand in harm’s way with Australian personnel” but had “left them standing in harm’s way”. “It is dishonourable,” said the inquiry’s interim report, which was written by the Labor chair, Kimberley Kitching, and not opposed by government members of the committee. Australia’s last-ditch evacuation mission – launched on 18 August days after Kabul fell to the Taliban – lifted 4,168 people out of the Afghan capital over the course of nine days. Those carried on the 32 Australian flights included 167 Australian citizens and 2,984 Afghans with approved visas. Read more about the report here: The government says they will give priority in the humanitarian program to: former Locally Engaged Employees (LEE) and their immediate family members; subclass 449 holders (current and former) and their immediate family members; those with enduring links to Australia, such as Afghans who were employed by Australian non-government organisations or who worked on Australian Government funded projects, and Coalition partner LEE and their immediate family; and Women and girls, ethnic minorities, LGBTQI+ and other identified minority groups. Hawke says: These priorities recognise the dangerous and volatile nature of the situation in Afghanistan, acknowledge those at greatest risk, and recognise the unique and exceptional contributions made by individuals and their families to the Australian and Coalition missions in Afghanistan. I have directed the Department of Home Affairs to give priority processing to the Afghan cohort in the Humanitarian Program and to give priority processing to all Afghan nationals within the Family Program. It also says that the Hawke will conduct a series of roundtables with the Afghan-Australian community in the coming weeks. OK, I’ve got the media release from immigration minister Alex Hawke on the increase to Australia’s humanitarian visas for Afghan nationals now. The details: Australia will provide at least 15,000 places for Afghan nationals through the Humanitarian and Family Visa Program over four years. This increased allocation includes 10,000 places for Afghan nationals within Australia’s existing Humanitarian Program and at least 5,000 visas within the Family stream. It follows the initial allocation of 3,000 places in August 2021. Hawke said the statement: The War in Afghanistan was Australia’s longest, and a humanitarian intake of this size reflects this. Our commitment to Afghan refugees will be second only in scale to our humanitarian intake from Syria and Iraq. Today’s announcement of 15,000 places follows our initial allocation of 3,000 places to Afghanistan in August 2021, which as we indicated then, was a floor and not a ceiling. This continues to be the case. The Government will continue to monitor processing numbers and reserves the right to increase the program in future years. Since evacuations commenced from Kabul in August, more than 4,300 Afghan evacuees have been brought to Australia and are in the process of securing permanent visas over coming months, as they establish their lives in their new home. There has been an unprecedented level of visa applications from Afghanistan for our Humanitarian and Migration visa programs. In recognition of this demand, and in support of this specific visa commitment, dedicated teams within the Department of Home Affairs have been established to undertake priority processing. Not to put too fine a point on it though – the Department of Home Affairs says it has received more than 32,500 applications for the Humanitarian program from Afghan nationals, on behalf of more than 145,000 individuals. Some important context to that humanitarian visa allocation increase: The Northern Territory government is under fire after a group of people taken into quarantine 10 days ago from a remote Aboriginal community were sent home on Sunday “unexpectedly” and subsequently tested positive for Covid-19. The remote central Australian community of Yuendumu has asked NT Health to explain why the community members – who had been evacuated to the Alice Springs quarantine facility as close contacts – were flown home on 16 January and sent back to their homes without being tested on arrival, with local authorities saying they had not been informed of their return. A number of the group were Covid-positive when later tested by local health workers in the following two days. Johanna Ward, the CEO of the Warlpiri Youth Development Aboriginal Corporation (WYDAC), said: The people got off the plane and were able to go to their respective homes, and then tested positive once the emergency response team realised they were here ... There were a number of people who were positive. We haven’t been provided with that number. So the community is very angry. Read the full story here: There are 62 people in hospital, with two in intensive care and one ventilated. Premier Steven Marshall has been giving a press conference in Adelaide. He says there are 298 people in hospital. 33 people are in intensive care and 7 are on ventilators. Twitter officials apologised to politicians who have experienced abuse on its platform, and said more was being done to prevent female politicians and journalists from being subject to abuse on the service in a hearing on social media and online safety on Friday. Committee chair, Liberal MP Lucy Wicks, asked Twitter officials how the company’s hateful content policy aligned with her own experience on Twitter and that experienced by ABC journalist Leigh Sales: On the one hand, I think this is wonderful that you have got a hateful content policy. But then I look at some of the tweets that are directed at me that don’t get taken down or I look at some of the other tweets that I’m going to read out to you that I know have been the subject of very public conversation. And I guess I wonder how hateful content and your hateful content policy is actually policed and managed. And what’s the words that regulators moderated? Given that so much harmful content seems to remain on Twitter and stay on for the directed individuals? Twitter’s director of public policy in Australia, Kara Hinesley, apologised to Wicks for “any harm that might have come across Twitter that might still be there”: I know that it can be horrific and having worked with a lot of victims of abuse, or victims survivors in my time here at Twitter, it’s something that we care very deeply about. And I understand that this is something that is a lived experience for you. And so I appreciate you sharing this information with us and helping us think through where we need to continue to make strides in terms of abuse. Hinesley pointed to recent changes to Twitter, including allowing users to limit who can reply to tweets and a new safety mode currently in a beta trial, as ways the company had been responding to people being abused on the site. When taken to specific tweets, including several about Sales, Hinesley said she couldn’t comment on the individual tweets, but was aware that female journalists and politicians had been specifically targeted: I wouldn’t be able to comment on the specifics at this stage. But I would assure you that our teams would be reviewing this against our terms of service and the Twitter rules and we’d be taking enforcement actions that would be consistent with what they find violative. You had mentioned Leigh Sales and we’ve worked with the ABC in a number of regards being very cognisant and aware and alive to the fact that we are seeing trends that are attacking both female journalists but also female politicians. We know that this is something that is quite complex and we have dedicated teams that are working on how these interactions with individual targeting or again scale targeting, how it can be managed and how we can ensure that we’re taking action to actually look at the behaviours that would cause harm in the short term and the long term – so in acute and chronic settings. I just want to reassure you that this is something that we are getting better at with the scaled enforcement and we’re working very hard to also ensure that we’re alive to any situations that come up, especially around current events. The rogue National MP, George Christensen, has confirmed that although he is exiting parliament at the next election he will still be involved in politics – as a journalist. Christensen, speaking at online event Prayer and Pushback, said: I’m not leaving politics – I’m leaving parliament – we’re all involved in politics as citizens. I’m going to be in the fray. I was a journalist before I was in politics … I’ll probably step back into that in the future, in some way, shape or form. Christensen continued his crusade against the children’s Covid-19 vaccination program, arguing that “one death” from adverse reactions is too many (although he conceded his evidence of this in Australia is “anecdotal and not verified”). “Healthy children don’t die of Covid-19,” he said. He said: Labor are saying I should be booted out of parliament, for expressing a view about safety. They’re not going to see the end of me. 62 people are in hospital, five currently requiring oxygen. There are two patients in critical condition in ICU. Gunner says they are both unvaccinated. Phew, OK, so while we were over at submarines in the Indo-Pacific, the Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner was giving a presser on their Covid numbers and back-to-school plans. Dutton, though, aims straight for China: The United Kingdom has, as I said before, a proud history and heritage of standing up for good against bad and if you look at what is happening between China and Lithuania at the moment, or between China and Thailand, between China and India, between China and Australia, other countries, where there has been economic coercion or activities otherwise ... it takes, I think, many countries to come together to call out that behaviour. And I think the principal of sunlight or sunshine and exposing the conduct and being frank about where red lines are and where conduct is unacceptable is the only way in which we can address such behaviour. Nobody, as I’ve said repeatedly, nobody in our country, in our region, across the world wants to see conflict of any nature. The Chinese government has been very clear about their intent with Taiwan and they’ve been on a course of conduct with other countries, as I say, including Lithuania. It is all well documented and it is all freely spoken about now, and it should be, because they have the questions to answer and they should answer them. I think there is nothing strange at all, and in fact I think it is to be applauded, that the United Kingdom has fought for and continues to fight for freedom in the Indo-Pacific, that’s their history and I think it will continue to be their future. There’s a question about what the UK would contribute to security in the Indo-Pacific in the face of pressure from China, and whether Australia would be expected to offer concrete support to European security in return. Almost everyone had a go at answering this in some form, but these comments from Truss are quite pointed: We are seeing increased economic coercion from China, we are seeing increased aggression from Russia, we are seeing Iran in danger of obtaining nuclear capability and we need to work with all of our friends and partners around the world, and Australia is an absolutely crucial ally and friend. Whether it is in trade – and I believe trade and investment are very, very important – between allies to build up capability and reduce strategic dependence on countries like China, and whether it is on defensive support, which we are achieving through the AUKUS agreement, as well as through other agreements we have ... Truss takes a question on Boris Johnson’s leadership, which has been on the rocks since the revelations of parties at Downing St during widespread lockdowns. Truss has been tipped as a frontrunner for the leadership if he goes down. Reporter: Foreign Secretary, you’re here in Australia at a very challenging time back home, especially with the leadership crisis of Boris Johnson. Does he have your 100% support without reservation? In your view, is his leadership tenable? Truss: The Prime Minister has my 100% support. He is doing an excellent job. Britain was one of the first countries to roll out the Covid vaccine. We’ve had a very successful booster program. We’re now able to open up our economy again in Britain and we’ve got one of the fastest-growing economies in the G7. And the reason that we are here in Australia is working with our very close partners, to advance freedom and democracy around the world, and to protect our country. I want the Prime Minister to continue as long as possible in his job. He is doing a fantastic job. There is no leadership election. Reporter: On Ukraine, and in particular to Minister Payne, can you give us a sense ... of what assistance Australia is willing to contemplate giving to Ukraine? Payne: In relation to the Ukraine, I had a very good conversation with the Ukranian foreign minister on 19 January, so a day-and-a-half ago, and very clearly reaffirmed Australia’s support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. I indicated that Australia would be prepared to consider requests in areas in which we could assist to Ukraine and no formal requests have been made. To be clear, that is not about direct military support. That is not on the table from Australia’s perspective. But we will work closely with Ukraine in the coming days and weeks in terms of challenges that they are deal with and continue to affirm our views on their... sovereignty and territorial integrity. Reporter: Can I ask, have you discussed UK submarines or other assets either making more regular visits to Australia, or potentially temporary basing arrangements for those assets in Australia – any light you can shed on that from discussions today would be appreciated. Dutton: We’ve been able to work incredibly well together. So in terms of additional visits, yes, that’s been part of that working group discussion but also part of the discussion we’ve had hear in Sydney as well and we will see greater rotations, as we’ve already seen from the strike carrier group and from the nuclear sub visit out of the UK. We will see more, not just from the UK, but from the United States. We’re seeing greater interest, of course, from even the Germans and other European nations, more people that understand what is happening in terms of the coercion and bullying taking place within the Indo-Pacific. There are many countries who have that interest in making sure that they have a presence and that they express their own view about freedom and the continuation of what we know in the Indo-Pacific at the moment. Wallace continues, with direct reference – not for the first time in this press conference – to Russia: If globalisation has been a reality for the economy, it’s also been a realisation for threat and with the internet comes a turbo boost that means young men in Sydney can be and radicalised by people from Syria. It means that nations can interrupt and corrupt our democratic and free and open societies from as far away as countries such as Russia and therefore we have to work together to strengthen those alliances. There’s a phrase in English and I’m sure it’s the same in Australia which is ‘by your friends, will be judged’. I’m proud that Australia is our closest friend. UK Defence Secretary Ben Wallace takes the mic. He invokes the second world war, too: 81 years ago to the day, the men of the Australian 6th Division and the British 7th Division captured Tobruk from the Nazis, on this day. We fought side by side then against authoritarian and totalitarian regimes and we won not just because of the bravery of those men, who died, many of them, for the sake of freedom, but because we have an alliance and we are alliances. Our strength is through alliances and that’s why AUKMIN is such an important tool for us to stand up the values that we believe in. The stronger we are together, the stronger our values will be protected around the world. And it was great to have a comprehensive meeting today where we covered all the subjects that was mentioned - cybersecurity, misinformation, better, deeper military coordination and exercising and a recognition that today’s world, unlike 1941, is more global than ever. More from Dutton: As we demonstrated in Kabul only a few months ago, Australia was able to bring out over 4,000 people but only because of the assistance of the United Kingdom and the UK, United States. And the security overlay they provided, the integration with our own Defence Force personnel on the ground, resulted in a positive, significant, tangible outcome for us and we’re seeing at the moment in the Indo-Pacific with the greater presence of the strike carrier group, of the recent visit from the Astute and many more visits that will follow as a result of the agreement under AUKUS, a strengthening and a necessary strengthening of the relationship between the United Kingdom and Australia ... AUKUS represents an enormous opportunity for us, not just in relation to the acquisition of nuclear-powered submarines but also, rightly, as Marise point out, other capabilities which will deter acts of aggression. Basically, again to state the bleeding obvious, we need the defence support of the UK and the US in the case of “acts of aggression”. Now we’re hearing from defence minister Peter Dutton: We know as a world today that we would be in a very different situation if, during the 1930s and 1940s the United Kingdom had not stood up to malign forces and had not represented the values that they adhere to even to this very day. And we have a lot in common with the United Kingdom, a shared heritage, a shared set of values, and they must endure into the future. And the Prime Minister and I and others have spoken about this period in the Indo-Pacific being not dissimilar to the 1930s. And so it is incredibly important that countries that share values like the United Kingdom and Australia stand up once again and we will work together in the Indo-Pacific and right around the world to deliver on those values, to give them meaning. Let’s just state the absolute obvious here so this doesn’t get lost: the 1930s led up to devastating world war. This is not a benign, throwaway comment. Truss: Thirdly, we’re strengthening our security ties. We’re proud to work together in the Five Eyes and on the five power defence arrangements. I’m looking forward to travelling to Adelaide tomorrow to see the Hunter class frigates being built. Our carrier strike group exercised with Australia and other partners last year. AUKUS will help make our defence and security ties even stronger by helping Australia acquire nuclear-powered submarine capability. It will also deepen our cooperation on advanced capabilities like cyber, AI and quantum. This will help protect trade routes and the widest ability of the Indo-Pacific. Truss moves on to the cyber and technology partnership: Secondly, we’re boosting our cooperation on technology. Technology has enabled incredible freedoms, but it is also being used to promote fear, and we can’t allow the technologies of the future to be exploited for malign ends. Global tech standards must be shaped by the free world, not by authoritarian regimes, and that is why yesterday Marise and I signed a new cyber and critical technology partnership focused on tackling malign actors. Truss continues: Today, we’ve agreed to work even more closely in our response together with our friends and allies around the world, focusing on three key areas - first of all, strengthening our economic security. We’re deepening economic ties to strengthen our supply chains and reduce strategic dependence. Our new trade agreement will completely remove tariffs between our two nations and it will pave the way for the UK to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership, reinforcing that reliability of supply. We’re working together on joint infrastructure investment into the Pacific region. We’re now hearing from UK Foreign Secretary Liz Truss: We have no better friends than Australia and it has been an incredibly productive day of talks. We are modernising our partnership for a new age. The reality is that threats are rising across the world. Russia is threatening Ukraine, amassing troops on the border. Iran is striving for a nuclear weapon and China is using its economic muscle against Australia and other allies like Lithuania. What we have shown today is that we are completely united in our response. We’re standing shoulder to shoulder in defence of freedom and democracy, and we’re determined to face down these growing threats. Payne: I think it’s important to emphasise the inclusiveness of our approach. The UK and Australia have a vital relationship. We’re forming new structures of cooperation through arrangements such as AUKUS with the United States. All of these promote peace and contribute to the resilience of nations in the Indo-Pacific, but there is strong value in flexibility. The quad grouping between Australia, India, Japan and the United States for example aligns well with UK priorities in the Indo-Pacific. Payne: Secretary Truss and I share a strong appreciation for the importance of developing the infrastructure in the Pacific that is sustainable and climate-adapted, that drives economic growth and achieves genuine development goals. Yesterday we signed an infrastructure investment MoU [memorandum of understanding] and a cyber and technology partnership, perfect examples of cementing that practical cooperation. We have today also discussed at length dangerous disinformation. And how we can work more closely together in countering the narratives of authoritarian actors who seek to undermine our efforts to promote openness and stability. Payne: We have agreed today that the way we meet such an array of challenges is by working more closely together. Even more closely together. As liberal democracies, we are natural partners in countering the influence of malign authoritarianism, in standing up for human rights, in maintaining the international rules-based order. Certainly our values accommodate working with different political systems, for all of whom, though, the sovereignty of their own country is fundamental, but they don’t allow for assertiveness or aggression by authoritarian states who would deny others that sovereignty or their own strategic choices. That’s not something that can be tolerated by democracies looking to maintain an international system that is open and stable and prosperous, by standing clearly on our values, our interests and sovereignty, we can give confidence to others, which is a matter Australia considers to be very important and something we have discussed today. We’ve talked about how we achieve this practically. In particular we can support the resilience of those countries in fields in which they might be vulnerable to malign influence or coercion, areas such as cybersecurity and technical infrastructure, trade, economics and defence. Payne is beginning with the usual kind of preamble – thanking lots of people etc. She also says: It’s fitting that the first two plus two ministerial meeting in person in Australia since COVID began has been with such close and long-standing partners. It’s also been invaluable, coming at a time when we all face numerous strategic challenges. Whether that is the rising assertiveness in the Indo-Pacific, or whether it is Russian aggression on the Ukraine border. At the same time, as governments, we are also managing the ongoing Covid pandemic. Here in the Pacific, we are responding to unforeseen disasters, such as the volcanic eruption and tsunami that has devastated Tonga, with whom Australia is supporting, in cooperation with others, including the United Kingdom. And I do want to take a moment here to acknowledge the Tongan Government’s efforts in the face of this catastrophic event and the devastation that it has caused. Foreign Minister Marise Payne is speaking live now from Sydney on the AUKMIN (Australia-United Kingdom Ministerial Consultations) talks. You can also get a free icecream if you get your booster at state run clinics in Victoria on the weekend. Pallas says the cost of this is “a drop in the ocean” of what the state has spent on pandemic measures to date and it’s important everyone keep cool while getting vaccinated on this forthcoming hot weekend. The Victorian treasurer Tim Pallas and health officials are speaking at the moment in Melbourne, and they’ve just announced that they’ll give paid time off to public sector workers to get their third dose of the Covid vaccine: Today we are also taking another important step to supporting our public sector workforce by providing paid time off for workers to be vaccinated with a third dose of the Covid vaccine. We are doing this because the health and safety of our public service and public sector employees and the whole community is vitally important to us. We recognise that, as an employer, we have a duty of care to our public servants. They also have a responsibility to the community at large to make sure that they are not a source of infection in those interactions. That is why, as an employer, we are taking this vital step. The change, in conjunction with the vaccination blitz at sites like this, makes getting your third dose earlier and easier than ever before. Our expanded policy will take effect immediately to help encourage and support Victorian workers to do the right thing, by themselves, by their family and their community and get the third vaccine as quickly as possible. The state environmental approval for a controversial uranium project that received the green light from the federal government on the eve of the 2019 election has expired. Canadian company Cameco planned to develop its Yeelirrie uranium mine 500km north of Kalgoorlie in Western Australia. It was approved by the Barnett government in 2017 and received its federal environmental approval from the Morrison government the day before the 2019 federal election was called, despite the risk the project posed to 12 stygofauna, which are tiny groundwater species. Under the conditions of its state approval, the company had five years to demonstrate the project had substantially commenced or its environmental authority would expire. That deadline was reached on Thursday and a spokesperson for WA’s environment minister, Reece Whitby, has confirmed the project had not substantially commenced. He said Cameco had applied for an extension of its approval and the government was waiting for advice from the department of water and environmental regulation. The Conservation Council of Western Australia and the Australian Conservation Foundation welcomed news the Yeelirrie mine’s deadline had not been met. Dave Sweeney of the ACF said it was “increasingly clear” there was no economic case for uranium mining in WA. The organisations said rather than granting an extension, they hoped the government would choose to permanently protect the site. Mia Pepper from the CCWA said: After 50 years of tireless campaigning to protect Yeelirrie we are now looking forward to the introduction of lasting protections against uranium mining in WA. It is not the first approval for a uranium mine that has lapsed in recent times. Toro Energy’s approval for a proposed uranium mine at Wiluna in the northern Goldfields expired earlier this month and Whitby’s spokesman said the company had not sought an extension. The approval for another Cameco project at Kintyre in the eastern Pilbara expired in March 2020 and an application for an extension was rejected. The McGowan government was elected on a platform of opposing uranium mining but had said it would honour projects that were already under way. Health experts warn delaying elective surgeries in Victoria, including gender affirmation procedures, will see blown-out waiting lists spiral into a “massive healthcare crisis”. On 5 January, the Victorian government announced elective surgery – except for “emergency and urgent” procedures – would be temporarily suspended to ease pressure on public and private hospitals amid the Omicron wave. The changes came into effect from 6 January across Melbourne and major regional cities for a three-month period to help hospitals manage record Covid-19 patients. But on Thursday, IVF procedures were exempted from the restrictions following a social media backlash, with hospitals scaling up to resume procedures from 25 January. But it’s not just IVF that falls under this banner – the current national definition for elective surgery is care that can be delayed for at least 24 hours – used to distinguish between emergency care which requires action within that timeframe. The banner includes a wide range of procedures from cataract extractions and endometrial procedures to coronary artery bypass grafts, full hip and knee replacements and some cancer procedures. Read more: Happy Friday, all! Thanks Matilda Boseley for all your work. I’ll be with you for the rest of the afternoon, bringing you all the end-of-the-week madness as it comes to hand. Okay all, that’s it for this week. The inimitable Stephanie Convery is taking over and will be with you for the rest of the afternoon. See you all bright and early on Monday. More than a year after a December 2020 deadline, 30% of major irrigators in the northern basin of NSW are yet to install accurate water meters and connect them to government monitoring via telecommunications networks. But the Natural Resources Access Regulator chief executive, Grant Barnes, says he is heartened that 90% overall have now installed modern pumps, with the main problem being black spots that limit the final stage of connecting to the government network. In 2017 Four Corners aired allegations of substantial water theft and meter tampering in the Barwon Darling region, prompting a major overhaul of NSW water rules. Unlike Victorian irrigators, who had been using pumps that used telemetry to report real-time water use, many major NSW cotton farms were running outdated meters on pumps that were able to take large quantities of water. But progress has been glacially slow in getting new meters installed in northern NSW. Independent NSW MP Justin Field said it was time for the NSW water minister, Kevin Anderson, to take action against corporate irrigators who continued to flout NSW water metering rules. It is unacceptable that after the Four Corners report into water theft and Icac findings of systemic failures in water management in NSW, we are still in a situation where over 30% of the biggest water users are still breaking the rules. Barnes said that NRAR would soon start prosecuting non-compliant operators unless they had sought an exemption from the minister. When the La Trobe University lecturer Dr Yves Rees was told their gender affirmation surgery would be cancelled, they were devastated. “It was impossible to contemplate,” they said. Rees’ procedure was scheduled for November, during the Delta wave, and was later reinstated when elective surgery was reintroduced in Victoria. But at the time, Rees was told there would be an eight-month wait for the procedure. “There can be a perception gender affirmation surgeries are a choice, something people would prefer to do rather than not,” they said. “That’s not correct; the reality is these are very much medically necessary surgeries …this can be the difference between a life of constant gender dysphoria and acute stress and anxiety, and a life of feeling good.” You can read the full report below: The One Nation leader, Pauline Hanson, has revealed her party will stand on a platform of demanding a royal commission into the Covid response, claiming that Australians have been “lied to” about the number of deaths from Covid. Hanson confirmed that the Senate strike will continue when parliament resumes, telling Prayer and Pushback: “[Liberal senators] Alex Antic and Gerard Rennick stood their ground against their party’s politics – they’re still continuing with that stance as I am and Malcolm Roberts – we’re not going to vote for government legislation until they deal with the states, the way they’re dealing with Covid and keeping families apart.” Hanson said Novak Djokovic should have been let into Australia if he tested negative to Covid, labelling it a “weak excuse” to claim his presence would help spread anti-vax views. To kick someone out because they don’t believe in the vaccine – it’s pathetic. Earlier, Antic spoke about voting with One Nation against vaccine mandates: The One Nation bill was similar to one Craig Kelly had put when he was a government member. It related to discrimination, to people having a choice. People should have a choice over their own medical autonomy ...We had to make a stand on this issue ... It’s not easy – I don’t relish crossing the floor against my own party. Many shared the same view, there were five of us: me, Gerard Rennick, Matt Canavan, Sam McMahon and Concetta Fierravanti-Wells. It’s an important issue, a real line in the sand. Apologies, the Queensland premier said there were 6,031 new Covid-19 cases today in the state, but it seems she maybe have misspoken as Queensland health now says it is in fact 16,031. Interestingly, this means that Queensland is now getting close to overtaking Victoria in terms of daily cases. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, says she does not regret opening up the state’s borders despite the surge of Omicron cases now sweeping the state. No, I don’t, because I said very clearly at the time that the federal government had all the information in relation to the Omicron variant, and they said it was safe to do so. Queensland’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, has gone through the details of the state’s Covid deaths. Sadly today, we have 13 deaths to report, two people in their 60s, five in their 70s, five in their 80s, one person in their 90s. Of those, two were unvaccinated, one received a single dose of vaccine, eight received two doses and one had received a booster, and we don’t have a confirmation on one of those patients. Our thoughts are very much with their families today. We have a total of 855 people in hospital with Covid-19, that’s up by a small amount from yesterday from 850. That includes 54 patients in hospital intensive care units, 22 of whom were are ventilated. That’s a bit up from 48 yesterday. Palaszczuk has spoken a bit more about her plans to bring rapid antigen test manufacturing to Australia after she raised the idea at national cabinet yesterday. She says the federal government is happy to help the state fast track this process to get a manufacturer approved by the TGA. I want to talk briefly about rapid antigen tests ... We’ve got 2 million that are coming over the next couple of weeks, and these are going out, of course, to our health services and our health testing centres for the public and for our staff. We’ve also got a new distribution centre ... which is under construction and [there are a] couple of companies that we hope to get approval soon so we can do local manufacturing right here in Queensland. At national cabinet yesterday, I raised this issue, and can I thank the prime minister, he said that the TGA will work closely with the state government to iron out any issues that those companies may have to facilitate their accreditation as quickly as possible and to go through the normal processes. ... If there’s any issues that either party needs [resolved] then we will fast-track those issues and work with the federal government to really accelerate the approvals of those companies and I thank them for that. OK, we will be hearing from the Victorian leaders at 1pm AEDT today. One Nation senator Malcolm Roberts, is speaking at the Prayer and Pushback online conference – which is a jamboree of anti-lockdown anti-vaccination sentiment. Roberts said: Pauline Hanson and I will continue to oppose government legislation the moment parliament resumes in February – we will continue until we get our freedoms back ... We will be opposing every piece of government legislation until the government wakes up to itself. In November One Nation did side with the government in some procedural votes, but its refusal to vote for government legislation until the Coalition overturns state-based vaccine mandates has been a major headache. Roberts accused Scott Morrison of a “lie” for saying there are “no injection mandates” in Australia. He urged voters to put the major parties last: the Greens last, Labor second last and the Coalition third last. That means, despite all the bluster, One Nation voters would be helping to re-elect the Morrison government if they followed this suggestion. Roberts claimed that Covid-19 vaccines are “plummeting in effectiveness” and “can kill [people] and is killing them”. In fact, after 43m doses given since the start of the rollout the TGA has found that just 11 deaths were linked to the vaccine. The TGA said: Vaccination against Covid-19 is the most effective way to reduce deaths and severe illness from infection. The protective benefits of vaccination continue to far outweigh the potential risks. Roberts made an unsubstantiated claim that the government’s digital identity legislation was drawn in part from “World Economic Forum documents ... under UN direction”. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has also confirmed that Queensland will reduce the time period between people’s second and third vaccine shots to three months. This will come into effect from Monday 24 January. Queensland has recorded another 13 Covid deaths, taking the national death toll on Friday to 80, beating the grim record of 77 set on Tuesday. Queensland has also recorded an additional 16,031 cases in the latest reporting period, a significant dip from the rest of the week’s infection numbers. Australia has again recorded its deadliest day of the pandemic with 88 deaths on Friday. Here is a summary of the daily numbers so far: NSW Deaths – 46 Cases – 25,168 Hospitalisations – 2,743 (209 in ICU) Victoria Deaths – 20 Cases – 18,167 Hospitalisations – 1,096 (121 in ICU) Queensland Deaths – 13 Cases – 16,031 Hospitalisations – 855 (54 in ICU) Tasmania Deaths – 1 Cases – 866 Hospitalisations – 31 (three in ICU) South Australia Deaths – 6 Cases – 3,023 Hospitalisations – 298 (33 in ICU) ACT Deaths – 2 Cases – 826 Hospitalisations – 62 (2 in ICU) Northern Territory Deaths – 0 Cases – 432 Hospitalisations – 62 (2 in ICU) Western Australia Deaths – 0 Cases – 10 Hospitalisations – 0 We should be hearing from the Queensland premier and health minister soon when they step up and confirm the state’s death toll and case numbers. Australia has already recorded 67 Covid-19 deaths today. Tuesday was our deadliest ever day so far, with 77 deaths overall. I’ve been speaking with holders of bridging visas who are still effectively barred from entering the country, trapping people in, and out of, Australia. Bridging visa holders have watched as the federal government announced eased travel restrictions for the vast majority of other temporary visa holders, including this week when the government called for working holidaymakers and students to come to Australia to fill the workforce shortage. Many of those on bridging visas are skilled migrants and graduates waiting on permanent residency or a decision on their more substantive visa. Processing times for making those decisions have blown out massively. That has left many, including skilled migrants waiting for permanent residency, in despair. Unable to see their families for years and with no end in sight, many are considering leaving Australia permanently. Muhammad, who was raised in the United Arab Emirates, was invited to Australia on the promise of a regional work visa as an engineer in the construction sector. He has not seen his family for three-and-a-half years, and was meant to get married abroad this year, but has been separated from his fiancee by the border restrictions. The very first reason why my parents moved to Australia … is they were moving to a better place for their family. But it’s not a better place if you are not even getting your basic rights to see your family. Emma Cochrane, originally from the United Kingdom, has been separated from her family for years. She is still trapped due to her bridging visa, and has applied for a travel exemption 14 times. Each application was denied. We’re literally stuck in this limbo-land. Police in WA are investigating what they suspect was a homemade explosive device that detonated in Newcastle St in Leederville, Perth yesterday, with one man taken into custody. They were called to the vicinity of two restaurants on the busy inner-city street after the device exploded, causing shrapnel and debris to spray out around 10 meters in every direction. WA police say no one was injured. The item appeared to be a homemade, makeshift device that had been ignited. The remnants of the device were seized by police for forensic examination. Later that night they got a call about someone allegedly in possession of a second, similar device. About 10.20pm last night police were called to a location near the intersection of Wellington Street and King Street, Perth after a person reported they were in possession of a similar improvised explosive device. They had [allegedly] taken the device from a vehicle belonging to a person known to them. Police and emergency services cordoned off the area while the tactical response group’s bomb response unit attended and “rendered the item safe”. The item was confirmed to be a homemade, makeshift device similar to the one detonated in Leederville earlier in the day. As a result of investigations, Perth Detectives attended a residence in Lansing Street, Queens Park in the early hours of this morning and executed a search warrant with the assistance of the Tactical Response Group. A 29-year-old man was taken into custody without incident and is assisting detectives with the investigation. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, has thrown his support behind Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan’s, decision to indefinitely enforce hardline border measures. Albanese said while some may have been disappointed by the border decision, the WA premier made the right call, reports AAP. I told [Mark McGowan on Thursday night] I respected and supported the decision ... People were keen to visit loved ones, but the first priority of Mark McGowan has been to keep WA safe. People in WA enjoy life almost as normal, certainly compared with NSW. McGowan said the border delay would allow for more people to receive booster doses and for children to get fully vaccinated against Covid. He initially said the state would reopen the border at 90% fully vaccinated. WA is now at 89%. Albanese said the booster rollout would be critical to providing Covid protection. Mark McGowan has done the right thing by WA which is keeping their health OK, which is a precondition for keeping their economy OK. The border decision has meant neither the opposition leader nor the prime minister, Scott Morrison, has been able to get into WA for campaigning ahead of the federal election, due to be held by 21 May at the latest. The Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras have been forced to cancel their 2022 “Party” event as Covid cases surge in NSW. The Party is one of the central events of the LGBTQ+ festival, when 10,000 or more people gather at the Hordern Pavilion to dance to live music and DJ sets. Luckily, the parade and other events in the festival are going ahead, however. Here is what the festival organisers had to say in a statement this morning: This phase of the pandemic remains volatile, and the health and safety of our community will always remain our top priority. The nature of this event being mostly indoors with dancing, plus with an attendance of more than 10,000 people means it is high risk for Covid transmission. Although March 5th is still several weeks away, due to Party’s large scale, sadly we have had to make the very tough call now, not only for the sustainability of the event in future years but also for the organisation, and so that artists and partygoers can make alternate plans. There will be other opportunities for us to come together this Mardi Gras Festival. We have approved Covid-Safe plans and procedures in place to ensure other key events, including community favourites Fair Day and Parade, can still go ahead as planned. Most of our events are outdoor and/or seated, meaning they fit under the Health Order and are deemed lower risk. Okay, let’s jump back to Tasmania where the premier, Peter Gutwein, is speaking after the state recorded its first Covid-19 death in nearly two years. This brings the state’s total death toll since the start of the pandemic to 14. [There are] 31 people in hospital with Covid. Of these 31 patients, 13 of these people in hospital with Covid are been treated specifically for Covid. Of these 13 patients being treated for Covid, three are being cared for in the ICU with two of these people being ventilated. Gutwein says the death of the 90-year-old woman, who passed away with Covid-19 on 17 January, is being investigated by a coroner to establish how much of an impact the infection had. Today, however, sadly, I do need to speak about our first death associated with Covid since 2020. The person deceased is a 90-year-old woman who was a resident at [a] nursing home in Newtown, Hobart. And our thoughts are with her family and friends at this difficult time. I understand that she had a range of medical issues, she was diagnosed as part of the initial testing that took place across that facility which was undertaken on Wednesday this week, following an outbreak of Covid which was first identified with the facility on Monday, 17 January. Her death was not recorded on the death certificate as being directly from Covid ... In the 24 hours prior, although asymptomatic, she tested positive for Covid and therefore Covid cannot be ruled out as a contributing factor to this death. In the interest of transparency, we are reporting it. NSW Health deputy secretary, Susan Pearce, has taken a bit of a hose to hopes that elective surgeries will restart in the state in the middle of February, telling reporters it will very much be a wait-and-see situation. Obviously, it is highly dependent on ... hospitalisations, so the next week or two will be critical in terms of making a decision. Clearly, as I said at the time, it is never the thing we want to do, to suspend surgery and make people wait. We have demonstrated before, after we’ve come through these waves, that we get back into it and do the best we can to catch up as fast as we can ... I will make the point that for urgent surgery, and during the Delta wave, 100% of surgery was complete on time and we continue to operate on people each and every day, and the thing we’ve kept going is day surgery procedures. There is a balance there, but we will absolutely be turning surgery back on as soon as we possibly can ... we can’t make a call on that yet. Perrottet says NSW views rapid antigen tests as playing a “short term role” in the return to school process, rather than becoming a staple of the education system during Omicron. We have made very clear that we expect rapid antigen tests to play a role, and I understand health’s view in relation to that, but you are balancing a number of things here: the educational outcome and the health outcome, and we want to provide confidence to parents and two teachers. We are working closely with the teacher’s federation to provide comfort to teachers, and we want to provide comfort to parents – and as a parent I know that many mums and dads across our state are anxious about the return to school and therefore we want to provide as much confidence as possible. We don’t see rapid antigen tests playing a long-term role, we see them playing a short-term role in instilling confidence in our parents and in our teachers to get kids back in the classroom on day one. Okay, no return to school plan for NSW to be announced today, Perrottet says. He says the announcement will be made in the coming days (which is starting to cut it quite close to the start of the school year!). Well, this is ... interesting. Perrottet now seems to argue that NSW actually had tighter Covid-19 restrictions than other states, including Victoria. We actually had higher restrictions in place than Victoria. For one week we moved from highly recommending masks to mandating masks, and the majority of people, right across the state, followed that recommendation, just like they are following the recommendation today to minimise household gatherings, and to have most of the activities that you undergo outside rather than inside. That’s the efforts that people have made, the social distancing, continuing to hand sanitise, those types of efforts have been the ones that have got us through. New South Wales actually led the other states when it’s come to imposing certain restrictions. We were the ones that put in [the] two square metres [rule] first, Victoria followed. We were the ones that – even though it was an unpopular decision – to stop singing and dancing. Victoria then followed. There are no dancing limits in Queensland. The approach that we have taken is in line with the national plan to open up once we have a fully vaccinated population and that is exactly what we have done. Perrottet has been asked if he has any regrets about his handling of the pandemic, given today’s record-high death toll: I think if you look right here across the country, we have all taken this approach and there are different approaches obviously, [such as] in Western Australia, but we have taken the approach that ... we learn to live alongside the virus and the challenges will come our way. Ultimately the key is being vaccinated and being boosted. We have to live in the world as it is, not as we want it to be, and that creates difficulties in a global pandemic, but over the last two years our people have stood strong. The alternative is lockdown and that is not the right approach. It is not the right approach at all for where we sit currently in this pandemic. That doesn’t mean it is an easy road. It is a hard road, a difficult and challenging one. But it is the right road as we move through this next phase. Chant has given additional information about the types of underlying health conditions that several of those who died from Covid-19 had. We’ve looked at the underlying health conditions of those 28 [people under 65 who died between 15 and 21 January] and I would like to say that many had multiple health conditions. Four of the 28 did not have significant underlying health conditions and three of those were unvaccinated and one had had two doses, so again confirming very much the importance of vaccination. But of the 24 that had underlying health conditions, 10 had significant heart or valvular disease, six had obesity, six had chronic lung disease, seven had diabetes, six had significant kidney disease, two had significant rheumatological diseases, three had other autoimmune diseases, four had severe liver disease, four had cancer, five were significantly immunocompromised. One had a significant mental health illness. Four had chronic neurological disorders and one was on a palliative care pathway pre-Covid diagnosis. So my key message is this data and all available scientific evidence that I have seen – and new data emerges every day – confirms the critical importance of a booster dose and getting that booster quickly and promptly to afford the maximum protection against the Omicron. Chant: So if we now go to the 46 people who we are reporting have died in this 24-hour reporting period, or as I said, those coronial investigations where the deaths related to the period 29 December through 13 January. There was one person aged in their 30s, one was in their 40s, four were in their 50s, eight people were in their 60s, 12 people were in their 70s and 13 people were in their 80s and seven people were in their 90s. One person had received three doses of the Covid vaccine. Twenty-nine had received two doses ... two people had received one dose and 14 were not vaccinated. And of the seven people who died under the age of 65, all were men. Two had received two doses of the Covid vaccine and five men were not vaccinated including the men in their 30s and 40s. And both of the men who were vaccinated had significant underlying health conditions and three of the five men who were not vaccinated also had significant underlying health conditions. Chant has confirmed that an infant in the Hunter-New England area has died while infected with Covid-19. A coronial inquest is now underway to establish if Covid contributed to the child’s death. You will have noted in the media today that the media has reported on the death of an infant in Hunter New England. Can I also take a moment to express my condolences to that family for their loss. ... That infant had Covid, and the cause of death has been referred to the coroner. I have spoken with the family and the family are very keen for their privacy to be protected. You can imagine that this is one of the most difficult times a family could ever go through, and they just ask the media to respect the privacy of this family. The coroner and the forensic pathologist that has supported the coroner are working very hard to get the answers that most importantly, the family wants... in terms of this child and the contribution that Covid may or may not have made to its death. Clearly, there is strong public interest in this and we are very committed to sharing, to making known the outcome of the coronial [inquest], but can I just be clear, our priority will be that the process will be that the coroner will inform the family, the family will have the time to talk to the clinicians about the implications of the findings and then we will release it publicly. Chant says deaths will continue to rise, despite cases potentially having already peaked in NSW. There is a significant lag between cases being identified to when we see them get hospitalised, and then also flow through tragically, a small number, into deaths. That is the cycle and therefore in this outbreak as in previous outbreaks, we expect to see a lag of two or three weeks. So unfortunately, the death numbers will likely remain high, but my message is that we can turn that around by boosting, and getting that booster in with a real sense of urgency. Chant has confirmed that seven of NSW’s 46 deaths recorded today are historical cases that have been added to the death toll following a coronial investigation. The NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, says there are multiple signs that the spread of Covid-19 is slowing in the NSW community. It is pleasing to see that a variety of indicators demonstrate that the spread of Covid is slowing in the community. One single indicator doesn’t tell the whole. We look at the hospitalisations, the, staff furloughing, staff absenteeism. Data from industry, our testing data, our case positivity. That all gives us a sense that the spread of Covid is slowing and it is pleasing to see, and we want to thank the community and acknowledge the actions of everyone in contributing to that. Okay, jumping back to NSW and Perrottet is urging people to get their booster vaccine doses. I note the change we made very recently ... of moving the interval between your second dose vaccination and your booster shot vaccination from four months to three months. That has ensured that many people across New South Wales are now eligible for their booster shot. We have 40 centres right around New South Wales in addition to the GPs and pharmacists where you can get that booster shot. I’ll get some more information on this for you soon, but we have just heard that Tasmania has recorded its first Covid-19 death since April 2020. The woman was a 90-year-old aged care resident from Hobart who was not vaccinated. There has been an outbreak at her facility with 18 residents and five staff infected. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, is speaking now, as the state records its deadliest ever day of the pandemic. Sadly today, we are reporting the deaths of 46 people in New South Wales who have died with Covid. On behalf of people right across New South Wales, can I extend our deepest condolences to all the families, and our thoughts and prayers and hearts are with you at this difficult time. I’m obsessed with the mystery of this notice going around Twitter this morning. Do you ever see a sign that raises so many more questions than it answers? Today is NSW’s deadliest day of the pandemic so far, and, as such, we will be hearing from the leaders of the state at 10am. An Australian naval ship loaded with critical humanitarian supplies has departed for Tonga as part of disaster relief efforts in the Pacific island nation following the devastating tsunami, reports AAP. HMAS Adelaide left Brisbane just after midnight on Friday, and will take five days to reach Tonga. It has been loaded with humanitarian and disaster relief supplies, along with critical equipment to help with recovery efforts, including three Chinook helicopters. The HMAS Adelaide will serve as a base for relief work in Tonga in the wake of the underwater volcanic eruption and following tsunami. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, said Australia would be sending more planes to help with recovery efforts. “We are working closely with the Tongan government to understand their needs,” he told the Seven network on Friday. They need support on the ground to help them rebuild as quickly as possible, in particular their communication system which has been done. That is a real problem. An Australian C-17 plane landed in Tonga on Thursday afternoon with shelters, hygiene kits, along with water containers. Air supplies had been delayed in getting into the country due to large amounts of volcanic ash being on the runway. A New Zealand plane also landed in the country on Thursday. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, said she spoke to her Tongan counterpart and indicated further financial aid would be on its way. Australia had initially offered $1m in aid in the wake of the tsunami, but Payne said it was likely to increase. “There was $1m for emergency supplies in the immediate aftermath, and there are further commitments to be made,” she told ABC radio. It’s very difficult to estimate (the future cost) before those assessments are made by engineers and by the Tongan government itself in terms of what is needed. Payne said Australia would be standing with Tonga and providing as much support as needed. Armadas of alien-like sea creatures have been washing up on Australian beaches thanks to the warm weather but experts warn people should look but not touch. Jellyfish expert Dr Lisa-ann Gershwin said bluebottles had been washing up on beaches across New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania in “gobsmacking numbers” over the last few months thanks to the warmer weather. “They’re having a really fun time this year and they’re definitely terrorising us this year,” Gershwin said. “They’re really strange alien creatures. There’s no two ways about it. “It doesn’t have any equal to people, or animals, or corals, or things we understand intuitively. It’s just their own brand of weirdness in such a cool way.” You can read the full report below: We shall be hearing from the Tasmanian premier at 10am (AEDT). Victoria’s numbers are out and the state has recorded a significant drop in hospitalisation, from 1,206 to 1,096, with ICU cases also going down from 122 to 121. Sadly 20 Covid positive people died in Victoria in the last 24 hours and 18,167 new infections were recorded. NSW has once again recorded a small drop in hospitalisations, with 2,743 today compared to 2,781 yesterday. Unfortunately, it’s possible that the deaths recorded this morning account for some of that drop. NSW has recorded its deadliest day of the Covid-19 with 46 people sadly dying in the latest reporting period. The state also recorded 25,168 new coronavirus infections. By the way, we are just standing by now for the NSW and Victorian Covid-19 numbers to come through at 9am. Climate change could soon force baby sharks out of their shallow coastal nurseries in what could prove to be a profound threat to the apex predators, reports AAP. Scientists who have been studying such nurseries in French Polynesia have suggested baby sharks are right at the edge of what they can tolerate. Mangroves and other protected habitats baby sharks rely on to grow and learn to hunt have always been extreme places, says James Cook University marine biologist Jodie Rummer. Because they are shallow, baby sharks have always had to cope with the strain of high temperatures. But with climate change driving up sea temperatures and fuelling heatwaves that are more frequent, severe and longer lasting, Dr Rummer says things are about to get worse. “Adaptation - changes in DNA over generations to accommodate new conditions - may not be possible,” she says. This is because sharks are slow to reach sexual maturity compared to most other fishes and do not reproduce as often or have as many babies. Therefore, not enough generations can go by fast enough to keep pace with the rate at which we humans are changing their habitats. Rummer says studies of nurseries in French Polynesia since 2013 indicate baby sharks are getting by, for now, but could ultimately face an adapt, move or die scenario. “They are able to cope with the conditions they are experiencing right now, but they are very much at their limits.” It’s possible newborns might move to cooler nursery-like areas but it’s also possible that some shark populations would disappear. “This is a real risk. We know sharks are tolerating a lot already. The oceans, their habitats, are getting warmer, lower in oxygen, and lower in pH with climate change” Dr Rummer says. She says limiting other threats, such as habitat loss, will be crucial in the face of climate change. But like so many other species, the real answer is dumping fossil fuels as quickly as possible. Even if we try to protect habitat, yep the water is still warming. Even if we protect the sharks from fishing, yep the water is still warming. “Even if we watch the agricultural runoff, and make sure the chemicals aren’t going into the water, yep the water is still warming. We can keep putting those bandaids on, but at the end of the day we have to do the surgery and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and move towards 100 per cent renewables. The Omicron outbreak of Covid cases appears to have peaked in New South Wales, Victoria and other parts of Australia, epidemiologists believe. Prof Adrian Esterman, an epidemiologist and biostatistician at the University of South Australia, said the Omicron wave had “absolutely certainly” peaked in NSW and Victoria. The Reff – the effective reproduction number, which measures how many other people someone with Covid will infect, on average – had dropped below 1 in both states, Esterman said. “We know that the peak has been reached when the Reff gets below 1.” On Thursday, Esterman calculated the Reff to be 0.83 in NSW and 0.8 in Victoria. You can read the full report from Donna Lu and Nick Evershed below: The West Australian paper certainly isn’t mincing words with their views on the indefinite border closure this morning. The Australian federal police have launched an investigation into price gouging rapid antigen tests, warning people that re-selling them for “more than 20 per cent of the original retail purchase price” is a crime punishable with up to five years in prison. Here is what they had to say: Two investigations have begun in Queensland and NSW after referrals from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. More referrals are expected and will be coordinated under the AFP’s Taskforce LOTUS, which was established in 2021 as a targeted and scalable response to potential criminal threats to the COVID-19 vaccine rollout. Taskforce LOTUS will refer allegations of RAT price gouging to Australia-wide AFP strike teams, which have access to the AFP’s world-leading technical and forensic capabilities. The strike teams have the powers to force individuals or businesses engaged in price gouging to surrender the RATs, which will be sent to the National Medical Stockpile. To date, the AFP has not seized or surrendered any RATs, PPE or other relevant medical supplies to the National Medical Stockpile. You can read their full statement below: Former coalition treasurer Joe Hockey has slammed as “absurd” the Morrison government’s failure to take up an offer by Brisbane-based company Ellume to supply rapid antigen tests. Hockey told 2GB’s Ben Fordham this morning: It’s very frustrating for Australia because Ellume are now are exporting 100,000 tests every day to the United States because the US government backed them and the Australian government didn’t. Hockey, who was appointed Australia’s ambassador to the US and has lately become a business consultant, said Ellume first approached him in August 2020 saying they had a rapid test for the flu that could send results to the digital cloud within 15 minutes. He said they should test for Covid, knowing that, for instance, the US navy wouldn’t send a ship to sea if there was a case on board and so there would be demand for such a quick resulting test. “The US government gave emergency approval to Ellume ... and then backed it up with more than $US260m (A$360m),” Hockey said, with a plant built in the US state of Maryland producing 500,000 tests a day. “I felt it was absurd. It was the Department of Industry, not the Department of Health or TGA, but the Department of Industry that wasn’t prepared to back Ellume at that time but the United States government did. “When you have an incredible technology in an emergency situation, you’ve got to do what is in the best interest of the country and that there was a process and the Department of Industry basically walked away.” It’s a little hard to keep up with which minister was responsible for industry in the past few years of turmoil in that portfolio, but in mid-2020 it looks like Karen Andrews held the reins. And where does that leave Australia? Fundamentally, the supply chain relies almost entirely on China to Australia now, which is a risky issue if China suddenly decides that it needs to domesticate all of its testing because of an outbreak there. Or perhaps some bright spark within the Morrison government thinks now is a good time to poke China because that might play out well in a “khaki election” (although it should be those naval camos of blue, white and grey). Better stockpile those RATs now, I suppose. Energy minister Angus Taylor was primarily chatting on the radio this morning about hydrogen, specifically about how “clean” it is and Australia’s plans to export its first shipment of liquefied hydrogen to Japan. It’s very significant and not just for Australia. It’s significant globally. The beginning of a trade which will be crucial for the world in bringing down emissions ... We can create green energy in many different places in Australia, including the La Trobe Valley, but we can also use sequestration to produce ‘blue hydrogen’. We’re not going to get ideological about it – we want clean hydrogen. The debate can get very ideological. People like one sort of energy and dislike another sort. Well, it seems “if not now, when” is a popular phrase among federal ministers this morning when it comes to WA, with Angus Taylor busting it out when speaking to ABC RN just a second ago. Well, WA has done well to keep Australians safe and keep the economy moving... I can understand why Western Australians would be disappointed with the situation. I think it’s reasonable to ask, if not now, when? I can understand the frustration of Western Australians on this but we’ll continue to support them to open up as the rest of the country is doing and to get ourselves back to where we need to be as quickly as possible. Now the federal coalition government has gone slightly harder in criticising WA’s decision to keep their borders closed indefinitely, although they are still somewhat reserved on the topic. Here is treasurer Josh Frydenberg speaking to Sunrise on the topic: This is a decision that the Western Australian government themselves have taken and one for them to explain. But obviously many people in Western Australia would be disappointed with the decision. And they will be asking if not now, when? It’s not a federal-state issue, this one. It’s a decision of the Western Australia government and the Western Australia people have been fantastic through this whole pandemic and the Morrison government has provided them with an unprecedented amount of economic support. It’s really pleasing to see the double-dose vaccination rate now in WA approach 90% but as you know we are in a new phase of the virus. Hundreds of Australia’s early education centres are closed as the Omicron variant of Covid-19 washes over the country, and there are calls for more financial support for the struggling sector, AAP reports. Some 286 centres were on Thursday closed temporarily due to a health emergency, according to data published by the Australian Children’s Education &amp; Care Quality Authority. Those numbers were even higher a week ago. On Thursday last week, 295 centres were temporarily closed in NSW, with 93 closed in Victoria and 51 in South Australia. Lisa Bryant, a consultant in the early education and care sector, told AAP that Covid-19 is “ripping through” childcare centres. She says the sector feels overlooked and needs more financial support to survive. While centres that close due to Covid-19 are allowed to waive families’ gap fees and continue to receive the government subsidy, “that isn’t enough money to keep those services operating,” Ms Bryant says. New government data reveals more than 100 centres closed their doors permanently over four months during the Delta wave in 2021. Between July 1 and November 1 2021, 104 centres closed permanently, the senate estimates data reveals. That’s almost one per day. Some 1,405 centres closed temporarily due to Covid-19 in that time, on average for nine days. Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi says the data shows the need for more financial support. I’m really worried that without adequate support for early learning during the Omicron wave, more centres will close their doors permanently, just as they did during Delta. Time and again, the government has been too slow to support early childhood education and care. Under new rules agreed by national cabinet last week, educators who are close contacts can now continue to go to work as long as they’re asymptomatic. A spokesperson for the federal education department said the change was enabling more services to stay open. But Bryant says it’s putting people at risk, with workers’ fears heightened because small children aren’t eligible for vaccination. Prime minister Scott Morrison on Thursday announced that the federal government would split the costs of rapid tests with states and territories that decide to do surveillance testing in early learning centres, though it’s not clear which jurisdictions those are. Chalmers is dedicated to somehow finding a way to make the WA situation Scott Morrison’s fault. Presenter: The AMA have been scathing in their immediate assessment, saying this is not necessarily the right move and also in an economic sense businesses and the tourism sector are upset by it. If you were Mark McGowan, would you have made the same move? Chalmers: We haven’t been second-guessing premiers of either political persuasion if they have taken difficult decisions based on health advice. I want to pick up something you said about the economy. In the last few weeks, we have seen there are economic consequences to opening up before the federal government’s done its job on things like rapid testing and boosters. We shouldn’t assume that opening up is necessarily on its own good for the economy, versus the alternative. We have seen, with our empty supermarket shelves, we have seen with the Hunger Games* in the pharmacies, we have seen people unable to get back to work safely because of this rapid testing debacle. We all want the economy to recover. We all want Australia to open up when it is responsible to do that. In order for that to happen, we need the prime minister to do his job for once because we have seen the economic carnage when he fails to take responsibility. *What is it with politicians not understanding what the Hunger Games is! Has no one in all of Australian politics actually read this book? Now, the WA premier’s decision not to open the border has no doubt put federal Labor in a bit of an awkward position, so let’s see how the shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers handled being asked about the decision on ABC News Breakfast. This is a big decision, a difficult decision that premier McGowan has had to take. Clearly, he has looked east and seen what are the costs and consequences to the economy and to communities when the virus is running rampant, without the prime minister having done his job on rapid tests and boosters and all the rest of it. That is what played out here. What we have tried to do throughout this pandemic is, when premiers of either political persuasion have taken difficult decisions, based on health advice, is to not second guess that advice. The most important thing we need to see is for Scott Morrison to fix the mess that he’s made of rapid testing and boosters, to take responsibility for that failure, so the whole country can open up safely when it is responsible to do that. Good morning everyone and welcome to Friday (finally!). It’s Matilda Boseley here with you again this morning and of course, we are going to kick off the day talking about Western Australia. WA premier Mark McGowan has abandoned his state’s reopening date of 5 February, claiming it would be “reckless and irresponsible” to bring down the borders then given the surge in Omicron Covid-19 cases across the country. The premier originally stated that borders would reopen once the state’s double-dose vaccination rate reached 90%. It is currently at 89%. McGowan stated that there would be an increased “focus on both safety and compassion” when it comes to border exemptions after 5 February. Unfortunately, the world changed in December, Omicron arrived. It would be irresponsible and reckless for the state government to ignore the facts and ignore the reality of the situation playing out on the east coast. Allowing hundreds or thousands of Omicron-infected people to fly straight into Perth from 5 February with no testing, no quarantine and no public health measures would cause a flood of Covid across our state. It would cause a surge in cases, a surge in hospitalisations, and result in thousands of people not being able to work or go to school. We know that bad health outcomes lead to economic pain. The premier did not give a new reopening date, instead suggesting that the state’s health authorities would watch the eastern states closely over the next few weeks, waiting to see how their respective peaks play out. There will no doubt be plenty of updates on this – and other things, such states announcing their return to school plans – this morning, and I will bring you all the updates here on the blog. So let’s jump into the day!There is a common misconception that the developing world is full of archaic values and that women struggle to have their voices heard. The more countries I visit and the more female leaders I speak to, the more I am convinced the contrary is true. In fact, those in positions of power worldwide could learn important lessons from these strong women when it comes to tackling some of society’s most pressing issues, including pandemics, the climate crisis, education and infrastructure. Of course, successful female leadership in the developing world isn’t new. During her time as prime minister of India, Indira Gandhi was famously strong. In Africa, I met the highly respected former Liberian president Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, who was recognised among Time Magazine’s Top 100 Women of the Year in 2020 for her role in picking up the pieces of a damaged nation when she was elected in 2006. I am writing from South America and the Caribbean, having interviewed many female leaders, most recently from Suriname, Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago and Barbados. The level of respect for female political and business leaders here is partly because they have had to dig deeper to prove themselves, which I believe is one key to their success – particularly during turbulent times. Since taking up office, Barbadian prime minister Mia Mottley has changed the face of democracy in the country. She has been transparent, stands up publicly against injustices, and has created authentic ties between Caribbean countries. It is difficult to overstate what her commitment to collaboration across the region and internationally has done for Barbados, securing investment and developing infrastructure to enable a stable and sustainable economy during the Covid crisis. Countries like Barbados are often not the protagonist, yet Mottley put issues such as the climate crisis and international development to the front on the world stage. Such is the level of support for Mottley within the region that it is not uncommon for the president of Guyana, Irfaan Ali, to wake up at 5am to cook his famous fish curries and have them delivered by the next flight, as a gesture of care and support for her. I have also been struck by the role a “first lady” can play in sharing leadership. In Suriname, Mellisa Santokhi-Seenacherry has helped ensure that, through government policy, no one is left behind. A successful lawyer, she has promoted female leadership, empowerment and mental health with rigour. Guyana’s first lady, Arya Ali, has brought family back into the state house and work. She is committed to inclusivity, setting up countrywide schemes that support women and girls, those with disabilities and children, and is not afraid to look at the challenging issues of domestic violence and rape. This takes courage and heart – and she has these in abundance. In other spheres, Guyana’s Annette Arjoon has been widely recognised for her environmental and community work. Arjoon is responsible for establishing one of the country’s first, and most successful, conservation NGOs, the Guyana Marine Turtle Conservation Society – leading the way in preserving the natural environment for future generations. Trinidad and Tobago has this form of leadership in the private sector – the representation of female CEOs is greater here and in Jamaica than in the US. Trinidad and Tobago Business Hall of Fame award winner Angela Lee Loy continued to invest in training her employees during Covid and supporting them through the challenges of home working, giving parents the flexibility to work around home schooling, for example. “I firmly believe that if their home life needs support, then that should be our domain and area of concern, too,” she says. This approach certainly paid off. Her staff have remained engaged and loyal. It is not easy, and there has never been a linear upward path for female leaders. However, the women highlighted here are courageously carving a path and are a brilliant example to the world. The unprecedented disruption of the past two years has thrown a spotlight on leadership. These women are finding solutions to pressing global challenges with purpose, passion and people at the fore, and are improving the lives of their communities through harnessing the very qualities that make female leaders so successful. Mandeep Rai is the author of The Values Compass: What 101 Countries Teach Us About Purpose, Life and Leadership Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly:Magnus Carlsen’s campaign to score a record eighth victory at Tata Steel Wijk, the “chess Wimbledon”, and so launch his campaign to break the 2900 rating barrier which he narrowly missed in 2014 and 2019, was back on track after Friday’s sixth round despite a the No 1’s earlier sluggish start to the elite tournament. The world champion used his favourite Catalan Opening to demolish Hungary’s Richard Rapport in 31 moves. The 31-year-old Norwegian had been too variable in his earlier games, missing a clear win in one and allowing a tailender a strong chance in another. Carlsen recently announced that his main target this year will be a fresh attempt to reach an all-time record rating of 2900. He had achieved 2882 in both 2014 and 2019 on the official Fide monthly rating lists, and peaked at 2889 in the unofficial daily ratings. He also hinted strongly that he will only defend his world championship crown in 2023 if his opponent is Alireza Firouzja, 18, the world No 2 former Iranian who now represents France, or another from the younger generation. Carlsen began Wijk by drawing with Andrey Esipenko, the 19-year-old Russian who defeated him at Wijk 2021, after missing a chance for a strong central pawn push. Round two was a fine victory against the world No 7, Anish Giri. A draw against Poland’s World Cup winner Jan-Krzysztof Duda was followed by a wild game against Jorden van Foreest, the Dutchman who won Wijk 2021 and then joined Carlsen’s team for the world title match in Dubai. Carlsen missed an improbable win in the complications where the hidden winning manoeuvre was Kf1-e2-d1. Thursday’s fifth round against the tournament tailender Nils Grandelius could have been a real disaster. Carlsen offered a pawn in a sharp position by 19...d5? but it would have been two pawns for little compensation had the Swede found 20 Bxb5+ Kf8 and now 21 Qb4+! Kg8 22 Qb3! when the d5 pawn is pinned and lost. When Carlsen made his surges to a 2882 rating in 2014 and 2019, there were fewer rapid and blitz events, and little serious online play, to distract him. Now all this has changed, and Carlsen will defend his $1.6m Meltwater Champions Tour crown in a series of nine tournaments starting on 19 February. The Tour format has been revamped, with speeded up matches of one day rather than two and the introduction of three points for a win, one point for a draw. The leading trio at Wijk before Saturday’s seventh round (1pm start) are India’s No 2, Vidit Gujrathi, Carlsen, and the world No 5 from Azerbaijan, Shak Mamedyarov, all on 4/6. The trio have yet to play among themselves. Carlsen’s seventh-round opponent will be the tournament’s youngest competitor, Rameshbabu Praggnanandhaa, 16. The Indian teenager has proved a tough opponent and is regarded as a potential top-10 grandmaster. Mamedyarov caused a stir when he opened against Esipenko with 1 d4 Nf6 2 c4 e6 3 g4?! The Russian teenager declined the pawn after a long think, and the game was eventually drawn. Judging by the expert online comments, if that pawn is offered in a future game, it will be snapped up without hesitation. Mamedyarov was also involved in an unusual finish against Duda where White (to move) is rook for knight ahead but Black’s h2 pawn is menacing and he threatens Rf5-h5. However, after White’s next move, Duda resigned. What happened? The answer is alongside the puzzle solution. 3799: 1...Bxe4! 2 Rxe4 Ra8! wins as Black threatens Qxe4, Nxe4 and Ra1+. The game ended 3 h4 Qxe4 4 Qxe4 Nxe4 5 Be3 Ra2 6 g5 Rxb2 and White resigned two pawns down. If 3 Bxf6 Ra1+ 4 Ne1 Rxe1+! and Qxf3. Mamedyarov v Duda: 1 Kb3! Resigns. If Rf5 2 Rc3+ Kg2 3 Rc2+ wins the h2 pawn and the game.What a miracle that the House of Lords rose up and rebelled this week against the government’s assault on protest. Labour had no idea how many peers on the crossbenches, let alone the Tory benches, or even among their own rapidly ageing and frail cohort would be there to vote against draconian new laws that are more redolent of Hong Kong than Britain. If the Lords is the last backstop against the arbitrary powers of an elective dictatorship, it relies on the thin safety net of enough members’ individual sense of justice in that 800-strong chamber – motivating them to turn up and stay late to vote. And this time, they did. This week the women’s rights activists Reclaim These Streets are in the high court arguing that the Metropolitan police breached human rights by banning a vigil on Clapham Common for Sarah Everard, who was murdered by a Met police officer. The group also allege that Met police officers used force while threatening protesters with £10,000 fines for breaching lockdown rules. The spectacle of police charging into the spontaneous outpouring of anger and grief that night should have been shocking enough to stay the government’s hand in its attempt to ban virtually all effective protest. But no. In a parliamentary coup, after the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill went through the Commons, the government bypassed MPs by adding 18 pages of new anti-protest laws for the Lords. It was this outrageous procedure, as much as the laws themselves, that caused the Lords rebellion. In a clear attempt by the government to stifle protest groups such as Extinction Rebellion and Insulate Britain, the new clauses would have made it an offence to disrupt infrastructure, including (rightwing) newspaper printers, with tougher sentences for blocking a highway. Police would also have been given the right to stop and search anyone at a protest without cause for suspicion, looking for people who may be planning to “lock on” to objects – a vital part of protest. Perhaps most shockingly, courts could ban anyone “with a history of causing serious disruption” from attending specific protests at all, even if they have committed no offence. Ignoring the result of the vote, the justice secretary, Dominic Raab, says he is bringing controversial measures to restrict noise at protests – which were defeated in the Lords – back to the Commons in a new bill. He told the BBC’s Today programme that noisy protest “cannot be allowed to interfere with the lives of the law-abiding majority”. These freedom-loving libertarian Tories do a lot of venting about escape from the state’s illiberal powers to make them wear masks or seatbelts, or stop them from smoking indoors, or whatever other imaginary curtailments of their personal “freedom” irritate the readers of the Telegraph, Daily Mail and Spectator – reckless of public welfare. Yet they make not a bleat about the silencing of protest that is a cornerstone of liberty. What’s the point of protest? Anyone who has ever marched, sat down or locked on has asked themselves that. Few indeed are the marches that change a law, though specific and local ones can: fracking at Balcombe was stopped by Tory voters in the heart of Tory land. A million marching against the Iraq war didn’t prevent it. But as with the Chartists, mass protest does change how history looks back on events. Would Iraq be seen as such an unequivocal and illegal disaster without the spectacle of a government ignoring that biggest-ever demonstration of opposition? A giant Countryside Alliance protest seemed to frighten New Labour more. I went on the first nuclear disarmament march as a child with my father (that time, he stopped at the Bunch of Grapes in Knightsbridge and we went no further). I carried on protesting in my teenage years – marching four days every Easter with friends to the atomic weapons research station at Aldermaston. That marked my teenage calendar much like rock festivals are teen rites of passage now. Yet despite the Greenham Common years, the bomb stays unbanned, with this government planning to increase its nuclear arsenal. Suffragettes won, says history – though the more moderate suffragists claimed suffragette violence against property delayed that success. So, what protest does work? There is surprisingly little research, says David Mead, professor of human rights law at the University of East Anglia: “There’s no easy way to measure a causative link”. Steven Fielding, professor of political history at Nottingham University, says the myth of the Jarrow hunger marchers is overdone: they changed nothing. “The poll tax riots didn’t finish Margaret Thatcher, middle England complaints in Tory seats did.” Nothing works without capturing public attention – the press – and that takes wit, imagination, blocking streets, criminal damage or riots. The satirical collective Led By Donkeys is brilliantly subversive and effective, both online – as in its current Line of Duty spoof – and with its billboards and messages projected on to buildings. In the post-2010 austerity years I took part in UK Uncut protests that cleverly juxtaposed public cuts with private companies the group claimed avoided paying fair taxes: I joined an occupation of a Barclays branch to set up a “library”, a Boots to set up a “medical centre”, a Pret a Manger and a Top Shop protest, setting up a token “swimming pool” (a paddling pool) and a “nursery” inside tax avoiders’ premises, as emblems of all the losses they caused. Alas, UK Uncut vanished. Such groups rise and fall, new ones refreshing ways to make a mark. Does it do any good? Action solidifies opposition, encourages solidarity instead of despair among isolated objectors watching the climate reach boiling point. Pro-EU marches reminded us how close that vote was, how many were not consumed by Brexit lies, sending an affectionate message to Europe. Joining a march can feel futile, yet doing nothing feels worse. Protests can be annoyingly captured by the tiny Socialist Workers’ party’s bulk manufacture of placards, “usual suspect” imagery damaging the impact. But here we are with effective protest destined to be banned, allowing only staid, quiet, police-backed marches, whose dullness guarantees no press coverage. This is the real cancel culture, where toppling a statue could earn a 10-year sentence. It took the rebellion of a jury against bad laws to save the Colston Four. Maybe the many rowdy protests around the country against the bill encouraged this week’s Lords rebellion. But that’s just a stay of execution, as the government presses on. As with all present policies, expect no new leader selected by this generation of Tories to turn liberal. They have their own perverse interpretation of liberty. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistAt the height of the pandemic, Farrukh Sair worked on a temporary contract as an NHS IT engineer, setting up computer systems in hospital wards converted to accommodate Covid patients and reconfiguring laptops so that NHS staff were equipped to work from home. In Sonita Gale’s new documentary, Hostile, Sair explains why he has kept hold of his NHS lanyard. “It reminds me I have been part of something good,” he says. Clinging on to this evidence is important to Sair because elsewhere in his life things are not going so well. After 19 years in the UK, he has had to spend more than £50,000 on Home Office visa fees and legal bills to try to regularise his immigration status. He is still fighting for the right to remain. Both his children were born here, but the whole family could face removal proceedings if his most recent application is refused later this year. Sair has confronted some of the most unwelcoming aspects of the Home Office’s hostile environment – a series of policy measures designed to tackle illegal immigration, but which frequently have made life barely tolerable for migrants living here legally. Since moving from Pakistan in 2003 to study at the University of Manchester, Sair has worked continuously in various IT roles (apart from an eight-month period when officials decided to remove his right to work). But his application to remain permanently has been refused several times on contentious technicalities; he has attended six court hearings to attempt to resolve the case. “They are asking for the brightest and the best to come here, however I am already here and they are trying to get rid of me, which doesn’t really make any sense,” he says. Much of the Home Office decision-making highlighted in this film seems not to make sense, unless it is seen as part of a deliberate policy to make life in the UK profoundly difficult for people with an unresolved immigration application. Sair’s immigration status means that the family has no recourse to public funds – the initialism NRPF is marked on their files – so they have no access to benefit payments, his children are not eligible for free school meals and no one in the family is eligible for free NHS healthcare (despite Sair’s role as a frontline essential worker during the worst of the Covid crisis). The family is heavily in debt. It is a bold step to make a feature-length documentary about technical details of immigration policies that even senior politicians find hard to understand. Gale’s film includes footage of Boris Johnson revealing blithely that he has no understanding of NRPF, despite the fact that this immigration status – which excludes hundreds of thousands of people in the UK from social welfare – pushed international students and professionals into destitution during the pandemic when they lost work and were unable to claim unemployment benefit. The film was longlisted for the outstanding debut Bafta this month and Gale hopes that it will raise awareness of the human impact of Britain’s ever-tightening immigration policies. “People know we’ve got an environmental crisis, but we’ve also got a humanity crisis. I wanted to show the broken system, so people will start thinking about how it can be fixed,” she says. Hostile also features Anthony Bryan, a Windrush victim who was sacked after wrongly being classified as an illegal immigrant, spent five weeks in immigration detention and was almost deported to Jamaica – a country he had left as a child half a century earlier. He is still struggling to rebuild his life. A huge amount of content is covered at dizzying speed and the bleak subject matter makes the film hard to watch. But Gale’s portrayal of Sair’s predicament is so clear and powerful that the pointless human damage wrought by these complex policies is laid bare. We see Sair sitting at a table at home, day after day, sifting through piles of neatly sorted immigration applications, tax records and bank details, juggling his debts and working out how to save enough money (about £12,000) to pay for the next application for a visa for his family. “Waiting is not like hurting you physically, but it is torture mentally,” he says. He keeps three printers in the attic – his main one, a spare one and a backup ready to be recommissioned in case of emergency. Printing thousands of pages of forms and evidence is a central part of the head-spinning immigration application process. While the rest of his house is immaculate, Sair’s attic is a tip and he is reluctant to tidy it. “It reflects the confusion of my life,” he says. When I spoke to him on the phone this week, Sair said: “We don’t know what tomorrow will bring. My children only speak English and we could still face removal to Pakistan, a place they’ve never lived.” He is pleased to have been involved in the film, even though it has exposed the misery through which his family continues to live. “It was very emotional to see it. I don’t have any convictions; I don’t even have points on my driving licence. Rather than thinking about what I’ve contributed to this country, they stick to these tick-box exercises. I’m still struggling to stay.” The Home Office said it was unable to comment on Sair’s case due to a pending appeal. • Hostile is in UK cinemas from 21 JanuaryThe prosecution: Elsie My brother is really tight with spending on birthdays, and refuses to make an effort Ollie, my younger brother, is a nightmare every time a birthday in our family rolls around, but he’s especially bad with mine. I am thinking of banning presents between us as it has caused a few arguments. He doesn’t put in the same amount of effort as I do for him. For years he wouldn’t even get me a card, whereas I go all out. I know it’s partly because I’m five years older than him, so when we were kids I wouldn’t expect much. But now that he’s 24, it offends me. Over the years I have given him designer shirts, clothing vouchers and electronics he’s asked for. He has bought me a cheap supermarket card with the sticker still on, a scented candle that smelled of nothing and a horrible scratchy scarf. A few years ago I snapped, and told him his gifts weren’t up to scratch. Ollie apologised, but then last year I got a text on the day and a cheap bouquet of flowers a month late. That year I had bought him some AirPods. For his 21st birthday, I bought him an expensive engraved gold necklace. He was really grateful, but that year I didn’t even get a birthday card – he completely forgot. I texted him the day after saying, sarcastically, “Thanks for your birthday message”, and he said he was sorry – he’d been stressed with his new job, but I don’t think that’s a valid excuse. Our youngest brother is really close with Ollie and they swap decent gifts all the time. Maybe it’s because they are boys, or because Ollie just knows what to get him. As the older sister it feels like the responsibility is always with me to keep up with birthdays, and his lack of effort makes me sad. Birthdays are a time to show a loved one that you care. He has known me for more than 20 years – so he should know what to get me. It’s especially important as we grow up. He needs to start being more thoughtful with gifts or it’s going to continue to affect our relationship. I feel as if I should start spending less and be less thoughtful, which is horrible, but what other solution is there? The defence: Ollie I admit I could do better at giving birthday gifts, but Elsie never tells me what she wants I am terrible with presents, but it’s usually because I forget Elsie’s birthday, or I’m preoccupied. This year I have put the date in my calendar, but I should have done that before. Girls are really hard to buy for and Elsie never tells me what she wants. I don’t have a girlfriend, so how am I supposed to know what to do? In the past, when I’ve tried to keep things simple with presents, Elsie has been offended. The time I got her a scented candle she was thankful to my face, and then months later I heard from our younger brother that she had actually been annoyed about it. She won’t tell me until long after the birthday has passed. I would love her to make a few gift suggestions so I have a rough idea of what to get her. Over the years she has let rip at me when I’ve forgotten her birthday. She’s like: “I don’t know why I bother.” That’s her favourite line. I sent her flowers in the post last year but they were late: it was lockdown, everyone was stressed. She wasn’t impressed but at least I did something. I think she also holds a bit of a grudge when I give our brother, Michael, a good gift, but he’s easier to buy for because we’re closer in age and he’s a guy. It’s true that Elsie is really good with my birthday. She has always been a super-thoughtful big sister. One year she got me this amazing gold chain that I had wanted for ages. I thought my parents were getting it for me, but Elsie told me she wanted it to be from her. She loves the feeling of being a good gift-giver, and I wouldn’t want to take that role away from her. It’s just that Elsie secretly wants me to repay her for all the presents she gets me and I am just not on her level. I also don’t have her budget: I’m in a low-paid, entry-level job, while Elsie is a manager. I’ll try to step it up, because I want to preserve our relationship, but she can’t expect me to match her. That’s not what giving presents is about, after all. The jury of Guardian readers Should Ollie make more effort when buying gifts? It’s Ollie’s lack of effort that upsets Elsie most, not the price tag – especially as he makes more of an effort for their brother. Ollie is aware his thoughtlessness upsets Elsie, so there is no excuse. He is guilty and should up his game. Nadine, 56 Elsie is looking for commercial solutions to what is an existential problem. She should consider having an actual conversation with her brother rather than papering over the cracks in their relationship with vouchers. Jac, 29 Overall, I side with Ollie. You give gifts because you want to give, not because you want something similar in return. Not everyone shows their feelings for others like this, so Elsie should take a broader perspective. However, Ollie should mark her birthday somehow as it clearly matters to her. Michael, 52 Ollie’s excuse of “girls are really hard to shop for” is really poor. Aside from this, Elsie needs to accept that gift giving is dependent on our ability to spend. She’s thoughtful and puts her heart into it, but her demand for equal gifts takes some of that away. Nicole, 35 Elsie says “he should already know what to get me”. Why should he? He is a 24-year-old single bloke! They need hints, or a list of possibilities. Maybe Elsie could prime her mum with a few suggestions in advance (within Ollie’s price range, of course) and she could tactfully pass them on. Carol, 83 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Ollie get Elsie better birthday presents? The poll is now closed We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. Last week’s result We asked if Annabelle should stop hogging the television, as it annoys her dad, Mick. 61% of you said no – Annabelle is innocent 39% of you said yes – Annabelle is guilty Have a disagreement you’d like settled? Or want to be part of our jury? Click hereOK, so the much ballyhooed Super Wild Card Weekend slate ended up being something of a bust. Of the six games, four ended up being blowouts, with only the Cincinnati Bengals’ win over the Las Vegas Raiders and the Dallas Cowboys’ epic choke-job against the San Francisco 49ers providing much drama. However, with the field culled down to eight, the divisional round traditionally ends up providing fans with the most exciting four games of the year. Here are our predictions for which teams will advance to the conference finals. Cincinnati Bengals at Tennessee Titans (Saturday, 4.30pm EST/9.30pm GMT) What the Bengals need to do to win: At the risk of repeating ourselves, the Bengals’ hope of success lies in Joe Burrow. If Burrow can have another performance like the one against the Raiders last week, where he threw for two touchdowns (albeit one with an assist from an erroneous whistle) and amassed 244 yards, the Bengals could pull off something nearly unthinkable for them: a playoff winning streak. What the Titans need to do to win: Rely heavily on their running game. Tennessee quarterback Ryan Tannehill has had a fine year, but the passing game is not their true strength. Plus, the Bengals’ defense has allowed a not-ideal 4.4 yards per rush this season, making it a crucial weakness for the Titans’ running back corps to exploit. Key player: Derrick Henry, running back, Titans. While Henry has been out with a fractured foot since Week 8, he is one of the best players in the league when healthy. The question is how good he will be after his injury. Tennessee have proved they can win without him, going 6-3 in his absence, but the playoffs are a different beast and the Titans are at their most dangerous when Henry is barreling through hapless defenses. Prediction: Bengals over Titans San Francisco 49ers at Green Bay Packers (Saturday, 8.15pm EST/Sunday 1.15am GMT) What the 49ers need to do to win: Quarterback Jimmy Garoppolo, who is dealing with a strained shoulder, simply cannot afford to make the mistakes that nearly doomed his team against the Cowboys. During the win, he threw one potentially game-changing pick in the fourth quarter and was inches away from throwing a second. The 49ers got away with their blunders last week because the Cowboys were even sloppier, but the Green Bay Packers won’t be as forgiving. What the Packers need to do to win: With Aaron Rodgers as their quarterback, the trick will be for the Green Bay defense to force the ailing Garoppolo into a throwing contest. The Packers should be able to score with ease – that’s not going to be the issue – but the 49ers are a great, well-rounded team that could very well keep pace. That is unless, as noted above, the Packers expose San Francisco’s weakness at the most important position in the entire sport. Key player: Davante Adams, wide receiver, Green Bay Packers. Aaron Rodgers is going to be the league MVP for the second straight season, but let’s give some credit to his top receiver. Adams is a huge reason for Rodgers’ success, having put up 2,927 yards and scored 29 touchdowns combined over the past two seasons. If this weekend’s heavyweight matchup is Josh Allen v Patrick Mahomes, then Adams v Deebo Samuel will make one hell of an undercard. Prediction: Packers over 49ers Los Angeles Rams at Tampa Bay Buccaneers (Sunday, 3.00pm EST/8.00pm GMT) What the Rams need to do to win: Get a big game from quarterback Matthew Stafford. The Buccaneers have a great run defense but not the best luck in limiting the pass. Opposing quarterbacks have averaged a 65% completion rate against the Bucs this season. If Stafford can do his best to throw it to the players wearing Rams uniforms, not exactly his greatest attribute as a QB, he could put his team in line for a road victory. What the Buccaneers need to do to win: Keep Tom Brady upright. If the offensive line doesn’t do its job, the Rams could stifle the mighty Tampa Bay offense. As great as Brady is, he’s still 44 years old and was never the most mobile quarterback in the league. He’s also missing most of his reliable targets, not counting Rob Gronkowski, so he might need an extra second or two to get the ball out of his hands. Key player: Aaron Donald, defensive tackle, Rams. What Rodgers is to offense, Aaron Donald is to defense. The preseason favorite to win Defensive Player of the Year every year, he’s exactly the guy to disrupt Brady’s flow and stop Tampa Bay’s attempt at winning back-to-back Super Bowls. Predictions: Buccaneers over Rams Buffalo Bills at Kansas City Chiefs (Sunday 6.00pm EST/11.00pm GMT) What the Bills need to do to win: Score a touchdown on every drive again? In last week’s thorough humiliation of the New England Patriots, the Bills did just that if you don’t count the game-ending kneel down. They clearly don’t need any notes from a gameplay perspective but maybe the best advice they should heed is not to get too cocky after pitching a perfect game. The Patriots essentially folded against them last week and the Chiefs will do no such thing. What the Chiefs need to do to win: The Chiefs defense must put together a clinic. Despite being much-improved from previous incarnations, Kansas City’s defense is still not entirely a known entity. It’s going to be a team effort on Sunday, because even if they stop the pass, Allen can just take the ball himself. He’s rushed for 60 yards in five of his last six games. Key player: Josh Allen, quarterback, Bills. Josh Allen’s not entirely expected development from a promising but highly erratic younger passer to one of the most dangerous offensive threats in the game has been one of the league’s best storylines. Now comes the biggest challenge of his young career: winning a shoot-out against Patrick Mahomes during a road playoff game. Can he pull it off? Well, that’s why they play the games … and it’s going to be glorious watching him try. This is the game of the weekend and possibly the entire NFL season. Prediction: Chiefs over BillsThere were just six days between Young T &amp; Bugsey releasing their debut album and the UK going into its first lockdown in March 2020. But while the Coronavirus Act kept the silky Nottingham rap duo off stages, their songs did the algorithm-boosted rounds on TikTok – most notably the smooth slinking Don’t Rush, which was propelled to internet ubiquity (and eventually the US Billboard charts) by a glow-up challenge started on the app by a bored Hull University student. Compounding the runaway success of a single song into something more concrete isn’t a challenge unique to the TikTok age, but it’s one Young T &amp; Bugsey – AKA Ra’chard Tucker and Doyin Julius – are nonetheless shouldering with their second full-length album, Truth Be Told. The result is a tussle between rehashing the same formula and testing deeper waters. The formula, for the most part, wins out in a stream of similar-sounding, seductive shag rap. Big Bidness, Nice (which features another TikTok rapper, Blxst), and Hall of Flame are all variations on the same sultry theme as Don’t Rush. The Lil Wayne-aping chorus of Prada Bae (“Real Gs move in silence like bolognese”) feels written for an Instagram caption. It’s fun, and fine, if a little self-serious. But there are glints of something greater too – like the slick Afrobeat shuffle of Tense, the title track’s gliding trap, and Outro, which sounds like Mobb Deep, were they from Nottingham not New York – that keep you hooked in, and swiping back for more.Authorities and pet lovers in Hong Kong are locked in a game of cat and mouse, with citizens mounting a clandestine rescue operation for hamsters condemned to be euthanised over fears they could transmit Covid-19. On Tuesday, government and health officials announced traces of the virus had been found on 11 hamsters, all in a pet shop where a 23-year-old staff member had fallen ill. They decided more than 2,000 of the imported animals, including any pets bought since 22 December, must be killed, and “strongly recommended” owners surrender their pets. For many, it was the final straw after two years of ad hoc and often illogical pandemic measures. Residents sprung into action, offering to hide or adopt the doomed pets. Tens of thousands signed petitions, while others offered to fake backdated receipts to before 22 December, the Washington Post reported. Groups gathered outside collection facilities urging people not to hand over their animals. One Causeway Bay woman, who gave the name Jessica, said she volunteered on a social media group to house a hamster, but was still waiting to be assigned one. “There are a lot of other volunteers,” she said. “I left a message saying which area I’m in, and that I could take one hamster because the flat I live in is small and I have a dog. “I can keep it forever, or if someone wants it back I can give it back,” she said, adding she wasn’t worried about the infection risk. “Even if I’d bought a hamster [myself], I would rather have Covid-19 than hand it in … Hong Kong makes such a big deal of it.” Local media was awash with footage and images of crying children saying goodbye to their hamsters, and interviews with people working to save them. Many spoke anonymously, their voices and faces disguised out of fear of retribution amid Hong Kong’s worsening security crackdown. A spokesperson for Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, called the backlash irrational, and said the animals had been “humanely dispatched … to minimise as soon as possible the potential risks of virus transmission”. The Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department (AFCD) said attempts to save the hamsters obstructed the department’s work and posed a public health risk. “The AFCD demands them to stop such action immediately and return the hamsters taken away,” it said. “If the people concerned continue with such action, or fail to return the hamsters taken away, the AFCD will stringently follow up and hand it over to the police for handling.” Jessica said she was not worried about the government threats. “I don’t care about that, the police. Fuck them. They arrest people anyway for doing nothing,” she said. “Some of my friends are in jail now. Not because of a hamster. I would rather save a life. A hamster life is still a life and that’s what a lot of volunteers are thinking.” Animal welfare organisations have blasted the government’s decision, and urged people not to hand anything over, saying the government did not have the legal power to make the order. By Thursday, just 68 had been handed over by the public, according to government figures. Authorities have conceded there is no evidence that domestic animals can pass the disease to humans, but said they were acting out of caution. “We have reason to believe the source was the warehouse containing more than 1,000 hamsters in close proximity,” said Yuen Kwok-yung, a leading microbiologist and government adviser, on Wednesday. “The virus could multiply via cross-infection and spread to pet shops and other retail outlets.” Additional reporting by Xiaoqian ZhuNetflix has stoked fears the pandemic-fuelled streaming boom is fizzling out, saying it expects to report the lowest number of new subscribers in the first quarter in more than a decade, as competition from newer rivals such as Disney+ grows. Netflix expects to add only 2.5 million new subscribers globally in the first three months of the year, well down on the 4 million new sign-ups in the first quarter of 2021, and almost half the number expected by analysts. The company has not reported such a low number of new subscribers in the first quarter since 2010, in the past seven years it has always managed to attract at least 4 million new sign-ups, according to research firm Ampere Analysis. Shares in the streaming company plunged by almost 20% on Friday, wiping almost $45bn (£33bn) from its value, as investors took fright at the unexpected slowdown in growth. “While retention and engagement remain healthy, acquisition growth has not yet re-accelerated to pre-Covid levels,” Netflix said, pointing to “Covid overhang and macroeconomic hardship” in parts of the world such as Latin America. Netflix added 8.3 million new subscribers in the final quarter of last year, thanks to hits such as the Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence film Don’t Look Up, and Squid Game, broadly in line with analyst expectations. Overall, Netflix added 18.2 million new subscribers last year, half the number it gained in 2020 when the pandemic fuelled a streaming boom as the public sought to alleviate boredom during lockdowns. Netflix admitted that the streaming wars against rivals such as Disney, Apple, HBO Max, Peacock and Amazon, which on Wednesday announced details of its mega-budget Lord of The Rings TV adaptation, is intensifying but that it remains in growth in all territories. “Consumers have always had many choices when it comes to their entertainment time – competition that has only intensified over the last 24 months as entertainment companies all around the world develop their own streaming offering,” the company said. “While this added competition may be affecting our marginal growth, we continue to grow in every country and region in which these new streaming alternatives have launched.” Last year, Netflix added the fewest number of UK subscribers since it launched in 2012. Netflix’s disappointing results were accompanied by Peloton, the maker of exercise bikes and running machines which has been another pandemic winner, which suffered an almost 25% slump in its market value after a report that it has experienced a slump in demand. The company’s chief executive, John Foley, told its 3,200 staff that it needs to “evaluate” the size of its workforce and indicated that production is to be scaled back. “We feel good about right-sizing our production, and, as we evolve to more seasonal demand curves, we are resetting our production levels for sustainable growth,” he said. Netflix and Peloton are among a number of companies that have thrived under lockdown conditions, but are now being dumped by investors as the stay-at-home boom fizzles out. Zoom, the video-conferencing app that became indispensable during the pandemic, and Netflix’s rival Roku have both seen their market value fall by 60% over the past 12 months. Nevertheless, Netflix pointed to a number of big releases, including Ozark, Bridgerton and Stranger Things, later in the first quarter that it expects to drive a return to stronger growth. “As an increasing number of subscription- and ad-based video services entered the fray, Netflix knew it would have to spend big on high-profile, original content to compete with not just legacy platforms but newer services, too,” said Ryan Cook, the UK managing director of the advertising technology company Criteo. “While price increases across regions will offset this flood of content to some degree, Netflix may find itself looking over its shoulder at other advertising-funded video-on-demand services for inspiration. This could mean opening its platform up to ad-funded models for a reduced subscriber fee.”Arsenal are in talks with New England Revolution over buying the goalkeeper Matt Turner. If the 27-year-old USA international joins it would clear the way for Bernd Leno to leave. Personal terms for Turner have been discussed and will not present a stumbling block, so the issue is whether the clubs can agree a fee. Turner has played his whole career in the US and started 13 of his country’s 22 matches last year, with Manchester City’s Zack Steffen his biggest rival for the No 1 spot. Turner won the best goalkeeper award at the 2021 Concacaf Gold Cup after playing in all six US matches and keeping five clean sheets to help the team secure the title. He is regarded by Arsenal as cover for Aaron Ramsdale, who has impressed since joining from Sheffield United last summer. Ramsdale’s form has restricted Leno to four cup appearances since late August, when he started Arsenal’s 5-0 Premier League defeat at Manchester City. Arsenal’s Thomas Partey has admitted he ought to have been cleverer than to be sent off for two yellow cards in Thursday’s Carabao Cup semi-final defeat by Liverpool. “I should be more intelligent not to get in a challenge already booked but this is my personality I like to fight for every ball,” the midfielder wrote on his Instagram stories.Two gay educators have spoken out about being sacked for their sexuality, warning an inquiry the religious discrimination bill will make it easier for such dismissals. Karen Pack said she was sacked “purely because I’m gay and I was getting married to my partner” while Nathan Zomprogno warned a Senate inquiry on Friday that schools “can and do” discriminate on sexuality. LGBT equality groups have said the bill will override state laws with more limited religious exemptions to discrimination laws on hiring and firing and give schools stronger rights to sack teachers for their views on sexuality and marriage. Pack told the Senate legal and constitutional affairs committee she was sacked as a lecturer at a Christian theological college after she became engaged to her same-sex partner in 2019. In March and April 2020 the college sacked Pack after it received complaints denouncing her relationship as “demonic”, despite praising Pack for her depth of Christian faith. “It was very clear that the problem wasn’t my teaching, my theology or my character,” she said. “It was purely because I’m gay and I was getting married to my partner, Bronte. “I have a sincerely held Christian faith. I am not trying to insinuate myself into anything. What is happening at the moment with this legislation and others is an attempt, essentially, to purge the church of people like myself.” Teacher Zamprogno told the hearing that Christian schools “can and do” sack teachers for their sexuality, and he and Pack were “just two examples of very many”. After working in private Christian schools for 20 years, Zamprogno said he was “well regarded and good at what I did” and believed his sexuality had “nothing to do with my ability to do my job”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “When I was challenged about my sexuality, I answered honestly and then I was told that there was no place for me at the school the following year,” he said. “The connection was crystal clear. “Employers will often obfuscate the reason that they’re letting their employee go, even when it is clear that it is because of their religious conviction or their sexuality,” he said. “The provisions of this bill effectively empower those who want to put pressure on and ultimately purge people of a different religious conviction to themselves, within religious communities.” The attorney general’s department has submitted that although the bill does not affect schools’ ability to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation it “would allow a religious school to consider a person’s religious beliefs about issues such as sexuality” where it is part of the beliefs of the school. The Sydney Anglican church has defended an unnamed Christian school against the widely reported claims that teacher Stephanie Lentz had been sacked for being gay, by arguing she was sacked for her belief that a person can be a Christian and be gay. “A heterosexual teacher who held the same theological views on sexuality and relationships, and therefore was unable to sign the statement of belief, would also have had his or her employment terminated,” it said. Two parliamentary inquiries into the bill are due to report by 4 February. The bill is likely to require Labor support to pass, as three Liberal MPs are reserving their right to vote against it and a further group of four Liberals agreed to support it in return for greater protections for LGBTQ+ students that the attorney general appears to have reneged on. Michaelia Cash told a Christian webinar in December protections for LGBTQ+ students will have to wait for 12 months, despite Angie Bell, Fiona Martin, Dave Sharma and Katie Allen claiming they’d won support to pass them at the same time as the religious discrimination bill. Independent candidate for Wentworth Allegra Spender said “gay students should never be penalised or expelled from school for their sexuality”. “We mustn’t discriminate on the basis of religion but students and teachers must be protected in any laws,” she told Guardian Australia. “Once again the community is left guessing what the government is going to do. “The government needs to explain how it is going to protect vulnerable young people, rather than leaving us guessing.” Bell told Guardian Australia she will “continue to work with the attorney general and all stakeholders”. “I am certain there will be further discussion on amendments and possible solutions to ensure the safety and protection against discrimination for all Australians once the bill is reintroduced in parliament.”Currently larging it up at the Africa Cup of Nations with Ivory Coast, for whom he scored on Thursday as they guaranteed qualification for the knockout stages, eliminating reigning champions Algeria in the process, Franck Kessié could be on his way to the Premier League. Tottenham are ready to make Milan a decent offer for the 25-year-old midfielder before the January window closes, in the hope of avoiding an unseemly bidding war for his services with Manchester United, Barcelona and Paris Saint-Germain when his contract expires in the summer. Spurs see Kessie as the ideal replacement for Tanguy Ndombele, who looks increasingly likely to go on loan to PSG, in a deal which could include an option for the runaway Ligue 1 leaders to buy at the end of the season. Newcastle remain interested in bringing Jesse Lingard on loan to St James’ Park until the end of the season and have made a new and improved offer after having a previous one rejected. Lingard is reported to be interested in the move but Manchester United want to cash in with a permanent deal for the 29-year-old, who will be a free agent in June. Newcastle are also reported to have submitted a £14.5m for Bayer Leverkusen’s Dutch left-back Mitchel Bakker and are inching closer to completing their £30m deal for Sevilla central defender Diego Carlos, despite facing competition from another unnamed Premier League club. With Bernd Leno also rumoured to be off to Tyneside, Arsenal will try to sign New England Revolution’s Matt Turner as a replacement for their reserve goalkeeper. After returning home early from Afcon following the detection of heart lesions after testing positive for Covid, Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang has taken to Instagram to provide fans with a medical update. “Hi guys, I came back to London to do some additional checks, and I’m very happy to say that my heart is absolutely fine and I’m completely healthy!!” he or one of his people wrote in a message accompanied by a beaming Pierre giving a thumbs-up in the gym. “Really appreciate all the messages over the last few days and I’m already back at it.” The news will be welcomed by Milan, Juventus, PSG, Marseille and Sevilla, who are all interested in taking the out-of-favour Gabon international on loan. Bordeaux and Nigeria winger Samuel Kalu is wanted by Watford, according to manager Claudio Ranieri. “It is not closed 100% and for this reason I said if the club think he is good for us, for now, for the future, we are ready to train with him,” he said. With three players signed already this month, Watford are also ramping up their efforts to get Liverpool defender Nat Phillips in the dressing-room door. And finally, Hull City winger Keane Lewis-Potter is a young man in big demand, with Brentford, Southampton, Leicester and West Ham all forming an orderly queue. His 19-year-old Fulham counterpart Fabio Carvalho has also turned heads at several Premier League clubs including Liverpool, Leeds and West Ham.Pick of the week Personal Shopper The second of two collaborations between actor Kristen Stewart and director Olivier Assayas is this cunningly ambiguous ghost story cum stalker thriller from 2016. Stewart is a tightly wound presence as Maureen, an American in Paris with a job procuring haute couture clothes for a demanding female celebrity. She is also a medium whose twin brother has died – their pact that they would stay in touch beyond the grave leads to several chillingly depicted attempts to make contact. A series of creepy, anonymous text messages adds to her worries as she faces her fears and her grief, the camera circling her like an unseen spirit. Sunday 23 January, 1.25am, BBC Two *** Supernova Harry Macqueen’s chamber piece has a more muted take on memory loss than recent films The Father or Relic, but is no less heart-tugging. Longstanding couple Sam (Colin Firth) and Tusker (Stanley Tucci), who has early onset dementia, take a road trip to the Lake District. Amid family gatherings and cosy nights in their campervan, the pair struggle to deal with loss – in more ways than one. It may sidestep some of the realities of the condition, but this is a superbly acted drama about living life on your own terms. Saturday 22 January, 10.25am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere *** The Man Who Fell to Earth David Bowie’s otherworldly musical personas and mannered acting style made him an ideal lead for this seminal 1976 sci-fi. His alien, Thomas Jerome Newton, comes to Earth in disguise with a plan to save his dying planet. But in Nicolas Roeg’s fractured tale, he finds powerful interests – and his own weaknesses – conspiring against him. A woozy melancholy infuses the film, in the lives of the people Newton touches, his addictions to booze and television, and even in his love for Candy Clark’s waitress Mary-Lou. Sunday 23 January, 1.05am, Talking Pictures TV *** The Souvenir With part two just out in cinemas, here’s an opportunity to catch the challenging first tranche of Joanna Hogg’s semi-autobiographical coming-of-age drama. Honor Swinton Byrne plays Julie, a 24-year-old film student whose privileged upbringing has left her all at sea in terms of her creative voice and the authenticity of her work. Then she meets Foreign Office official Tony (an effortlessly toffish Tom Burke) and is seduced by his air of confidence and louche mystery. But his gaslighting of her and slowly revealed dark secrets begin to sour their relationship. Sunday 23 January, 10pm, BBC Two *** Fantastic Mr Fox This is Roald Dahl, certainly, but as filtered through the lens of Wes Anderson it’s a curious beast. In a children’s animated adventure about an egotistical fox (voiced by George Clooney) and his long-running battle with three human farmers we find Anderson’s typically smart dialogue and passive-aggressive characters. There’s enough quick comedy, colourful spectacle and Dahlian viciousness for the kids, but this is really one for the grownups in the room. Sunday 23 January, 2pm, Channel 4 *** Little Joe An unsettling Invasion of the Body Snatchers-style horror built in bold blocks of colour, Jessica Hausner’s 2019 film is set at a laboratory that is developing a mood-enhancing plant. When scientist Alice (Emily Beecham) brings one of the pretty red flowers home for her son, Joe (Kit Connor), and names it Little Joe, bad things are bound to happen. There’s good support from Ben Whishaw and Kerry Fox playing Alice’s concerned colleagues, as both mother and child find their behaviours changing in response to the possibly malevolent flora. Wednesday 26 January, 11.15pm, BBC Two *** The Abominable Dr Phibes Vincent Price’s 100th film is a fine example of the grand guignol tendency in 70s British horror. Director Robert Fuest had directed episodes of The Avengers, and this 1920s-set chiller has elements of the spy series’ line in stagey murders. Price’s mute, scarred widower takes revenge on the doctors he blames for his wife’s death by recreating the curses visited on Egypt in the Old Testament. It’s inventive stuff – kudos to the set and costume designers – even with a sadly diminished Joseph Cotten as one of the surgeons under threat. Friday 28 January, 9.05pm, Talking Pictures TVThe Last One is French-Algerian writer Fatima Daas’s autobiographical debut novel, translated beautifully into English by Lara Vergnaud. Fatima Daas is both the pseudonym of the author and the name of the narrator in this hypnotising, lyrical book. Fatima lives in the majority-Muslim Parisian banlieue of Clichy-sous-Bois, with her parents and sisters, who were all born in Algeria. She’s the only one born in France, the youngest child in the family; she is “the last one”. Almost all of the numerous chapters, some less than a page, start with an iteration of “My name is Fatima Daas”, followed by a couple of words, or a few sentences, expanding on aspects of her identity or lineage. This rhythmic invocation is powerful, though occasionally I felt it contributed to an impression of explaining details of her existence specifically for a non-Muslim readership. For me, this is always unnecessary in a work of fiction, but seemed especially so considering the intimate specificity of Fatima’s world. What information, guidance or meaning, then, is contained in the name Fatima Daas, which we read more than 70 times in under 200 pages? This is one of many burning and burdening questions of identity, tradition, heritage, religion and sexuality that Daas’s narrator deftly explores in a nonlinear love letter to embracing all aspects of herself – or at least trying to before she self-destructs. The creation of a spiritual self that is not in conflict with a sexual self, and the unwavering desire for these two selves to be joined harmoniously, is gorgeous and galvanising to read, even as Fatima suffers and doesn’t fully succeed in her attempts. Fatima is a lesbian and a practising Muslim. In her youth, she wishes to be an imam: “The Koran soothes me.” Her mother sharply tells her that this is not possible for girls. As Fatima grows, it becomes apparent that this patriarchal, Islamophobic, capitalist society that keeps her on a seemingly never-ending loop of failing public transport will do far worse than derail her dreams of being an imam. And then later, the pain is visceral when she realises that a detached, violent father and a severely anxious mother are even more significant obstacles in her quest for self-acceptance than the sociopolitical barriers she has railed against. Stylistically, the mini-chapters resonated with the way my brain has been rewired over the last few years. Daas’s snippets of memory build up a picture of her life non-chronologically, bit by bit – it feels like becoming friends with someone via social media. You glimpse their home, read their opinions, look at their baby photos, learn about their family. You never really know them fully, but at the same time you know them better than some of your oldest friends. The Last One was published in French in 2020 and has been showered with accolades and prizes. I hope it will meet a similar reception in its English translation, as we push against pigeonholing and towards a reclamation of all the many things we are and can be. The Last One by Fatima Dass (HopeRoad, £11.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The enforced confinement of 2020 spurred Julie Sassoon to dust off and release an inspired but long-shelved solo improv recording, If You Can’t Go Outside… Go Inside. Later that year, in a gap between lockdowns, she and her long-running quartet made this buzzing and conversational set. In those starkly contrasting projects, the Manchester-born Berlin-based pianist/composer seemed to be mirroring the period’s swerves between isolation and dreams of shared life. Sassoon is a fascinating original, her piano world inhabited by Keith Jarrett’s lyricism and driving hooks and Steve Reich’s minimalism, but perhaps most significantly, the resources she has been accumulating through collaborations with unorthodox jazz and contemporary classical improvisers since the 1990s. The quartet – with saxophonist Lothar Ohlmeier, her long-time musical and life partner, and the powerful bass/drums pairing of Meinrad Kneer and Rudi Fischerlehner – toured Europe in February 2020, then went on to record these headlong yet lucidly eloquent originals in a Cologne studio that November. The bumpy, darting Missed Calls joins Ohlmeier’s squalling Albert Ayleresque tenor sax clamours to oompah-rhythm chug and dead halts. It sometimes recalls the sardonic vaudevillian mashups of the Netherlands’ Instant Composers Pool or Willem Breuker’s Kollektief, albeit subtly juxtaposed with Sassoon’s keyboard ruminations, her mandolin-like trills and soft chording. Dissonantly rapturous bowed-bass passages turn to bleary low-lights smooches and then to free-sax blusters: Waltz With Me starts in a warmly open triplet sway but becomes a duck-and-dive group improv chatter; the meditative, tiptoeing tone-poem Jerusalem is an abstractly beautiful showcase for all the band in turn, and the closing Melody opens as an exhilarating, fast-tempo free blast before evolving into hauntingly tremulous tenderness. This is music that splices lyrical shapeliness with bursts of take-no-prisoners abstraction, but Sassoon’s sensitivity to that balance is as alert here as her listeners have come to expect. Also out this month The immense promise of the 24-year-old American saxophonist Immanuel Wilkins surges on with The 7th Hand (Blue Note) – on which Wilkins and his hip young New York lineup nimbly join heavyweight spiritual themes to light-footed contemporary jazz-making. On Louise (ACT), effervescent French saxophonist Emile Parisien steers a classy US-European sextet through his poetically pensive or driving, boppish originals, plus a fine account of Joe Zawinul’s Madagascar. And saxist/composer Mark Lockheart turns his cross-genre melodic nous to a dozen synth-textured, fitfully chilled-out themes with a quartet including keys original Elliot Galvin on Dreamers (Edition). A bit hook-and-vamp-bound for the improv-inclined, but it grows on you.Exhibition of the week Gainsborough’s Blue Boy One of the most famous portraits ever painted in Britain returns from the US for the first time in a century. • National Gallery, London, 25 January to 15 May Also showing British Art Show 9 Michael Armitage, Alberta Whittle, Jamie Crewe, Florence Peake and many more feature in this sprawling attempt to catch the pulse of art now. • Wolverhampton Art Gallery and Wolverhampton School of Art, 22 January to 10 April America in Crisis Photographs from the Vietnam era and today offer a historical perspective on what the hell has gone wrong with the United States. • Saatchi Gallery, London, until 3 April Testament Phyllida Barlow, Jeremy Deller and Mark Wallinger are among the artists rethinking memorial monuments, after Colston and Covid. • Goldsmiths CCA, London until 3 April Kaws The celebrity street artist offers a show that’s in the gallery, but also on Fortnite and an augmented reality phone app. • Serpentine, London, until 27 February Image of the week Ways of Seeing, John Berger’s TV show that changed the way we see art, has turned 50. In 1972, Berger’s groundbreaking series confronted the blind reverence of art, showing viewers how oil paintings such as Hans Holbein’s The Ambassadors were in fact commodities made for the rich as a way to assert their power and worldview. As Olivia Laing writes about how the series opened the public’s eyes: “A landscape was not innocent, and nor was a lobster, let alone a nude of Venus.” What we learned Tracey Emin wants her art removed from No 10 due to Boris Johnson’s behaviour A wave of googly eyes has hit Adelaide landmarks and colonial statues Street artist Kaws thinks his virtual exhibition will connect with people in “a new and massive way” Great artists have designed wine labels – bring me a bottle of Picasso! The fate of a Nazi-looted Pissarro is to be decided by US supreme court Jordan Nassar’s embroidery depicts a peaceful Palestine Pressure is increasing on the UK to return the Parthenon marbles to Greece Nigerian documentary photographer and artist Etinosa Yvonne is latest in our series, Women behind the lens Rachel Mars will weld a replica of the Dachau concentration camp entrance as part of a Leeds festival The BBC’s Eric Gill statue was vandalised in response to his sexual crimes Masterpiece of the week Le Petit Parc by Jean-Honoré Fragonard, c1762-64 Fragonard – even his name sounds like, and is, a perfume. This radical, provocative stylist painted hedonist scenes of aristocratic decadence at a time when other French artists were getting into a proto-revolutionary mood. His seductive scenes include that notorious Rococo idyll The Swing, also in the Wallace Collection. But nothing he created is more erotic than this landscape. He doesn’t need to depict flesh to suggest sensual delights in this silky, melting image of soft foliage opening like a mouth in a wet french kiss. It is oil painting as orgasm. • Wallace Collection, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comPoor Janet McTeer. Not since the Pacific breeze blew Steve Buscemi’s ashes into the Dude’s beard in The Big Lebowski have a character’s remains been so disrespectfully treated. At the start of the fourth series of Ozark (Netflix), Wendy and Marty Byrde, like a pair of Lady Macbeths, are washing the remains of cartel lawyer Helen Pierce (McTeer) out of their clothes in the bathroom of Mexican drug lord Omar Navarro’s palatial compound. At the end of series three, Navarro’s hitman offed Helen, because she was working an angle contrary to the cartel’s interest (trying to take over the Byrdes’ money-laundering casinos). “They blow her brains out two feet from us,” Wendy tells her children later. “We had to wash pieces out of our hair.” The long-awaited, Covid-delayed final season – with one tranche of seven episodes being dropped now and the final seven to come later this year – rejoins Wendy and Marty on the journey they started three series ago. They left Chicago for a resort in the Ozarks, laundering money through a bar and strip club to fund the nonprofit Byrde Family Foundation into which they could funnel heroin money to do good things, such as bankroll rehab centres for addicts. Instead of going straight, though, they sunk ever deeper into evil. By the end of series three, they were laundering drug money for the Navarro cartel through multiple casinos, partnering with the Kansas City mob to deal heroin, and luring the US army to raid and eliminate a rival cartel. Wendy kills her own brother to prove her loyalty to Navarro, helps his thuggish nephew Javi dispose of the local sheriff who asks too many questions, and now plans to offer up her traitorous son Jonah to the FBI. Say what you like about Lady Macbeth: at least she didn’t have siblings to swell the body count nor sons to betray to the feds. Laura Linney’s performance as Wendy is all the more chilling because her face says apple pie, but everything she does curdles into evil. Meanwhile, Jason Bateman’s Marty is a study in how far a pragmatic accountant can go into the depths of wickedness without the strain showing on his face. If one of the great pleasures of Ozark is that strong women motor the storyline – not just Wendy, but hillbilly heroin farmer Darlene Snell and trailer-trash business whizz Ruth Langmore, not to mention daughter Charlotte Byrde, who dreams of whisking herself and brother Jonah to the Pacific north-west beyond their parents’ and the mob’s clutches – none of them is a role model. Even Ruth, who is Ozark’s token moral conscience, her every compunction subtly registered in Julia Garner’s impressive performance, is like everyone else: pursuing Ozark’s version of the degraded American dream – profiting from evil without consequence, then blowing town with a bank account swollen by drug money. Once the Byrdes have washed McTeer out of their hair, they go to Navarro’s gaudy party (the crab alone cost $10,000), where Omar tells them he too dreams of going straight, without having to do jail time or be assassinated by his upstart nephew Javi. “I’m sorry,” says Wendy. “That’s impossible.” “Isn’t this exactly what you were doing with your foundation?” Omar asks reasonably. “You can transform yourselves into a pillar of society, but you won’t do the same for me.” “I’m sorry. It’s not doable.” The temperature drops several degrees. “OK, why are you still alive?” The scene is set for the final season: the Byrdes must help one of the world’s most wanted drug kingpins to walk free or they will go the way of McTeer. The series premiere, The Beginning of the End, actually opens with one of those tantalising foreshadowing scenes that Ozark does so well. The Byrde family are driving to the soundtrack of Sam Cooke’s Bring It on Home to Me – as if their troubles are behind them. It recalls the last scene of The Sopranos, in which the mob family are eating at Holsten’s diner. We await some terrible denouement – machine gun splattering, ziti stuffed with explosives – but it never arrives. There was, rather, the realised possibility that against the odds, crime, indeed, can pay. Ozark ironically inverts that Sopranos ending. A juggernaut barrels down the wrong lane of the Missouri black top towards the Byrdes, forcing Marty to swerve and crash. Was it an accident? Was Navarro’s hitman at the wheel of the oncoming truck? Do the Byrdes survive to do what the Macbeths failed to – escape their bloody pasts? Nothing seems more unlikely, but I’ve been wrong before. • This article was amended on 23, 24 and 26 January 2022. An earlier version said the final season consists of a tranche of eight episodes now and the last six to come later this year; in fact each tranche will be seven episodes. The song playing at the start of the first episode is Bring It on Home to Me by Sam Cooke, not the same singer’s A Change Is Gonna Come. The character Javi should have been described as Omar Navarro’s nephew, not brother. And the setting for the final Sopranos scene was Holsten’s diner rather than Artie Bucco’s restaurant.After all those weekly showstopper challenges, it was perhaps inevitable: the TV phenomenon The Great British Bake Off is to become a stage musical. Billed as a heartwarming and wholesome comedy, the production will follow eight amateur bakers as they compete to impress the judges under the gaze of a pair of presenters. The musical will have its world premiere at the Everyman theatre in Cheltenham this summer. The score is by the award-winning duo Jake Brunger and Pippa Cleary whose previous musicals include an adaptation of Sue Townsend’s novel The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole, Aged 13¾. The new musical’s producer, Mark Goucher, said that the TV competition – which first aired on BBC Two in 2010 and is now broadcast by Channel 4 – “gets to the heart of the nation”. An average of 6.9 million viewers watched the grand final of the 12th series, in November, in which 45-year-old Italian engineer Giuseppe Dell’Anno triumphed. The musical will use similar ingredients to the TV show as, amid the assorted stiff peaks and soggy bottoms, the audience will learn more about the personal lives of the characters battling to become “star baker”. The UK programme is shown in more than 200 territories around the world and the format has been licensed for homemade versions in more than 30 countries. Bake Off’s success saw a rise not just in other baking shows but also in similarly jolly craft contests such as The Great Pottery Throw Down and The Great British Sewing Bee (both made for the BBC by Love Productions, creator of Bake Off). Work on Great British Bake Off: The Musical began a couple of years ago in association with the executive producer of the TV series, Richard McKerrow, and Love Productions. McKerrow said the musical “has been a creative labour of love that has taken several years of painstaking development” and he hoped that it “embraces the soulful warmth and humorous spirit of the television show. And that it proves to be a real treat for all the family and anybody who comes. We often say, ‘Love the bakers, love the baking!’ Now it’s time to love the singers, and love the songs!” The cast for the production, which opens on 22 July, is yet to be announced. The subject of baking has been a recipe for success in previous stage musicals including the Broadway and West End hit Waitress, whose heroine dreams of taking part in a pie-baking contest. Waitress is set in a diner famed for its whimsically named dishes including Polka Dot Peach Pie, Couch Potato Pie and Lost Shepherd’s Pie. Stephen Sondheim’s musical Sweeney Todd – about the Victorian barber turned serial killer – has a less appetising menu. In one of its songs, the waltz A Little Priest, the baker Mrs Lovett promotes her “shepherd’s pie peppered with actual shepherd on top”.The Multiverse – or should that be Multiverses, as there are now Marvel and DC versions? – is clearly a good thing for superhero movies. Just as naysayers had begun to suggest comic book flicks might have exhausted all their vim and verve, along comes Spider-Man: No Way Home, a movie that uses the introduction of alternate realities to restore characters such as Willem Dafoe’s Green Goblin and original wall-crawler Tobey Maguire with all the wide-eyed enthusiasm of a nine-year-old who’s just realised he can have He-Man and Jabba the Hutt battling a team comprising Snarf from the Thundercats and the Care Bears? The problem is, the internet has now worked out that if Maguire and Andrew Garfield can return to the big screen despite having never previously been in any Marvel superhero flicks, fans can really have anyone they want in future episodes. Dig deep enough and there are web rumours that the upcoming Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness could feature the return of Robert Downey Jr as a version of Iron Man from another universe who did not die in the Infinity Wars. Not enough of an eye-popper for you? Some reports have even suggested that Tom Cruise could play a third version of Iron Man. There is a danger here that we are getting into Snakes on a Plane territory, where fans end up almost writing the script for the film-makers. Andy Muschietti’s upcoming The Flash will see Ben Affleck and Michael Keaton return as alternative versions of Batman. And, let’s face it, there would hardly be gasps of shock if new kid Robert Pattinson turned up in Gotham at some point too. Thanks to the wonder of modern technology, DC could even re-enlist 1960s Batman Adam West if the late actor’s estate were up for it. It’s not like it hasn’t happened before. It even looks as if Hollywood’s A-list is beginning to get in on the act. This month’s GQ features Willem Dafoe pitching the tantalising prospect of himself and Joaquin Phoenix as duelling clown princes of Gotham in an-as-yet-to-be-but-let’s-face-it-probably-going-to-be-now future sequel to the Oscar-winning Joker. “There is something interesting about, like, if there was a Joker imposter,” Dafoe mulled. “So it would be possible to have not duelling Jokers but someone that [claims] to be the Joker that isn’t the Joker. “And that kind of opens up the possibility of an interesting story, particularly if you had Joaquin Phoenix’s Joker, and then you had someone who was either imitating or riffing off what he did. I fantasised about that. But other than that I am not talking to anybody [about it], you’re the first one.” But, in the current climate, it’s likely the GQ interviewer won’t be the last. And again, why not? We’re not entirely sure how Phoenix’s Joker really connects to the DC extended universe, where Jared Leto is still ostensibly Batman’s nemesis. In fact we’re not really sure if there is a DC universe any more, but there is certainly a Multiverse if The Flash is anything to go by. And that means everyone can have everything they’ve ever wanted right now, even if it means six different actors playing Batman in the same movie, like some gothic take on the spoof James Bond movie Casino Royale (1967 version) in which everyone from Peter Sellers to Woody Allen played versions of 007. Not buying that this fan-fulfilling version of reality is the one we now live in? Let me just point out that Disney+’s biggest current show is an entire series based on a minor character from Star Wars who barely had more than a few lines in George Lucas’s original trilogy. And, yes, I love it too, green-skinned, pig-face henchmen and all. So why shouldn’t Dafoe pitch his own Joker sequel? And why shouldn’t Iron Man be played by Cruise in Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness? Except that eventually all this Multiverse-inspired stunt casting is going to become tired too, and DC and Marvel will have to think of something even more far fetched. Which, of course, we’ve all probably already worked out. First, we had superheroes who appeared in each other’s movies. Then we had superheroes from different studios appearing in each other’s movies. The next logical step is for a massive DC-Marvel crossover event in which Disney and Warner Bros triple their values overnight by sending Batman into battle against Spider-Man, and Wolverine up against Superman. In fact, let’s throw Luke Skywalker and Ethan Hunt from Mission Impossible in for good measure. At this rate, Tom Cruise could actually end up fighting himself, and all in the name of good old-fashioned entertainment. It’s going to be like The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen on steroids and LSD. I personally can’t wait.Tottenham are in talks with Paris Saint-Germain over a deal to loan Tanguy Ndombele to the Ligue 1 leaders. The midfielder is keen on the move, which could include an option for PSG to buy at the end of the season. Discussions are being held over what percentage of Ndombele’s salary, if any, Spurs would pay. The transfer would reunite the 25-year-old with Mauricio Pochettino, who made him Tottenham’s record signing for an initial £55.45m in July 2019 and is now in charge of PSG. Ndombele’s time at the Premier League club has not been a success, the player showing only flashes of his ability, and he is out of favour under Antonio Conte. Jeered off by Tottenham’s fans when substituted against Morecambe on 9 January, he was not in the squad for the two matches since. After the Morecambe game Conte said in reference to Ndombele: “You have to be good to change the opinions.” The France international, previously with Lyon, was told by the manager in November that he had to work harder and learn to play “for the best of the team”. Wolves have rejected Tottenham’s £15m offer for Adama Traoré, who has 18 months left on his contract, and are holding out for £20m. Conte has made the Spain international, who can play at right wing-back or right wing, a key target. Conte is desperate to make signings, going as far as to suggest that even lower-quality recruits would do. “If there is the opportunity and also if it’s not the best opportunity … we need to do something,” he said before Wednesday’s dramatic late win at Leicester. The goalkeeper Hugo Lloris has signed a new Spurs contract to 2024. Conte was keen for the captain to stay and the deal was confirmed on Friday. Lloris joined from Lyon in 2012 and has made 395 appearances, including 67 consecutive starts in the league since March 2020.“We’re like Batman and Robin – obviously, I’m Batman.” Andi Oliver, 58, is with her daughter, Miquita, 37, bunkering down in a coastal cottage in Hastings for a while to recuperate after a busy 12 months of working together. “We just want to sleep for a bit,” groans Miquita. But between bickering over which houses are the best to peek into on walks back home in east London, bursting into unstoppable deep belly laughs every five minutes, and occasionally pausing our conversation to answer the calls of other family members, it becomes clear that a restful time isn’t something the Oliver women experience much of. Both have successful television careers in their own rights (TV chef Andi is now a regular on weekend cooking shows; Miquita is best known for hosting 00s hit teen-show Popworld) but, in recent years, mother and daughter have merged their professional paths. It started with a BBC roadtrip show in 2018, Eight Go Rallying: The Road to Saigon, which saw them drive 3,000km around south-east Asia in a Morris Minor. They gained a deeper understanding of each other, and got a flair for working together, so when the pandemic hit, the pair formed a bubble and started an irresistibly upbeat Instagram series, What’s for Dinner Mummy?, documenting the joy of cooking. They also charmed viewers on Celebrity Gogglebox. Separately they are great – but united, they have an endorphin-pumping energy that can force a toothy smile out of anyone. Their next project is BBC Two’s culture series The Caribbean With Andi and Miquita, which airs on Sunday. “My parents grew up on different ends of the same street in St John’s in Antigua,” recalls Andi, “but they didn’t actually meet until they moved here and went to a dance in Leicester.” It’s this sort of tale that has always piqued her curiosity about her heritage, but it’s taken a while for her daughter to catch up. “Mum treated me to a trip to Antigua for my 11th birthday, but I didn’t want to go if I’m honest; I was young, settled at school and probably in love with a boy I didn’t want to leave behind,” giggles Miquita, fully aware of how brattish it sounds now. “She was a moody teenager!” Andi quickly interrupts. “She didn’t get the personal, familial, gut-wrenching ‘connection’ that I wanted her to have.” The new show was the pair’s second shot at it; they had been trying to get it commissioned for nearly five years. “This kind of story has always been really important to us – and the world – it just wasn’t given a platform,” says Miquita. “But the Black Lives Matter movement blowing up – it gave us the opportunity to tell what we’d wanted to for a long time.” Not only did the duo finally get the chance to showcase their story, they were able to do it as more than just the stars of the show they pitched – they are also producers. “It’s a big deal for us,” says Andi, of roles that saw her and Miquita work closely with the director, and get their teeth stuck into the editing. “We realised a dream to be more than presenters after broadcasting for so many years.” The pair also hope their adventure will help to change people’s perceptions of their destination: “In the UK, there’s a sort of homogenised idea of the Caribbean,” says Miquita. “It becomes one island, usually Jamaica. To the point where I – a woman of Caribbean descent – didn’t even really know much about the other islands.” This is rectified as the intrepid travellers explore the Caribbean island by island (Antigua, Barbuda, Barbados), meeting islanders to get a real sense of local life and – most importantly – learning the different ways they let their hair down. “In Barbados, you have a beer with your food at 8am on a Saturday morning and basically go on a pub crawl,” says Andi (in stitches of laughter). “This lovely man called Ryan took us out and he said it’s all a respected part of culture,” chirps Miquita (also chuckling away). “In Barbados they don’t drink with guilt or shame. I was talking to my friends about this the other day – I learned a lot about that – eradicating the shame that comes with having a drink in the UK and just having fun.” Food and drink was always going to be a big – and very welcome – part of the show with Andi involved (she opened Wadadli, a Caribbean food pop-up, in her local pub in Clapton, east London, during the pandemic). In fact, she says she is infuriated by how misunderstood Caribbean food is in the UK. “People often call it Jamaican food, which drives me up the wall. Every island has its own version of Caribbean food. People have travelled through the Caribbean islands for all sorts of reasons and left their imprint in the DNA and the food. There’s a dish in Antigua called ‘vina dosh’ which is a really old way of cooking pork marinated in vinegar; in Portugal there’s a dish called ‘vinah d’alhos’ which is also pork marinated in vinegar; then in India there is a dish called ‘vindaloo’ …” “She loves telling that story,” Miquita rolls her eyes before cracking up again. Did they find a new connection to the islands? “Without giving too much away, we had DNA tests done and they were quite mind-blowing. Expect lots of ugly crying on the telly,” howls Andi. “We were there at a time of change: Barbados became a republic last year and is now run by two incredible women [president Sandra Mason and prime minister Mia Mottley],” adds Miquita. “It felt serendipitous being there.” While many women would balk at the thought of working so closely with their mother or daughter full-time – regardless of how well they get on – these two make it look easy. It would be enviable, if they weren’t so likable. “We did some crazy things together; we were terrified when we went deep-sea swimming! To be a mother and daughter on an adventure together and show what it’s really like: the truths of it, the ins and outs, the ups and downs … we’re really proud of that,” says Miquita, in a suddenly more serious tone. “My mum was a single parent until my stepdad came along. We’re used to being a team: Mum was 20 when she had me, so it was a baby looking after a baby. We’ve always looked after each other and this just feels like an extension from how it started.” “Aw, that’s lovely!” coos Andi. They pause for a millisecond – and then the laughter erupts once more. • The Caribbean With Andi and Miquita is on BBC Two on Sunday at 9pm.One day, during the first Covid lockdown, Caleb Azumah Nelson’s father offered to cut his hair. “He’s not great with his words, but that’s a very specific way of saying: ‘Can I care for you?’” explains the 28-year-old writer and photographer, who spent the pandemic back in his family home in south-east London with his parents and his younger twin siblings. It’s just such moments that illuminate his debut novel, Open Water: tender, carefully observed and reported, casting a gentle light on the limitations of masculinity. A lot has happened since the book was published: he’s toured Germany, Austria and Switzerland; won the American accolade of a listing among the National Book Foundation’s “5 under 35” for exciting young writers; and this month he scooped his first big prize, the Costa first novel award, which brings with it the chance of being chosen as the overall book of the year, next month. He was standing in the street when the news came through: “I yelled with joy. It absolutely hadn’t been on my radar. I’ve been too busy trying to write the next one.” At the heart of the novel is a love affair between a young couple – he a photographer, she a dancer – which repeatedly runs up against the man’s inability to process his anger about the injustice and violence he sees all around him. “When I was writing, I wasn’t conscious that I was trying to understand and sort through this idea of masculinity,” he says. “I was exploring two people who were trying to be as honest as they could with each other. And I think so often in love, men aren’t necessarily dishonest, but they don’t know how to express the whole truth.” Azumah Nelson wrote the book in 2019, after a grim two years in which he had suffered a rush of family bereavements. “I was beginning to feel very hazy. Like I’d lost some form, and some detail, in myself,” he says. He would go to the cinema, to art galleries, spend hours listening to music – “just trying to be as present as I could be”. And that, he says, “is where the writing started from”. At first it was “very lyrical essays that were a bit all over the place, to be perfectly honest”. He was working four days a week at the Apple store at Oxford Circus (hard on the feet but very handy for dialogue) and devoting the rest of his time to his photography and writing. “I was sending stuff around to literary agents, because, despite the fact that I was quite young, I really felt I had something to say.” He was reaching the bottom of his list when one agent finally bit, suggesting that fiction might be where his talents lay. Within a month he had submitted an early draft, which she batted back. So he scrapped it, quit his job, and by September had produced a novel. In the intensity of the relationship it depicts, Open Water has been compared with Sally Rooney’s Normal People when in fact it is nothing like it. For a large part of the novel, the unnamed characters aren’t even lovers; they share a bed as friends, exhausted after nights out on the town, getting to know each other. “I have nothing against Sally, because I enjoyed her books and loved the adaptation as well. But I think I favoured sensuality over sexuality,” he agrees. Besides a love story, Open Water packs into its 160 pages a passionate conversation with the artworks that have described and shaped young Black people like Azumah Nelson: the writing of James Baldwin and Zadie Smith, the paintings of Lynette Yiadom-Boakye and the music of the south London streets on which its author grew up. The son of Ghanaian parents, both of whom arrived in the UK as children, Azumah Nelson was a bookworm who, by 11, was petitioning his Catholic primary school to install a library because he was getting through novels faster than his midwife mother could buy them for him. Like both characters in the novel, he went to a private secondary school – in his case, winning a scholarship before becoming a star hockey player and reaching the under-16s national basketball squad. This relative privilege didn’t give him immunity from being stopped and searched by the police. “It happens really often: even as I was writing the book,” he says. Nor did it protect him from more insidious forms of institutional racism. The backstory of the novel is full of uncomfortable details from his narrator’s schooldays, such as being confused with other pupils who also happened to be Black. Was this his own experience? Yes, he says. There were four Black pupils in his year. He had great PE and English teachers, “but we were always made to feel grateful”. Running through Open Water is an exploration of where the freedom to fully and safely be oneself is to be found in a society riven with dangers for young Black men: it might be in a barbershop, a club or a loving relationship. “You would learn that love made you worry but it also made you beautiful,” reflects the narrator. “Love made you Black, as in, you were most coloured when in her presence.” His use of the second person is not a stylistic affectation but an outward expression of his narrator’s struggle to own his own feelings. Both his novel and short story, Pray, which first brought him to public attention with a shortlisting for the 2020 BBC short story prize, are shaped by acts of violence within the Black community. “I haven’t been directly connected to people who have passed, or have inflicted that violence, but you always know someone who has,” he says. “It’s never far away from you, and it’s something that has had a significant effect on me. There’s a lot of collective grief in these communities I’m part of.” Such acts, he says, “are moments in which we fail each other, and I don’t think that’s happened on its own. It’s directly influenced by state violence, whether that be the government making it harder for marginalised communities, or police stop-and-searching someone yet again, and that person not knowing where to put the anger and reaching for the person closest to them.” Fiction, like music and art, can help to give a manageable form and focus to those feelings, he believes – and responses to Open Water bear this out. “I’ve had quite a few messages from guys who have said I understood what it meant to not be able to express something.” Women, meanwhile, report being drawn in by his unusual depiction of love. “It’s such a surprise to see what resonates with people. It depends on where they are. So while primarily I was writing for Black people and for myself, it’s been a real joy and a pleasure to see so many different people connect with the work.” • Open Water by Caleb Azumah Nelson is published in paperback by Penguin on 3 February. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.How should one feel about the first year of the Biden presidency? I can’t really say I’m disappointed, since I didn’t have high hopes going into it. But I do feel dread. This last year has felt a bit like being trapped in a nail-biting intermission between two horror films. The opening instalment consisted of Donald Trump’s first four years in office – it ended with the cliffhanger of a deadly plague and a surreal, poorly executed, but still terrifying ransacking of the Capitol. The sequel practically writes itself, as the man ascends to power a second time, even more emboldened and determined to hold on to power. Of course, the script is not yet set in stone. If regular people in the US get organised, we can help push the political class toward a different ending. But to do this effectively, we need to tell a story that begins earlier. To continue with the bad movie metaphors, the prequels are what got us into this mess. For decades, senior Democrats tacked rightward, helping to create the social conditions that Trump and his cronies took advantage of to propel themselves to the White House. Instead of rolling back Reaganism and standing up to a swiftly radicalising conservative base, the party elite helped implement and further entrench an undemocratic, corporate agenda. Democratic functionaries slashed welfare, invested in the military and policing, deregulated the financial sector, increased fossil fuel production and lobbied for disastrous international trade deals. The people who did this are Biden’s natural milieu – and they want Americans to believe their problems began in 2016. Establishment Democrats are desperate to paint Donald Trump and the Covid-19 pandemic as aberrations to an otherwise agreeable status quo. Thus a speedy “return to normal” is all it will take to cure what ails us. The problem, however, is that “normal” was a crisis. The political scientist Corey Robin recently pointed out a core paradox of the Biden administration. On the one hand, Biden has some important accomplishments under his belt: two enormous spending bills and crucial federal appointments, including dozens of judges. But, as Robin notes, they are tainted by an awareness of their fundamental inadequacy. These perilous times require more than generous spending bills and staffing tweaks – Americans need to restructure the economy, stabilise the environment and democratise the political system, before it’s too late. Though never the progressive candidate, Biden briefly appeared to be willing to break with tradition and embrace a bolder approach. “When President Biden took office, he promised to make ending poverty a theory of change,” Shailly Barnes, policy director at the anti-poverty group, Poor People’s Campaign, told me. “While we saw glimmers of what that might have been, we have yet to see this implemented in practice. The 140 million people who are poor or one emergency away from economic ruin … need more than short-term or temporary assistance programmes.” Consider one area I know well: the fight for student debt cancellation. Short-term assistance is all these borrowers have received, despite Biden’s promise of mass relief. Student debt cancellation is an interesting litmus test for the administration. While other proposals he campaigned on – such as raising the minimum wage and securing voting rights – require legislation to pass, the president has the power to cancel all federal student loans with a single signature. But instead of picking up the pen, the president has balked and backtracked, misleadingly focusing on the few Ivy League graduates who would benefit from write-offs. At the end of last year, his administration publicly declared that turning student loan payments back on was a high priority for the administration. Why? A concern about optics: his advisers worry that further relief programmes would undercut messaging about the economy’s good health. Given this intransigence, activists like myself have had to fight the White House tooth and nail just to get it to extend the student loan payment pause to 1 May. Here, the folly of Biden’s first year is on full display. Student debt cancellation would be a win for the American people and the administration. The more loans are cancelled, the more the economy is boosted and the more the racial wealth gap narrows. It is also incredibly popular with young voters, Black voters, and even Republicans. Given that it is a midterm year, delivering on this promise should be a no-brainer. Reform of the criminal punishment system is another area where progress has stalled, despite Biden having come to power after a wave of historic racial justice protests. Members of the dominant, corporate wing of the Democratic party like to marginalise progressives and activists while presenting themselves as savvy and responsible realists. This strategy is both insulting and absurd: there’s nothing naive or irresponsible about wanting a decent and equitable society where people aren’t buried in unpayable debt and don’t have to live in fear of the police. But the strategy is also self-defeating. “They think they are pissing on the left, but what they are really doing is failing to fight visibly [and] vocally for millions of everyday working people,” rural Pennsylvania organiser and author Jonathan Smucker told me. “There is no world in which that is good politics.” The Biden administration has instead been engaged in a dispiriting saga of insider negotiations – negotiations that make an already restive public feel even more frustrated and abandoned. Where the build back better bill is concerned, the president should have instructed his allies in Congress to load it up with extra investment that would mollify opposition and make it harder for his party’s obstructionists, like Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin, to hold it hostage. As the organiser Will Lawrence, a co-founder of the youth-led environmental justice-focused Sunrise Movement, put it on Twitter: include a “buyout of coal industry shareholders, and a generous lifetime pension for every miner in West Virginia. Blanket the airwaves promoting it for two weeks in West Virginia. Then put it to a vote and dare Manchin to vote against it.” If you are going to lose because a coal-baron senator is determined to derail your entire agenda and doom millions to deepening poverty and climate chaos, you may as well go down with a real fight. This fight should clarify for the public where the real problem is – not in culture war distractions, but the corruption of our political system by corporate interests – and it would make clear that the Democrats were firmly on their side. President Biden’s first year has ultimately demoralised people, while also providing an opportunity for Republicans to appear poised to seize power. Last spring, a strategic memo by Representative Jim Banks, leader of the largest bloc of House conservatives, was leaked: “URGENT: Cementing GOP as Working-Class party.” It laid out one plot for the second feature of the horror film I keep imagining. Of course, reactionaries will never actually defend working people. But they’re busy crafting a deceptive and destructive script. And if the current administration doesn’t act, we’ll all be watching it soon. Astra Taylor is a writer, organiser and documentary makerThe hack Using personal lubricant, which often contains silicone, glycerine and water, as a skin primer to be worn under make-up. The promise Dewy, wet-look skin may be the beauty trend du jour, but is lube an affordable alternative? About 10.8 million TikTok views suggest so. The test This isn’t the weirdest thing I’ve rubbed on my face in the name of gonzo beauty adventure – and there is some method to it: many primers and lubes share common ingredients. But a word of warning: some lubes also contain tingling and numbing ingredients that can irritate the skin. Silicone lubes tend to last longer than water-based ones, so after applying my usual skincare, I slathered my face in Durex Play Perfect Glide Silicone Lubricant. It did feel silky, like silicone primers do, and my makeup went on fine, but it wasn’t Earth-shatteringly good. Next I tried water-based Coco de Mer Divine Glow Aqua Lubricant, which contains ingredients you’d find in a hydrating primer. It gave my skin a glowy boost, but it didn’t quite match my regular primer’s prowess. Does it work? My foundation applied well, but I prefer normal primers as they contain skin-supporting ingredients (I rate Bobbi Brown Vitamin Enriched Face Base). But in an emergency, lube me up.In 2020, the NBA was 74.2% black and 16.9% white. It seems every decade, the white NBA player becomes less relevant. Yet one franchise has often kept the dream of mediocre white guys alive: the Dallas Mavericks. In 15 of the last 21 Mavs seasons, there were three or more white players on the 12-man active roster. In more than half of those 15 seasons there were at least four white players, not to mention at least two starting white players. The Mavericks, in the literal sense, do not look like the rest of the league. It’s tempting to put this down to racism or at least unconscious bias on the part of the Mavericks and their owner, Mark Cuban. But, if anything, the opposite is true. Although the Mavericks have a dubious history of toxic workplace culture when it comes to female employees, Cuban has thrown his support behind Black Lives Matter and has appointed a black CEO (Cynthia Marshall), president (Terdema Ussery), head coaches (Jason Kidd and Avery Johnson) and general manager (Nico Harrison) during his time in Dallas. And when it comes to the three most prominent white players for the Mavericks during Cuban’s ownership of the team, no one would argue they didn’t deserve their places on the roster. Steve Nash is in the Hall of Fame, Dirk Nowitzki will be there in the near future and Luka Doncic, at this early stage of his career, looks like he will join them (Nash and Nowitzki arrived shortly before Cuban bought the team but played most of their Dallas careers with him at the helm). Some argued that the Mavericks should have picked a black superstar, Trae Young, over Doncic in the 2018 draft but Cuban’s preference for European players has a certain logic. He believes European players, who usually enter the professional ranks at an earlier age, have a better basketball education than American players. This explains some of the racial balance of the current team: European players are usually white and American players are usually black. And all four of the white players on the Dallas’s active roster this season are European: Doncic (Slovenia), Kristaps Porzingis (Latvia), Maxi Kleber (Germany) and Boban Marjanovic (Serbia). They also have one black European player, Frank Ntilikina (France). European players “actually learn to play the game. If you look at the basketball education of kids starting at 11 years old in Europe and particularly Slovenia which is basketball oriented,” said Cuban in 2019. While there are valid reasons to push back against that philosophy – after all, the US have won seven of the last eight men’s Olympic tournaments and the other winner was Argentina – it does have coherence, even if it’s wrong. But the problem with Cuban’s Mavericks isn’t their penchant for white superstars – if every white guy they acquired was as good as Nash, Nowitzki and Doncic they’d be perennial champions. No, it’s their seemingly unquenchable thirst for terrible white players that sinks them. Much of the blame can be laid at the door of Donnie Nelson, who was the team’s general manager from 2005 until he left the team in June last year. And since buying the team, Cuban has always blurred the line between superfan and shadow GM. So the excessive signings of terrible white players under his ownership had to be, at least partially, a Cuban call. Indeed, the Mavs have traded for more white guys as centerpieces of a deal than any other team. The list is long and dreadful: Keith Van Horn, Austin Croshere, Matt Carroll, Rudy Fernandez, Shawn Bradley, Zaza Pachulia, Doug McDermott and JJ Redick. It feels like Cuban, and more specifically Nelson, tried in vain to repeat the magic of Nowitzki. It’s almost like they believed they just needed to get as many white guys in as they could in the hope that one of them would be as sublimely excellent as Nowitzki. The hit rate has been incredibly low. Doncic is brilliant but was acquired in the draft rather than a trade, while his current teammate, Kristaps Porzingis, is a solid NBA player but probably not worth the two first-round picks the Mavs gave up to acquire him from the Knicks. Guys like Redick were effective in their heyday but way past their prime by the time they headed to Texas. In 2014 came perhaps Nelson and Cuban’s worst attempt at signing a “star-level” sidekick for Nowitzki when they handed Chandler Parsons, a white player averaging a career-high of 16.6 points per game and four assists per game for the Houston Rockets, a three-year, $46m offer sheet. A deal the Rockets were happy to decline to match. Parsons’ first season with the Mavs was the definition of mediocrity. He played 66 out of 82 games while averaging 15.7 points. He experienced a dip in almost every significant statistical category, apart from a .01% increase in his three-point shooting. As ridiculous as the Mavs’ belief in Parsons the player was, it was made worse by their apparent willingness to indulge him off the court. Tim MacMahon, a long-time Mavs reporter, told ESPN’s Brian Windhorst &amp; The Hoop Collective podcast that: “Parsons had significantly more control over personnel than Donnie Nelson did for two years. That is simply a fact.” So why have the Mavs had such a long and consistent history offering big contracts to bad white NBA players? There has never been any reason to believe Cuban or any important member of the organization has had any racial bias against non-white players. And while there has been plenty of dysfunction within the organization, none of it has had a racial component. Perhaps the answer lies in marketing. According to the 2020 US Census, the Dallas population is 62.7% white. Perhaps the organization has wanted to put a product on the floor that looks like the majority of Mavericks fans (as a counterpoint, in 2014 FiveThirtyEight calculated that the Mavericks had more non-white fans than the league average). If so, they would be the only franchise in a predominantly white city that has taken such an approach. In the last 20 years, other majority white NBA cities like Portland (77.4% white), Boston (52.8% white) and Oklahoma City (67.7% white) have never had even one white player as the face of the franchise and they’ve still managed to pack their arenas with fans. Some may argue that the problem isn’t the players’ race as much as their ability. After all, is watching your team padded out with mediocre white players any worse than watching them padded out with mediocre black players? Maybe not, but in a league that has spent so much time talking up its attempts to raise the black community, a team that consistently appears to be drawn to white players looks out of step. Even if that policy is not deliberate or down to drawing in white fans in a white dominated city. It is also a policy that will end up hurting the most exciting white player in the league – Doncic won’t win a championship with the Mavericks if they fail to give him a good supporting cast. With the departure of Nelson this summer, Cuban hired a black general manager, Harrison, to replace Nelson. But this off-season, Harrison and Cuban continued the annual tradition of obtaining/retaining a so-so white player when the Mavs re-signed Marjanovic to a new deal. It remains to be seen how much power Harrison will hold within the Mavs front office, or if Cuban, the self-proclaimed “final say,” will keep the status quo that makes the Mavericks look more like a team from 1952 than 2022.What was your best memory or high point of your career so far with Texas? RainbowEden47 Having another hit album [2021’s Hi], all these years in, feels poignant, because the beginning feels like yesterday. There’s been amazing moments like Glastonbury or playing to 175,000 people in Valencia, but the funnier stuff makes for great stories as you get older. Once we were in Clint Eastwood’s daughter’s vintage Mercedes and a handle came off in my mate’s hand, so she hid it in her handbag. When I was 15, if somebody had told me that I’d have Debbie Harry and John Taylor from Duran Duran in my kitchen, I’d have melted. Debbie actually lent me the Heart of Glass dress. I never wore it because I’d never look like fuckin’ Debbie Harry in it. Well, I wore it secretly, in the house. David Brent once stated he was sure Texas couldn’t run and manage a successful paper merchants. Do you agree? JackJackals I loved The Office so when he said that, I phoned everyone I knew. It was one of my proudest moments. I’d have a shot at running an office, but David Brent could absolutely front Texas. He’s as mouthy as I am. In the 90s music journalists seemed more focused on gossip, your looks or the way you dressed than your music. Do you feel this kind of narrative has changed nowadays? BadRegina It hasn’t changed. It’s just better hidden, but as an interviewee, you can change the narrative. I might start to answer that sort of question but then veer off and talk about something else entirely. If someone’s really rude I tell them to fuck off. How did the collaboration with Rammstein come about? CF2013 What were your thoughts when a collaboration with the Wu-Tang Clan was suggested? CornShonnery Till [Lindemann] from Rammstein called me and asked. A collaboration should be something you’d never do with your band. It was the same with the Wu-Tang. Our manager got talking to a couple of them in New York and when he told us they liked us, we’re like: “Go back! See if they want to do something with us.” The night we recorded [Say What You Want (All Day Every Day)] with them, ODB had just been arrested, so Method Man had to write a whole new rap based on his idea that Scottish people were pirates. We all got chucked out of the studio and our manager in Glasgow got a call saying: “They were in there with guns and doing angel dust.” I’m like, “Er, none of that happened.” It was a strange, weird, wonderful time and we continued our friendship. RZA told us we were brave to work with them and we’re like: “Are you kidding? You’re a major hip-hop crew but you made a record with a band from Glasgow.” Does the state of current UK politics fill you with joy or dread? STATIONTOSTATION2020 You’d have to be living under a rock if it filled you with joy. What are these clowns doing? I’m actually terrified by what’s happening. There’s so much anger and hatred. Instead of separating, we should come together. As a musician, I’m ashamed that we’ve left the EU and can no longer travel freely. Before, a young band could break into Europe by just chucking everything in a van and fucking off for a year. What’s your favourite song to properly belt out? (Not necessarily your own.) jesswilkhull My sister has banned me from using her karaoke machine because I’m a “professional”. Outrageous. Basically my job is a giant karaoke machine, so at karaoke I do the cover versions we do live. So River Deep Mountain High; Suspicious Minds. I have been known to do Highway to Hell. Karaoke is so relaxing afterwards – it’s like meditation. Everyone should belt a song out. From one-hit wonders to bona fide stars, what kept you all going in the “in between years”? JAYJ1111 A one hit wonder has one hit and it’s over. We’ve been going for 34 years! Those moments where you can’t get arrested can be soul destroying, but you keep going because it’s what you love. Luckily we’ve always been allowed to keep making records. If you haven’t got a record out people think you’ve retired. Can you tell me about your run-in with Paris Hilton? SpikeTheCat The Paris, Texas moment? I was at a Vanity Fair party wall to wall with celebrities and Paris Hilton wouldn’t stop dancing on my mate’s coat, so I filled a straw with liquid and blew my drink at her. We ended up nose to nose. Someone took a photo and it went all over the papers. I had to phone my mum to apologise, but everybody loved it. Taxi drivers beeped me, going: “You fuckin’ tell ’er.” I preferred Texas when you sounded more bluesy, Americana … the shift to soul since the 90s felt more calculated. Do you understand that some people (like me) feel this way? StijnA If you liked Texas in 1989, you’d know there was always a soul element but we hadn’t honed it. So it was a natural progression, absolutely not calculated. Everyone has their opinion – some people went “how dare you” when we did the Wu-Tang record – but we’ve always mixed it up. Staying like we were in 1989 would be like wearing the same old clothes. What motivated you to write Halo? My interpretation is that it is about an unconditional love, with religious references. SaraLus I rarely speak about lyrics because every listener has their own interpretation, but I’d been going out with Jakob Dylan [son of Bob] from the Wallflowers. When we split, he sent me a song called She Has a Halo. I was so fucked off. I thought: “Fuck your song!” and wrote Halo in reply. I really enjoyed the show in Manchester but was surprised at the amount of effing and jeffing. Does that happen at every show? Oldintown I don’t swear [laughs], but sometimes you just have to tell people to fuck off. Once this woman was shouting so much that eventually I asked someone to get my purse from the dressing room so I could give her her money back. The cheeky so-and-so still watched the show, so eventually I just said: “Look, fuck off!” and everyone was cheering. I’m interested in how you keep your voice in shape as it changes over the decades? foCus07 Since getting laryngitis 10 years ago I’ve tried to look after it, so the night before a gig I won’t go to a party and smoke loads of fags. Pavarotti’s vocal guy told me I’m allergic to cleaning fluids, so now in my bunk on the tour bus I have a piece of plastic tubing like you’d get on a tumble dryer leading out of the skylight into the fresh air. Very hi-tech. How on earth did you become good mates with Thierry Henry? Gooner_7 I’m an Arsenal season ticket holder. After I met Patrick Vieira at a dinner he invited us into the player’s lounge, where I met Thierry. He’d just moved into the street behind us, so I offered to show him around. The night my daughter Misty Kyd was born, he scored and pulled up his shirt to reveal a dedication. The FA fined him £30,000 for making a “political gesture”, but Arsène Wenger told them it was for a newborn, so they waived it. Thierry became Misty’s godfather and we’re still mates to this day. • Texas start a two-month UK tour at Caird Hall, Dundee, on 7 FebruaryScott Morrison has taken aim at China for “economic coercion”, foreign interference and cyber attacks in a speech to the Davos World Economic Forum. Without naming the source of “sharper geopolitical competition”, the Australian prime minister warned of increasing territorial disputes in the Indo-Pacific region and urged an end to protectionist measures directed at Australia. Australia has been the target of Chinese tariffs on key agricultural exports, such as barley and wheat, due to a long series of grievances including “interference in China’s Xinjiang, Hong Kong and Taiwan affairs” and “spearheading the crusade against China in certain multilateral forums”. Morrison told the forum that the global strategic environment had “deteriorated” with the world becoming more “fragmented and contested particularly here in the Indo-Pacific, which has become the world’s strategic centre of gravity”. Morrison said the region had become “highly contested” due to increased use of “grey-zone tactics” seeking to “coerce and intimidate”. “There are tensions over territorial claims, there is rapid military modernisation, there is foreign interference occurring in nations right across the Pacific and here in Australia. “There’s malicious cyber threats and attacks that are taking place, disinformation, economic coercion.” In response, Morrison said Australia had sought a “web of alignment” with nations that wanted to cooperate to “favour freedom and the rule of law”, including Pacific nations, Asean and the Quad group with Japan, India and the US. “Australia’s interests are inextricably linked to an open inclusive and prosperous Indo-Pacific, one where the rights of all nations are protected … as well as aspirations as sovereign nations.” Morrison argued that Australia had sought to “hold firm to its values” despite experiencing economic protectionist and coercive measures that were “not without costs”. “But I also believe it’s come at a significant cost to the countries which implement such measures – it’s hard to see how anyone wins from such tactics. “The world can’t afford to march in that direction.” Morrison also noted increased tension with Russia over Ukraine and between the G2 of US and China. “The idea that we would be in a hemisphere of influence with one power in the region, is not something that is consistent with global stability and regional stability.” Australia has sought to fight off Chinese tariffs at the World Trade Organization, while some National party members in the ruling Coalition suggesting countering with protectionist measures. The US has vowed to help Australia resist Chinese protectionism. Morrison also used the Davos speech to boast of Australia’s economic recovery from the pandemic, with unemployment down to 4.2%, and its health outcomes, with the second-lowest death rate in the OECD from Covid and eighth-highest vaccination rate. Morrison said there had been no “great resignation” in Australia, crediting its success to a “business-led recovery” and not pursuing “funky experiments” with a permanently enlarged role for government in the economy. On climate, Morrison said Australia had cut its emissions by 20% on 2005 levels and now aims to achieve net zero by 2050. But when asked if Australia would sign up to the ICAO protocol for net zero emissions in the aviation sector, Morrison dead-batted by saying Australia “doesn’t make commitments without fully considering what the impacts are”.Women and girls whose grandfathers or great-grandfathers began smoking at an early age tend to have more body fat, research that taps into the extraordinary 30-year-old Children of the 90s study has found. In an earlier piece of work it was discovered that if a father started smoking regularly before reaching puberty, then his sons, but not daughters, had more body fat than expected. Now researchers believe they have pinpointed higher body fat in females with grandfathers or great-grandfathers who began smoking before the age 13. No effects were observed in male descendants. The research suggests exposure to substances can lead to changes that may be passed through the generations, though the team behind the research concede that much more work is needed to confirm this and understand how it may happen. They have been able to spot the possible link because of the detail and depth of inter-generational data the University of Bristol study provides and it is an example of findings that the scientists could not have anticipated when it was launched in 1991. Prof Jean Golding, the founder of Children of the 90s and lead author of the latest report, praised the participants in the study – an original cohort of 14,000 pregnant women who agreed to take part plus, now, their children and grandchildren. Other pieces of research over the decades that could not have been foreseen include the finding 20 years ago that women who eat oily fish during pregnancy, even only once every two weeks, have children with sharper eyesight. This was believed to be the first time diet in pregnancy was shown to be associated with a child’s visual development. A study published in 2013 concluded that iodine deficiency in pregnancy could have an adverse effect on children’s mental development. The discovery was made possible because the study had urine samples from early in participants’ pregnancies and detailed records of what the expectant mothers were eating. Yet another finding was that early signs of a genetic liability to Type 2 diabetes could be spotted in children as young as eight and a link was also made between peanut allergies and skin cream containing peanut oil. The Children of the 90s project has even allowed experts to examine how wounds heal by looking at participants’ BCG vaccine scars. For the latest study, published in the journal Scientific Reports, researchers dug into data on the smoking experiences of grandfathers and great-grandfathers. They could not look into the smoking of grandmothers and great-grandmothers as so few smoked, but were confident they would have reasonably reliable data from the male side of the family because they were likely to boast about smoking at a very young age. Golding said: “This research provides us with two important results. First, that before puberty, exposure of a boy to particular substances might have an effect on generations that follow him. Second, one of the reasons why children become overweight may be not so much to do with their current diet and exercise, rather than the lifestyle of their ancestors or the persistence of associated factors over the years.” Golding said animal experiments had shown that exposure of males to certain chemicals before breeding can have effects on their offspring but there has been doubt as to whether this phenomena is present in humans. “If these associations are confirmed in other datasets, this will be one of the first human studies with data suitable to start to look at these associations and to begin to unpick the origin of potentially important cross-generation relationships. There is a heck of a lot more to discover,” Golding said.The owner of restaurant chains including Wagamama and Frankie &amp; Benny’s said it expected full-year profits to hit the top end of its forecast despite a dramatic slowdown in sales last month because of the impact of the spread of the Omicron variant. The Restaurant Group (TRG), which owns 650 restaurants and pubs and operates 70 concessions mostly in airports, expects adjusted profits for 2021 to be at the top end of its £73m to £79m guidance to investors. It welcomed the government’s decision to lift plan B restrictions but warned that consumer confidence might take longer to recover. The company said its performance had been achieved through good cost control and strong trading, with sales at its Wagamama chain up 11% in October and 8% in November compared with pre-pandemic levels. However, TRG, which owns brands including Garfunkel’s, the Tex-Mex chain Chiquito, Brunning &amp; Price and Coast to Coast, said that sales slowed to only 1% growth in December as Omicron hit. TRG’s concessions business reported revenue declines of 34%, 24% and 34% in the final three months of last year compared with 2019. “The introduction of the UK government’s plan B in early December, which included advice to work from home, calls for further caution in socialising and increased testing requirements for international travel, reduced consumer confidence and put additional restrictions on the hospitality sector,” the company said. “[However], TRG continued to trade ahead of the market demonstrating our ability to outperform in all market conditions.” The company expects a sustained recovery to be some way off, though, as consumers continue to go out less and international travel lags pre-pandemic levels. “While we are encouraged with the recent government announcement that all plan B restrictions will be lifted next week, we expect consumer confidence may take longer to recover,” it said. “We are also mindful that the recovery in air passenger volumes remains dependent on the timing of changes to both UK and international restrictions.” TRG also expects to better its net debt forecast of about £190m and end the year at less than £180m. “Management reacted quickly to reduce food and staff costs, which allowed it to protect margins through December,” said James Ainley, an analyst at Citi. “In addition, [capital expenditure] projects were shelved or delayed, which has also supported a better than expected net debt performance.”Sex, desire and libido are things that change and evolve over time for most adults, with those in long-term relationships especially liable to these ebbs and flows. For some couples, a sex life which both partners find satisfying can be one of the first things to fall by the wayside when everyday stresses, distractions and routines start to take over. Here, Anjula Mutanda, a psychotherapist, relationship psychologist and president of relationship support charity Relate, advises how couples of all ages, genders and sexualities can stop life getting in the way of sex, and reconnect intimately. Don’t try to recapture the old days Many couples fall into the trap of thinking they must recreate romantic situations they had in the early days of their relationship to “get the magic back”. But I think that’s a self-defeating coping mechanism as you’re trying to go back to your chemical romance, that obsessive love when things were exciting because they were new; and when you don’t get that you feel like you’ve somehow failed. Your relationship is now deeper, more subtle, layered and experienced, you’re familiar with what you’ve got. Perhaps you have kids, a mortgage, or jobs you worry about – through these things you have experience and togetherness, which you can build real intimacy and affection on. Everything is foreplay There are lots of different ways to improve connection and they don’t all start in the bedroom. Relationship expert Dr John Gottman said that “everything is foreplay”. It’s all about the touching, hugging, smiling at your partner, eye contact, giving them a kiss before work. These are all connectors that will lead to mood boosts and more closeness in the bedroom. We get trapped into neglecting the smaller moments of affection and thinking that we have to get a date in the diary to have sex, or that we need to book a restaurant like in the early days. But if you do that then you jump ahead of time and forget to consider all the small acts of intimacy that can really rebuild your connection. Lube can enhance the sexual experience for everyone There are a number of things that can make sex uncomfortable and not pleasurable. For instance, vaginal dryness, which can be caused by age, medications, menopause, hormonal changes at times in the menstrual cycle and anything that can impact you physiologically. Using Kynect (the new name for KY Jelly) can really help to increase physical connection and pleasure. Unfortunately, many people are in the mindset that if they need to buy something that should occur naturally they are somehow lacking, which leads to nervousness around talking about and asking for lube. I’d advise seeing lube as a purely positive enhancement, a product that makes things feel better. Even if you’re not experiencing any physical problems, Kynect is a great addition to your sex repertoire. I think that as a nation we really need to reframe our thinking around using something that’s there to support and increase pleasure, there shouldn’t be any shame or embarrassment, we should be proud to be able to walk into a shop and buy a product that will help us have a better sex life. Understand each other’s love languages Relationships are very much the dance of give and take, so it’s key to understand the love language your partner is speaking and appreciate them for it. For instance, their love languages might be doing things for you, or asking about your day. Yours might be lots of penetrative sex and if you want more of that from your partner, it’s good to start it from a positive place. For instance, saying: “I love it when you do this” and “Thank you for doing that”, can lead to a supportive conversation in which your partner feels valued and seen, and can help come to a compromise for both of you. Listening to what each other wants can really take the pressure off. Be ‘good selfish’ It’s easy to get stuck in the rut of worrying about how long it’s been since you had sex with your partner and feeling pressure to pleasure them; but it helps to ask yourself if you’re looking after your own needs. Masturbation is a great way to get to know yourself and take a step towards building things back with your partner. There’s such a thing as being good selfish, and showing yourself some self love can result in you showing your partner what you like. Not enough people talk about masturbation, but it’s something that really matters. Get out of your own head People can get really stressed out by thinking about having sex so much they don’t want to do it. To stop getting too in your head about it, try some relaxation techniques that put you in a good positive headspace, like listening to relaxing music. Going for a walk together is a helpful way to relax, and holding hands while you do it is a form of creating intimacy. Touch helps you bond and feel closer, and studies show that it signals safety and security, so this could lead to having sex later in the day or that week. It’s also found that sexual activity prevents increases in blood pressure, so thinking about the health benefit can be motivation to get into the bedroom too! You can never have too much of a good thing. Enjoy more intimacy with your partner with our 200ml tube. Buy it here“My wife and I have an eight-year-old who never seems to need any sleep, so we don’t have as much ‘alone’ time as we used to. This means that when our daughter is at a club – like gymnastics at 9.30am on a Saturday – we both know that we need to use that time for sex. Because it’s often a bit of a rushed job (we have about 40 minutes before she needs picking up again), there’s not really much time for foreplay, so we rely on Kynect (the new name for KY Jelly) to make things a bit smoother, and it does. It might all seem a bit unromantic, but as with a lot of things in a busy household, you just have to work with what time you have.” Matt, 42 (straight male) “I’ve been married for five years, and my wife and I have a son and a daughter (I gave birth to both of them, but one of them is my egg with a sperm donor and the other is her egg with the same donor). Our sex life is probably the same as a lot of other married couples with kids – pretty sparse! It doesn’t help that for big chunks of time, her parents come over from New Zealand and stay with us, which means we have to move into our son’s room (our daughter goes into a bunk bed with him) and sleep in twin beds. Passion killer. But we always make sure that the last weekend they are with us, they look after the kids overnight and we book into a nice hotel and make up for it.” Gemma, 40 (gay female) “Tom and I have been together for 18 years and have two girls (14 and eight). We both have busy jobs but have always had a fair bit of sex. I’d say we do it at least twice a week now – something that always gets a shocked response from my other girlfriends with kids – but it used to be way more. Tom would do it every day if he could, but a lot of the time I’m super tired and don’t really feel like it. This is why I make sure I get a regular full wax as I know that really does it for him, and it makes me feel sexy, so helps the whole thing along! Booking a wax is a necessity for me and our intimacy, so the pandemic made things tricky, plus the girls were at home, so the sex did become less frequent. I was very relieved when my waxer could finally make home visits again – and so was Tom.” Holly, 48 (straight female) “I met my boyfriend on a popular gay dating app 11 years ago and we’re now pretty settled. We bought a house together, own a dog and have sex a few times a month. But we also have an open relationship, something that we agreed fairly early on. It stops both of us from feeling trapped and if I’m honest is probably the key to us lasting so long. We don’t talk about our ‘other’ sex lives with each other, I don’t want to think about what he might be doing when I’m away with work or he’s visiting his family in Ireland. But I know it’s happening. Recently I came back from a weekend away and I noticed our tube of lube was out on top of the bedside table, not where we keep it. So I knew he’d probably met up with someone. The important thing is that when we’re together we feel content, connected and very much in love, not itching for the excitement of something else.” David, 43 (gay male) “We’ve been married for 11 years now, together for 14, and after the birth of our daughter (five years ago) sex was pretty non-existent for about a year. We got stuck in a total rut with it. There was never any time, and to be honest I didn’t feel like it. After that, the only time we’d really do it was when I got drunk. A couple of years ago I decided to talk it through with him as I was worried it was becoming a problem. It wasn’t that I didn’t want sex with him anymore, I just felt like we had to go the whole way each time just to tick a box – which then made it feel like a chore. I was honest and told him that I missed kissing and touching and all the foreplay we used to do, when we were young and kid-free. We agreed to concentrate on that. We got a tube of Kynect but agreed only to use it for foreplay and massage. It just makes everything more pleasurable, and soft and slippy. I now don’t feel any pressure to have full-on sex, but all the touching that I get actually makes me want to do it more and we’re now in a much better, more exciting place with our intimacy.” Jen, 39 (straight female) “There’s much more to sex than intercourse and I really realised that when I lost my husband of 42 years to cancer 14 years ago. Quite quickly after his death, I started to have coffees and dinner with one of his old work colleagues, something my family couldn’t understand or accept. But I missed the intimacy of a man’s company over dinner and at the end of the evening, just to talk to. We’ve been ‘together’ ever since. We keep this intimacy alive by having at least three dinners together a week and the last thing we do every night is phone each other to hear each other’s voice. We don’t have actual sexual intercourse, I feel too old for that, and we don’t live together but we go on holiday a few times a year and share a bed and have a cuddle. I don’t think young people understand that talking – and making time for that – can be just as intimate as the other stuff.” Irene, 82 (straight female) “When my fiance and I got engaged recently we hired a photographer to take intimate pictures of us together (we look like we’re having sex in them, but we didn’t actually go the whole way in front of her!) and I love them. They’re so cool and will hopefully remind us both of a time that we couldn’t keep our hands off each other. We’re pretty well matched in that respect even though we’ve now been together for 10 years, and he’s 10 years older than me. But we keep things alive with role play and dirty talk, something that is guaranteed to get us both going.” Charlotte, 29 (straight female) You can never have too much of a good thing. Enjoy more intimacy with your partner with our 200ml tube. Buy it hereIt’s deeply ironic that lubricant has such a dry reputation among many folks. Sadly, scores of people are labouring under the misapprehension that a tube of lube is a product you only reluctantly reach for when there’s some kind of uncomfortable problem with your love life. In fact, while it can certainly help solve and soothe a vast plethora of bedroom-based issues, as we’ll explore, lubricant has huge potential to be fun as well as functional. A water-based formula such as Kynect – the new name for KY Jelly – is the Swiss army knife of the sex world: indispensable for all sorts of adventures and activities. It’s the one simple “must have” I’d recommend to pretty much any human who wants to enhance their erotic pleasure, whether partnered or solo, and I want to normalise its usage without shame, embarrassment or restraint – consensual bondage excepted. Here’s a roundup of reasons why cracking out the lube can lead to a more cracking sexual experience … Lubricant helps condoms work more safely, and feel more sensual A little lube applied to the outside of a condom once it’s on reduces friction, which in turn reduces the chances of your rubber ripping or accidentally being tugged off during intercourse. Pop a small drop inside the tip of the condom before you roll it on (a practice known as “gift wrapping”), and it’ll feel better for the wearer, too – just a touch is enough to increase sensitivity around the head of the penis without affecting grip at the base, so your protection stays in place. Oil-based products such as moisturising lotions, petroleum jelly, baby oil, coconut oil and massage oil can all degrade latex, making natural rubber condoms more likely to break. Different oils interact with the material in different ways, depending upon their molecular structure, and thus have more or less capacity to cause damage, but the golden rule is that if you’re relying upon condoms to provide a barrier between you and STI risk and/or unplanned pregnancy, anything oily shouldn’t be touched with a bargepole, and your bargepole shouldn’t touch anything oily. If massage features as part of your foreplay, switch to using a water-based gel such as Kynect rather than an oil to help your hands glide smoothly and safely, and make skin glisten and gleam seductively. As a bonus, lube is easier to wash out of your sheets post-playtime: all gain, no stain. Plus, if you’re prone to yeast infections, use of oils in and around the vagina is associated with higher rates of candida colonisation – the fungus responsible for thrush – so switching could help you avoid itching. Fancy a new smooth move? Draw inspiration from the Japanese “nuru” massage technique, in which both partners’ bodies are glossed with lube, and they slip-slide their whole selves against one another. It enhances sensation during masturbation Using lube during a ménage a moi can also help men avoid “death grip syndrome”: coined by renowned American sex columnist Dan Savage, this phrase describes a situation whereby a penis owner becomes conditioned via long-term rough, harsh manual masturbation habits to only orgasm in response to similarly aggressive forms of stimulation, meaning that the comparatively soft, gentle feelings of a vagina or tongue aren’t strong enough to induce climax. He may even struggle to maintain an erection during coupled play. The complication is thought to particularly affect circumcised men, who tend to have reduced genital sensitivity as their glans is always exposed rather than being covered with a foreskin, making them more likely to develop intense masturbatory practices. Using lube with a looser stroke when alone can help foster a more satisfying response to lighter stimulation. It combats vaginal dryness … which is much more common than you think The hormone oestrogen is responsible for ensuring that the walls of the vagina stay plump, elastic, and moisturised with a clear lubricating fluid – so when oestrogen levels dip every month at certain points in the menstrual cycle, or on a permanent basis after menopause, it’s utterly normal to feel dehydrated downstairs. Hormone levels also change during pregnancy and breastfeeding, and dryness can additionally be caused by underlying conditions such as diabetes; reactions to perfumed soaps and shower gels; alcohol; stress; treatments such as chemotherapy; and all manner of medications, including contraceptive pills. Certain antidepressants that give you a hand handling the blues can unfortunately make your pink bits arid, while antihistamines that stop your eyes and nose running can also halt fluid production in more southerly mucous membranes. Given all these factors, it’s no wonder that many women have experienced dryness causing discomfort during sex. Use lube. Make things wetter. Make things better. Simple. It helps when your mind’s turned on, but your body hasn’t caught up yet On occasion, dryness can be a sign that you’re not in a sexy mood; that what’s happening isn’t tickling your pickle; or that you need more foreplay before things move forward. However, that’s not always the case. Sometimes you can be dying to treat yourself to a quickie before the kids wake from their nap (or the teens get back before curfew), yet your body can’t work to make moisture at 100 miles per hour. Or maybe you begin feeling fabulous in your head, but then when your bits don’t immediately cooperate in bed, worrying about feeling dry starts to dampen your mood (there’s that irony again!) … which makes it even harder to get wet. Your partner notices things aren’t going smoothly; it puts them off their stride too; and the whole fumble starts tumbling down. Lubricant can break this vicious circle in a dash. It’s vital for anal play The bottom line? Lube is essential for any voyage up the back passage, as unlike the vagina, the anus doesn’t produce its own natural moisture at all. Plugs, probes, prostate toys, or penetration by a person: whatever you’re introducing to your rear end, using lashings of lube and warming up slowly are the best ingredients to feel fantastic and avoid injuries such as tears or fissures. It plays perfectly with sex toys Adding lube can bring a whole new dimension of sensation to a favourite vibrator or stimulator. Some silicone-based lubricants don’t react well with certain silicone toys, though, and can cause them to “rot” or “peel”. A plain water-based formula is gentle on the genitals and on toys too. It stops chafing during long sex sessions If you’ve got a dirty weekend planned, lube can help prevent you from walking like a rodeo bull-riding cowboy come Monday morning. And on a more everyday level, if you’re someone who requires a prolonged period of stimulation in order to orgasm, but finds themselves getting sore before they manage to get off, lube can take away the “ow” before the “O”. It makes cervical smears less stressful Along with tips like asking for a smaller speculum and to insert it yourself, bringing your own water-based lube can make cervical screening a less anxiety-inducing process for those who find this important health check triggering, painful or nerve-racking. For more support, I recommend the Vulval Pain Society’s Smears without Tears guide, and the My Body Back project for survivors of sexual abuse and assault. It helps bodies fit together better If you’re trying to put a girthy/long peg in a small/tight hole, lube equals less frustration, easier tessellation. So: for more freedom to enjoy yourself, lube liberally. You can never have too much of a good thing. Enjoy more intimacy with your partner with our 200ml tube. Buy it hereLube – once dismissed as something only used by the perpetually horny or older folks is finally getting the recognition it deserves. And it’s about time too! This magical goo has the power to revolutionise all of our sex lives. Interested? Here’s what everyone should know about lube. Who can use lube? Anyone and everyone! No matter your age, gender, sexuality, whether you have health concerns or are as fit as a fiddle, are single, in a couple, throuple, having solo sex or going to an orgy, you can use lube. It’s especially brilliant for people who experience vaginal dryness – a perfectly normal part of being a woman or vulva-having person that can be down to anything from stress and menopause to the medications you’re taking. But lube isn’t just a very efficient problem-solver, it’s also sex-life enhancer. That’s why it’s a staple in many a bedside drawer. What are the different types of lubes? With so many types and options, where to start? Water-based is the most popular. Kynect (that’s the new name for KY, the brand most synonymous with lube) describes it as “most similar to the body’s natural wetness”. It doesn’t get sticky, is easy to clean up and can be used for everything from touching to penetration. It’s safe to use with most condoms and sex toys. And, if you go for a gentle, paraben-free lube such as Kynect, it doesn’t upset the vagina’s natural pH. Silicone-based is thicker and longer-lasting. It’s often recommended for anal sex (unlike the vagina, the anus doesn’t self-lubricate), but it can’t be used with silicone sex toys as it causes them to degrade. Oil-based had its moment, but you don’t see it around as much these days. It’s not safe for use with condoms because it causes them to break down. What are the benefits of using lube? Look, it just feels really good. It makes everything slip and slide around easily, which leads to a more enjoyable experience all around. Of course, friction can feel good. But it can be painful if you experience vaginal dryness or are having anal sex. Lube gives you an extra layer of comfort, which makes sex more pleasurable and reduces the risk of soreness or tearing. It also makes condoms less likely to break. It’s not just about the physical benefits, though. Using lube during solo and partnered sex can help you relax, get out of your head and focus purely on the sensation (mindful masturbation is a sex trend for a reason). Using lube can help you connect with your partner, strengthen your communication skills, and build trust and intimacy. It’s also a really simple and cheap way to introduce playfulness to your sex life. Something we so often forget is that sex is meant to be fun! How do you use lube? You can apply it directly on to skin, genitals, nipples, condoms or dental dams. But beware, lube can be very cold. To avoid a potential mood-ruining shock, squeeze it into your hand first and warm it up between your fingers. When using a water-based lube such as Kynect, which is safe for everyday use, you can reapply to your heart’s (and body’s) content. Is lube safe for sensitive skin? Not all lube is created equal. Novelty and cheaper products often contain ingredients that aren’t considered body-safe, ie they’re not great for your skin. Go for water-based lubes such as Kynect, which are gentle and free of parabens, perfume and flavourings. With any new lube, test a drop on a small area first and avoid using it on broken or inflamed skin. Stop using it if you do experience discomfort, and see a doctor if the irritation continues. How do you ask your partner to use lube? We all know communication is the key to great sex, but it’s much easier said than done. Here are some tips: 1 Have any conversations about sex outside of the bedroom. Starting one during sex will likely catch your partner off guard and make them feel vulnerable. 2 Be honest and kind. If you experience vaginal dryness or discomfort, tell your partner. If you’re suggesting lube because you want to try something new, focus on the positives rather than what you think your sex life is “lacking”, or what your partner is doing “wrong”. 3 Ask your partner how they feel – and really listen. 4 Get their full, enthusiastic consent before skipping off to the nearest supermarket arm-in-arm. And finally, remember, using lube really isn’t a big deal. It doesn’t mean you don’t fancy your partner or that there’s anything wrong with you. It just means you’re up for having better, more pleasurable sex. So hats off to you! We’ll see you in the toiletries aisle. You can never have too much of a good thing. Enjoy more intimacy with your partner with our 200ml tube. Buy it hereThe business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, has said allegations of blackmail by government whips against Tory rebels need to be investigated but are unlikely to be true. Speaking to Sky News, Kwarteng said: “Any form of blackmail and intimidation of that kind simply has no place in British politics.” He added: “We need to get to the bottom of the matter. I’d find it very unlikely that these allegations are true.” On Thursday, William Wragg, the chair of the public administration committee, claimed there had been attempted blackmail involving threats to funding in the constituencies of his fellow Conservative MPs who backed a confidence vote on Boris Johnson’s leadership. No 10 dismissed the allegations and said they would only be investigated if any evidence was presented. Although Kwarteng was sceptical of the allegations, he suggested they should be investigated. He said: “I find it strange because the whip’s office doesn’t actually have the power over spending in that way. But obviously, we’re going to take the allegation seriously and we need to look [get] to the bottom of it.” He added: “I’ve been an MP for 12 years now and I’ve never heard of the kind of allegations that have been made: blackmail, the idea that somehow money is being withheld from communities that need it on account of the behaviour of the MPs, I’ve never heard of anything like that. “It’s really important that whips get on with MPs – it’s a really important relationship. So I was very surprised to see the allegations. I haven’t seen any evidence to back them up. But obviously we have to look and see what’s actually gone on. “I don’t want to get drawn into what will happen if unsubstantiated allegations [are] proven true. All I would like to say is that it’s completely unacceptable. And we need to get to the bottom of the matter.” Christian Wakeford, the former Tory MP who defected to Labour on Wednesday, said the whips had threatened to withhold money for a school in his Bury South constituency when he was considering rebelling against the government. Kwarteng told Sky: “He’s a Labour MP now, and of course, part of his job is to try and discredit the government.” Asked later by BBC Radio 4’s Today programme about Wakeford’s allegation, Kwarteng said: “I’m sure it will be investigated if it’s not being so already … I think Christian Wakeford will be aware that the whips don’t have authority to spend money in local communities. I don’t think it is true.” He added: “I think the claims have been unsubstantiated, as the prime minister said, he hadn’t seen any evidence. I haven’t seen any evidence of this. Any allegation of that seriousness should be looked into and would have consequences if it is found to be true.” The claims over whipping tactics came as Johnson battled to remain in power before the outcome of an inquiry by the senior civil servant Sue Gray into allegations of rule-breaking partying at Downing Street during coronavirus restrictions. The Times reported that rebels were considering releasing texts or recordings of their conversations with whips to show their tactics.A row over meat consumption in Spain over the last month is just the most recent eruption of the debate all over Europe, as the continent grapples with making its famous cuisines more sustainable. Food is inextricably intertwined with national identity for countries in continental Europe; a good steak, with perfect frites stacked beside it; a plate of wafer thin carpaccio, drizzled with dressing or plain old olive oil; wurst, served with good mustard; jamón ibérico laced with creamy white fat. Europeans love their meat, and they eat a lot of it. About 1.5kg a week is consumed by the average citizen of the EU27 – that’s twice the global average. But it is also clear that if there is to be any hope of reducing the impact of global heating, that consumption level will have to fall rapidly. Greenpeace estimates that it will need to drop by 70% by the end of the decade, and down to 300g by 2050. That translates (since not all the meat that leaves slaughterhouses ends up being either sold or eaten) to each European actually eating, per week, a quantity of meat equivalent to about two good-sized hamburgers. The response to this news? Unenthusiastic, to say the least. Politically, balancing the priorities of environmental action against the clout of often powerful farming lobbies and the expectations of populations accustomed to consuming large quantities of unrealistically cheap meat looks nearly impossible. In Spain, for example, which holds the dubious honour of being the EU member state with the highest per capita meat supply in the bloc (more than 100kg per person, per year) the consumer affairs minister, Alberto Garzón, was engulfed in a national row last July after calling on his compatriots to eat less meat for the sake of the environment and of their own bodies. “Our health and the health of our families is at stake,” he said. “Eating too much meat is bad for our health, and for the planet.” Within hours, he had been slapped down not just by the agriculture minister, but by the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez. Asked what he made of Garzón’s plea, Sánchez observed: “Speaking personally, a medium-rare steak is hard to beat.” There is evidence that many Europeans are taking the issue seriously. One recent survey showed almost half (46%) of European consumers are now eating less meat than they once did, while 40% are planning on reducing their meat consumption in the future. The EU-backed study, of more than 7,500 people in 10 European countries, found a third actively sought to minimise their meat consumption – with 73% of that group saying they had “substantially” reduced their meat intake over the past months. But in its latest document, the European Commission suggests that despite clear and growing public awareness of the importance of sustainability, EU meat consumption per capita, left to its own devices, is likely to fall by little more than 3kg a year. Government intervention, then, will be essential, but, judging by Spain’s example, difficult. Garzón again told the Guardian in December that people had to reduce their meat consumption, and contrasted meat from traditional, extensive farming with that produced on intensive megafarms, but parts of Garzón’s interview were seized on by the conservative People’s party and the far-right Vox party, who have demanded he resign for what they portray as an unforgivable attack on Spain’s important meat industry and the quality of its exports. The consumer affairs minister has stuck by his words, accusing “the lobby of certain big companies which promote polluting megafarms” of deliberately distorting what he said. His comments, moreover, do not differ wildly from official government policy. The ministry for ecological transition wants extensive production systems promoted, and well-adapted native breeds used more. The agriculture minister has praised small family farms, and some regional governments have already acted to limit intensive farming. In Germany, traditionally among the EU’s biggest consumers of animal-based products per capita, meat-eating has declined steadily over the last two decades, but here too the politics are sensitive. The Green party, part of the new three-party coalition with the centre-left SPD and the liberal FDP, might have been expected to throw itself into accelerating the falling trend, but has so far held back. The hesitancy comes from painful political experience. Germany’s Greens have suffered in recent years from being seen as a Verbotspartei, intent on banning the joys of life. A 2013 “veggie day” initiative for meat-free days at state-subsidised canteens saw the tabloid Bild complain that “the Greens want to take our meat away”. Instead, the environmental party has used its first weeks in power to initiate a less politically exposing campaign against junk meat sold for junk prices. The new agriculture minister, Cem Özdemir, told Bild Germans were losing out because food quality and food prices were too low. Junk prices, often imposed by all-powerful supermarket chains, he said, “drive farms to ruin, prevent animal welfare, promote species extinction and burden the climate. I want to change that.” The price of food should, he said, echoing the findings of a commission set up by the previous government, reflect the “ecological truth” and consumers must get used to paying a fair price for better quality. But this approach, too, is far from universally popular: the new government’s attack on cheap meat was criticised by the Paritätische Gesamtverband, an umbrella group for Germany’s social welfare organisations, which argues higher food prices must be accompanied by compensation payments for those on low incomes. And in Italy, the environment minister, Roberto Cingolani, triggered a fiery debate last year by saying excessive meat consumption was harmful to health and the environment, adding that encouraging Italians to eat less meat would be central to his plans. “Changing our diet will have the combined benefit of improving public health, decreasing water use and producing less CO2,” Cingolani said. Farmers hit back instantly, saying annual meat consumption per capita in Italy is among the lowest in Europe and meat was an important part of a balanced diet. Activists including Luca Mercalli, a well-known metorologist, are keeping the debate alive, arguing that better quality meat produced closer to home and consumed in smaller quantities would make a significant difference to the environment. “A proportion of Italians are sensitive to the topic and have changed their diets, either due to concerns about the climate or dietary motives,” Mercalli said. “The problem in Italy is the debate often turns toxic, with vegetarians becoming very judgmental of meat-eaters, which in turn alienates 90% of the population.” The onus should be on the government to provide clearer information, he said. “The message should be: eat less meat, but when you do, buy locally produced meat that is more sustainable. Even if you pay more, eating better quality meat once a week is far better than eating a cheap hamburger every day.” French meat consumption has also been falling steadily, with surveys suggesting half the population has reduced their meat consumption over the past three years and that 30% would like to continue doing so over the next three. And yet howls of outrage greeted the launch of France’s national low-carbon strategy, adopted in 2020, which aims to cut greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture – which represent 20% of the country’s total, with fully 80% generated by livestock farming – by 19% by 2030 and 46% by 2050. EU countries that have tried to implement concrete meat reduction policies have faced instant backlashes. The Danish government was forced in 2020 to reverse a ban on state canteens serving meat for two days every week after trade unions and the food industry objected, and the government has now instead switched its focus to boosting non-meat food production, approving a climate agreement that features the EU’s largest investment in plant-based research and development, including an annual fund to support the transition to a nationwide dietary shift. In the Netherlands, in an attempt to prioritise tackling the major environmental issues long caused by its intensive pig and other farms, the new government features a minister for nature and nitrogen affairs, Christianne van der Wal-Zeggelink. And all of this is no less true for the European Commission itself, struggling with the incompatibility of ambitious carbon emission reduction plans and the vast common agricultural policy subsidies that account for nearly a third of the EU’s budget. Greenpeace has broken down the numbers and calculates that a fifth of the EU’s entire budget is spent on livestock. As recently as 2020, the EU was still spending money to promote meat eating with a controversial and frankly slightly mad ad campaign exhorting people to become Beefatarians. “If the sound of beef sizzling on the grill brings tears to your eyes, you’re a real Beefatarian,” coos the ad. Confused? It’s only going to get worse.Tributes have been flooding in for the Bat out of Hell singer who died on 20 January. Meat Loaf’s 1977 debut album Bat Out of Hell is one of the biggest-selling albums in history. The musician’s family said in a statement: “We know how much he meant to so many of you and we truly appreciate all of the love and support as we move through this time of grief in losing such an inspiring artist and beautiful man … From his heart to your souls … don’t ever stop rocking!” We’d like you to tell us what Meat Loaf meant to you. Share your tributes and memories You can share your memories and tributes with us using the encrypted form below – please include as much detail as possible – and we’ll feature a selection of responses in our coverage. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Abba have reached a settlement with a tribute band they described in a lawsuit as “parasitic and bad faith”. Lawyers for Abba filed the lawsuit in December, arguing that the British group Abba Mania could be confused with the original act. They said they had asked Abba Mania to change their name but the quartet had refused. Terms of the settlement have not been disclosed, but one of Abba’s lawyers has claimed the tribute artists will stop using the Abba name. The Guardian has contacted Abba Mania for comment. Abba Mania formed in 1999 and describe themselves as “the world’s most successful touring Abba show”. They are due to tour France in March and the UK in April, and have previously toured across Europe and the Americas. Since Abba’s split in 1982, the Swedish quartet’s popularity has been buoyed by the success of the Abba Gold compilation and the musical Mamma Mia!, generating a substantial market for tribute shows, also including the likes of Björn Again. The lawsuit was filed shortly after the announcement that Abba were themselves returning to the live stage – or, at least, a motion-captured digital version of the group. The concert experience Abba Voyage, featuring avatars of the group performing along with a live band at a custom-built arena in east London, begins in May. Abba released their first album in 40 years in 2021, Voyage, which reached No 1 in the UK and saw the group nominated for Grammy and Brit awards.I meet Romola Garai in a velvet-sofaed establishment in central London, which feels radically incongruous. Not because one wouldn’t expect to find an actor of nearly 20 years on such a sofa, but because an hour before, I’d been forcing myself to watch the gory centrepiece moment of her new horror film, Amulet, which marks a dramatic departure into writing and directing. Amulet lulls you into a fragile sense of security with its arthousey tension, beautiful, subtle performances and lingering shots of decaying wallpaper. When it explodes into body horror – toilets birthing hideous, hairless newborn creatures, a prelude to the worse gestations to come – well, you’d be tempted to cover your eyes if it wasn’t all so horribly compelling. It is a major shift in subject matter for someone best known for their appearances in period dramas – Atonement, Suffragette, 60s newsroom drama The Hour – but Garai has poured a lot of creativity and self into these scenes. “I’ve always loved horror films,” she says, “they’re a big part of my life. They tend historically to have been made by men. Which isn’t to say that the newborn isn’t a feature of horror made by men, but the baby just arrives: [in] Rosemary’s Baby, Eraserhead, the baby is just handed to you. That’s the male experience, not having grown this creature inside you.” When she embarked on the project, she leaned into the fantasy just to see what would come out, and says in a tone of cool surprise: “I was extremely taken aback, extremely unprepared for the trauma of childbirth. And that’s what was sitting inside me, and crawled out.” Two things are immediately noticeable about Garai, which have been hinted at since her first major role, in 2003’s I Capture the Castle, a beautiful adaptation of the Dodie Smith coming-of-age novel. First, she seems almost allergic to trivial conversation, and this makes her unusually exhilarating company; second, she’s not at all interested in hiding her thoughts or feelings, which is, again, unusual, at least in the industry she’s in. So maybe I had a surprised look on my face that she misinterpreted – and she was moved to clarify. “Which isn’t to say that there’s a correlation between Amulet and my view on my baby. I don’t think my children are evil. Not all the time.” Both sides of the maternal hellscape are viscerally and metaphorically rendered; there’s also a powerfully decayed crone, part of, Garai says, “an inelegant history, in horror particularly, for older women to represent ideas of psychological threat. I wanted to do something playful with that.” Inescapably, too, the fear of the crone is the fear of ageing itself, which as an actor “I’m acutely aware of”, she says. “One of the first jobs I ever did, there was a woman playing my mother who was an actress I’d grown up watching on TV. I couldn’t work it out. I was playing the lead and she had two scenes. That’s what you see as you go into the industry – from the very beginning, you’re thinking: ‘That’s going to be me. I’ll get replaced, I’ll become that smaller and smaller part until I literally disappear.’” A horror film has succeeded when your attempts to describe it come out in bursts of imagery rather than what actually happened. But, for narrative clarity, at the centre of Amulet is a refugee, Tomaz (Alec Secareanu), who has come to London from a shapeless war zone, and at the centre of his story is a war whose horrors we never see and an act of sexual violence we glimpse from as far away as a camera could get. In fact, Garai says, “they were just lying next to each other. Because of the perspective, I didn’t need anyone to perform that act. I just didn’t want to do that to another actor: never mind sexual violence, being paid to portray a sexual act – that line between what is acting and what is sex work – has always been a really big issue for me, very challenging, full of conflict.” Romola Garai, now 39, was 17 when she got the main part of Cassandra in I Capture the Castle. It was something of a lottery win in terms of breakthrough roles, and she was magnetic in it, really memorable, though she thinks people mainly loved the film because they already loved the book. “Cassandra’s conditioning is that, to become part of womanhood, you fall in love. She’s on the brink of it, and knows that it’s potentially going to destroy part of her true freedom and true identity. These things come at such a cost. I was very much of an age where I was in that conflict myself.” She had never even really acted before, and the brink she was on wasn’t just child-to-adult but, in social and professional terms, person-to-commodity. “A young woman today would not be as innocent as I think I was, about what it meant to portray other people’s emotions, how commodified your body is as an actor. Not one person takes you aside and says: ‘This will mean that in the public imagination, for the rest of your life, you’re going to partly belong to other people. Do you want that? Do you want to be your body?’ And even if somebody had had that conversation with me, I think I would have been, like: ‘What? But I get to buy loads of stuff!’” It wasn’t until 2004’s Dirty Dancing 2: Havana Nights, however, that she had the full studio experience. “A corporation owned my body, owned what went into it. No one had ever asked me to change anything about myself. I’d never really thought of my body that much at all anyway. So it was a tremendous shock.” She pauses for a second. “What a ludicrous film to have had a profound experience of.” She was much more careful in choosing roles after that, Garai says, although she underlines that judgment can only take you so far: “Every project you go into, you’re jumping into a pool that you don’t know. You may think it’s going to be the most incredible arthouse project of your life, and three months later you’re having somebody psychologically torture you.” She built up a body of work, characterised by intelligent historicism (2006 William Wilberforce biopic Amazing Grace) or searching, if quite polite, psychological inquiry: Atonement, Kenneth Branagh’s As You Like It. “I did an adaptation of Daniel Deronda early on, these are fantastic roles. Costume drama has a bad rep these days but women tend to have good roles, where you don’t just have to lie sprawled naked on a bed.” But these roles didn’t necessarily represent or encompass her own creative sensibilities. “My tastes are quite dark, my interests are quite dark.” Garai is on a crusade to get women to watch more horror. “Women do like to be afraid. True crime is almost entirely a female audience. There are amazing female directors working in the genre, and I think the form itself is being affected. Now women just need to start watching it.” More importantly, Amulet marks a transition – “From puppet to puppet master” – that she didn’t realise how much she wanted until she made it. But it’s not a permanent shift away from acting. “I think I’ll be much less of a nightmare for directors now I’ve tried it,” she says. “For years, I thought that acting was a stupid job, and people thought I was stupid for doing it. I hated the perception of actors being morally compromised fools. And I felt quite embarrassed of it. I only understood when I was directing how important actors are, how much they give, and how valuable they are to the process.” Amulet was released in the US in autumn, and the reception was mixed, a fact I only glancingly bring up because I’ve come to the opinion that everyone needs to watch the film until they love it, or at least can stand to keep their eyes uncovered. But I needn’t have felt so protective. “I had a lot of success quite early, quite quickly and that is not great for dealing with failure,” Garai says. “You don’t go through the natural path of trying something and not succeeding at it, and having to struggle. People were just like: ‘Would you like a film career?’ And I was like: ‘OK.’ So this has been much more difficult, but I think it’s been very good for me. Worrying about whether people like it, or don’t like it, is the same as worrying about whether they like me or don’t like me. Which is to say … ” She pauses for the right word, and it lands as lightly as a Chinese lantern, “counterproductive.” Amulet is released in UK cinemas on 28 January. Buy tickets for Q&amp;A screenings here. • This article was amended on 21 January 2022 to add context to the quote in the headline.A slew of sexual violence and drugging allegations prompted officials at the University of Southern California to shut down all fraternity parties last fall. Now the parties are back on – but with new rules. Security guards will be stationed on stairways and in public areas, risk and sexual violence prevention trainings will be mandatory for members and chapters will have to complete compliance reviews before and after all gatherings when they resume in March, according to details outlined in an action plan this week. The new policies, put together by a fraternity-led committee that includes faculty, student government leaders and university officials, came about after more than a dozen students confidentially reported to the university that their drinks had been drugged or that they had been sexually assaulted. Six of the reports were linked to the Sigma Nu fraternity house, which pledged full cooperation with investigations in a statement issued last fall and suspended its chapter president. Protests erupted in the following weeks as students and teachers demanded accountability, and school officials promised they would deliver. But advocates are concerned the new policies will do little to change the underlying toxic culture that has persisted for decades. Some say the security solutions do more to placate parents’ perceptions than to solve core problems. “There is a history with this university of not protecting its students when it comes to sexual assault,” says Natalia Parraz, a USC senior and president of a student-led intersectional feminism organization called USC flow, which led demonstrations. She sees the plan as a “quick fix to a very systemic problem” and voiced frustration that recommendations from her group, including community-led discussions, were absent from the plan. Parraz is concerned that the university has prioritized PR over prevention. USC has relied on hired security observers to assuage safety concerns before, and fraternities are already required to have security guards on hand during events. Meanwhile, trainings about consent and sexual assault, though not mandatory, are already provided, and “obviously aren’t working”, she says. Warnings about the risks of attending fraternity parties at USC have long been passed down through students. It became common knowledge never to leave a drink unattended and female party-goers often exercised the buddy-system to ensure they got home safely. A third of female undergraduates at USC said they had been victims of sexual assault according to a survey done in 2019 by the Association of American Universities. That’s higher than the already astounding national average of one in four female students and 23% of transgender, genderqueer, or non-binary college students who have reportedly been sexually assaulted, according to statistics compiled by Rainn, an anti-sexual violence organization. But the university has resisted shutting down its fraternities, which are a big part of the school’s social scene. Roughly 4,000 USC students are affiliated with Greek life and the organizations are also considered important for providing opportunities for philanthropy, leadership and postgraduate networking. “The Greek community serves an important role in many of our students’ sense of belonging,” the Interfraternity Council working group wrote in a statement detailing the plan, adding that “it is clear that social environments within the IFC community require enhanced attention to safety planning and risk prevention”. The IFC, which serves as the governing board of fraternities at the university, did not respond to a request for comment. But in a previously issued statement the group expressed disgust for the “violence that took place in our community” and said it was “deeply apologetic for the trauma caused and impact on victims and the University of Southern California community as a whole”. The university has placed four IFC fraternities on interim suspension and a fifth is still under investigation, but others will be able to resume social activities next month if they are found to be in compliance with the new rules. Laura Palumbo, a spokesperson for the non-profit National Sexual Violence Resource Center, says that institutions must be committed to change the culture and not just the policies. “Often with fraternities there is a focus on risk management and security concerns, and it’s equally important to be thinking about how to positively shape the environment to promote respect and healthy behaviors,” she says. “Longstanding fraternity or campus cultures that normalize and dismiss sexual abuse cannot be changed overnight.” USC claims to be in it for the long haul. “The recommendations made by the university’s IFC Culture, Prevention and Accountability Working Group are part of a preliminary action plan,” a university spokesperson said in a statement to the Guardian, noting that a report will be issued at the end of the semester. “The group’s focus now shifts to exploring long-term strategies for improving culture, enhancing accountability, and addressing systemic challenges within IFC chapters.” Parraz, the student advocate, says she hopes their voices will be considered and included going forward. “We are trying to give advice on the preventative measures and they are not really listening,” she says. “The sad fact is that this conversation has happened every two to four years on campus.”Why will I love it? This rare and very strangely shaped cactus stands out from the rest, thanks to its “scientific experiment gone wrong” appearance and its long mouthful of a botanical name, Myrtillocactus geometrizans Fukurokuryuzinboku. Buy it from a specialist: you won’t find this in your average garden centre or plant shop. Light or shade? Bright, direct light. Where should I put it? On a sunny, south-facing windowsill. How do I keep it alive? Pot in free-draining soil and, as with all cacti, allow the soil to dry out completely between waterings. Use fertiliser to feed your cactus during the warmer months (April-September). Keep the temperature above 10C. These cacti like to have a winter rest period, so you should stop watering from late autumn until spring. Did you know … This is a “monstrose” (with abnormal or distorted growth) cultivar of the more widely found Myrtillocactus geometrizans. Characterised by unusually shaped ribs along with areoles that resemble … well, you know what. This is why this cactus goes by the nickname “booby cactus” or “titty cactus”.My Bloody Valentine have criticised Spotify for showing “fake lyrics” to the shoegaze band’s famously cryptic songs. In November 2021, Spotify launched a feature allowing users to read along to the lyrics while they listen to any song. “Just noticed that Spotify has put fake lyrics up for our songs without our knowledge,” the band tweeted. “These lyrics are actually completely incorrect and insulting. We’re not sure where they got them from, probably one of those bullshit lyrics sites on the internet.” The offending lyrics appear to have been removed from Spotify as of 21 January but they remain on Musixmatch, the site Spotify partnered with for lyrics integration. My Bloody Valentine were holdouts to the world of streaming, finally uploading their catalogue in March 2021 when they signed to Domino Records. The group, led by Kevin Shields, have never clarified the largely inaudible lyrics to their songs, even within the liner notes of their own records, a mystery that has added to the group’s mythology. In 1990, Shields teased NME with the fact that the lyrics were often “pretty sensual”. “It’s not hard, industrial music or anything like that. It’s very human. People who experience the pleasure of any sexual thing will find something there, I think. Our lyrics are quite explicit occasionally but it’s all real. There’s nothing there that ordinary people don’t say to each other when they’re alone.” They tended to emerge from his subconscious, Shields told Melody Maker in 1990. “When you know you really have to do it, you just forget everything and you do it. If you try to be clever and wordy, unless you’re really clever, the chances are you’ll fall flat your face. If you just write whatever’s in your head at the time, it’s your subconscious. Your conscious – mine, anyways – doesn’t know what’s going on.” An earlier, indie-pop incarnation of the band had been more focused on writing “perfect pop songs with sick lyrics”, as an NME journalist wrote in 1988. That was down to original vocalist David Conway – now a published science fiction novelist – Shields explained. “The idea of composing a sweet pop song that sugar-coated some lyrical horror and sending it hurtling up the charts appealed to our sense of humour. Also it was fresh after having made pure noise earlier. “Once we’d mastered the art of writing snappy pop songs with our eyes and ears closed the whole project started to become boring as hell,” Shields said. Conway departed the band, which lost its inclination towards pop, they signed to Creation Records and returned to their noisy roots, producing the era-defining albums Isn’t Anything (1988) and Loveless (1991). Even the label remained in the dark about the band’s true lyrical content. In 1991, Shields told the late music journalist David Cavanagh that he wouldn’t even write out the precise lyrics for the group’s music publishers. “I give them the titles,” he said. “Then a girl at Creation [Records] listens to the songs and writes down what she thinks I’m singing. And that’s what she gives them. They’re actually more her lyrics than mine. And some of the discrepancies are hilarious.” The rise of lyric sites online led to a lot of amateur guesswork at the content of Shields’ lyrics. In 2021, he told the Guardian that “30-50%” of those guesses are “completely wrong, sometimes in really key areas”. “Part of me really likes the folk song element of that – people changing things, having their own version of reality – and part of me thinks I should go through them like a teacher, correcting them.” My Bloody Valentine released their long-awaited third album, mbv, in 2013. Shields has promised a follow-up this year – but fans may know better than to hold their breath.It was an ordinary Tuesday at the office – and the day everything changed. We had breakfasted in a time of optimism, inside and outside the Guardian. The lustre was yet to fade from a Labour party that had recently been elected for a second term, while the internet was bringing the world to our doors. I was the literary editor. Come lunchtime, a group of us headed out to celebrate a new partnership with the Hay festival, which the previous year had been declared “the Woodstock of the mind” by Bill Clinton. It was all very jolly and perhaps a bit smug – part of a mission to seize the literary high ground. Halfway through the main course, a waiter appeared, asking if there was an Ed Pilkington at the table, because there was a phone call for him. This wasn’t entirely surprising, as Ed was the foreign editor, which has never been a job of the long lunch. When he returned, ruffling his hair, a bemused look on his face, he said he had to go back to the office because a plane had crashed into the World Trade Center. Ha ha, someone joked. If you need an exit line, you might as well choose a good one. Minutes later, the waiter was back again, asking if there was a Gary Younge in our party. Gary, at that time a columnist and features writer, returned with a stunned looked on his face. “I need a taxi home to get my passport,” he said. “I’m on the next plane to New York.” It was as if we had walked through a wormhole separating before from after. Around us, diners chatted on happily, stuck in the before, while we abandoned our lunch and hurried into the after. The office was in a state of hushed pandemonium. It was truly shocking, a glimpse of a tragedy that, even in those first minutes, you knew would unfold over decades. Staff clustered in appalled silence around TV screens – which were already playing the same image again and again, showing a passenger plane crashing into a tower in the morning sun – while editors tore up their plans and got to work on the first edition of the new era. Gary never did catch that plane to New York (the closure of US airspace meant he had to go the long way round, via the Caribbean), but I have never felt so awe-struck by my colleagues’ ability to rise to a crisis, and so humbled by the responsibility of finding words capable of giving shape to a horrific event that hours earlier had been beyond imagination.Nigel Jones is no stranger to emergency situations. After nearly 11 years in the Royal Signals, followed by 24 years in the fire service, Jones, from Penperlleni in Monmouthshire, now works as a full-time emergency medical technician with the Welsh ambulance service. Alongside the day job, his passion for volunteering has seen him join forces with charities such as SSAFA (the armed forces charity), the Fire Fighters Charity and mountain rescue. Two-and-a-half years ago, he began offering his help as an international responder to Re:Act Disaster Response, a charity that deploys military veterans to emergency situations where their hard-earned skills often prove invaluable. In February 2021, Re:Act sent Jones to Australia for a month as part of a team of six to help provide urgent relief during the bushfire crisis. It meant he returned to the UK just as another large-scale emergency – the Covid-19 pandemic – was beginning to take hold. “Being in the ambulance service, it was quite full-on,” he says of the early days of the pandemic. “During the first wave, pretty much every patient we took in the ambulance was Covid-related.” Seeing first-hand the gravity of the situation, Jones didn’t hesitate to offer his assistance to Re:Act on UK soil, too. “I couldn’t sit around not doing anything,” he says of the decision to give up his days off. It meant Jones was involved in several crucial projects in response to the pandemic in Wales, including helping to build Cardiff and Bridgend’s Nightingale hospitals. “Re:Act have access to incredible ex-military staff who have a wide range of specialist skills, from logistics to communications and transport, so the knowledge and skillset needed is already there,” he says. The Covid-19 response by Re:Act has been impressive. So far, the charity has helped provide 8,406 Covid response volunteers to emergency situations and has supported around 106,500 vaccinations. During the first wave of Covid-19, volunteers such as Jones primarily worked to support PPE distribution, as well as helping with emergency food provision, welfare checks for those shielding and even mortuary assistance, as well as helping local authorities. Since then, efforts have shifted to focus on supporting the NHS with hospital and ambulance decontamination, non-clinical tasks, and supporting NHS vaccination and testing sites. Jones’s latest volunteering role saw him stationed at a pop-up vaccination centre in Hereford. “Going into the Omicron wave, I realised vaccinations were probably the only way out of this,” he says. “So when Re:Act asked if anybody could help, I thought: ‘Yes, absolutely – because if we even get five people vaccinated, that’s five people who aren’t going to suffer.’ “The skills of ex-military personnel are so transferable,” he says. “In the military – and the emergency services too – there’s not a lot that comes across our path that bamboozles us. We can always find a way around things. We learn essential life skills – and crucial people skills – that are invaluable in emergency situations like this.” Stationed at the vaccination centre in January, Jones helped ensure that as many people as possible were able to receive their Covid-19 booster vaccine in the local area, as well as those who had decided to take up their first or second vaccinations. “Our role was to facilitate paperwork and take people from one place to another, ensuring they were OK and reassuring them so the nurses could get on and do the vaccinations. The whole team worked seamlessly together,” he says. “By the end of one day, we’d given about 120 vaccinations, ranging from schoolchildren to pensioners.” Those having their first vaccinations were welcomed with open arms, he adds. “I actually asked somebody having their first jab: ‘What changed your mind then?’ and he said: ‘Omicron, because it’s more infectious.’ I just said: ‘Well done for coming, it will be really beneficial to you’ – it’s not our job to judge people.” Jones’s role with the ambulance service means he is a firm supporter of the vaccination rollout. “In this Omicron wave, I’ve only taken one person [with Covid] to hospital in my ambulance in the last two months,” he says. “The hospital we drive into is split into two parts – Covid and non-Covid arrivals – and I can see that overall we’re not taking as many people into the Covid zone. Previously, every single ambulance had a Covid case on it. People are still presenting because they’ve got symptoms, of course, but they’re nowhere near as bad – that is all down to the vaccination. So, from my point of view, the vaccinations work and I encourage people to have them. I think people tend to listen to me because of what I do, perhaps.” The memory of transporting those seriously ill with the virus will stay with him for a long time, he says. “The gravity of the situation was really visible when you saw unwell people in the back of the ambulance. They were struggling to breathe, looked really ill and had all the signs and symptoms like the cough and a high temperature. Now we’re just not seeing that at all. “I’m not saying the virus isn’t there – it is, it’s just that because people have been vaccinated, it’s not putting them into hospital as regularly. While I’d never strong-arm people into being vaccinated, I do tell them I’m seeing less people going to hospital because of the vaccinations, which you can’t really argue with.” Jones, who was vaccinated early in the process, has not caught the Covid-19 virus himself. “It’s unbelievable,” he laughs. “It’s an ongoing joke with my wife and my colleagues now. There are usually two of us working on the ambulance – myself and my colleague – and we always work very closely together and with the people who come on to the ambulance. We were working on the same ambulance when he caught Covid, and – though I was testing regularly – I just never got it. I kept doing lateral flow tests expecting to see two lines and I never did. When I tell people this and explain I was fully vaccinated, I think it helps reassure them that the vaccinations really do work.” The furore over injections is something of a storm in a teacup to the military veteran, who has been stationed around the world in Kenya, Oman, Cyprus, France and Northern Ireland, for example. “I did just over 10-and-a-half years in the army and every time you go to a different country, you’re told: ‘Go to the medical centre,’ and you get jabbed with all sorts. So the fact it’s a new vaccination didn’t matter to me,” he says. “I’ve had 41 years now in uniform – with the army, fire and ambulance service and it has given me a sense of perspective. Certain things that people moan about aren’t really that important, I suppose.” For now, Jones is continuing to lend his support to Re:Act’s Covid-19 efforts and shows no signs of slowing down. “A lot of veterans join Re:Act because they leave the military and are at a low ebb. I think they lose the sense of comradeship, purpose and structure they once had, and I understand that. “I’m 57 years old now and working full-time, but whether I get to deploy internationally again, I don’t know. Volunteering and helping people is just something I’ve always done and really enjoy – I’ll keep doing it as long as I can.” This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (“Get boosted now”) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit gov.uk/coronavirusHundreds of people have been stripped of their British citizenship in the last 15 years, according to research, including one man who was stateless for almost five years. Research carried out by Free Movement, a website run by lawyers to provide information for those affected by immigration control, has found that at least 464 people have had their citizenship removed since the law permitting this practice was relaxed 15 years ago. The government does not routinely publish the total number of people it strips of British citizenship. CJ McKinney, of Free Movement, said the lack of figures from the Home Office was frustrating: “This is an extremely serious punishment that amounts to being banished from the UK in many cases. Saying how often existing citizenship deprivation powers are used is the bare minimum of transparency that parliament and the public should expect.” One of the most well known cases is that of Shamima Begum, who was deprived of her citizenship after leaving the UK as a 15-year-old schoolgirl to join Islamic State, and lost her battle to have it restored in February 2021. McKinney found that since 2006, 175 people have been deprived of their citizenship on national security grounds, and 289 because of fraud. Prior to 2006 the power had not been used since 1973. McKinney said he compiled the information from historic freedom of information requests and “obscure statistical publications”. A power to deprive someone of British citizenship goes back to 1914 but in recent years the legal test about when it can be used has been watered down. Between 2006 and 2010 there were nine cases, according to freedom of information data. But by 2017 numbers had peaked at 148 people who had their citizenship removed that year. In 2018 there were 73 cases, in 2019 82 cases, and in 2020 42 cases. In one case revealed by the Observer this week, a 40-year-old man, referred to only as E3, was stripped of his British citizenship in 2017. He was born in London to parents of Bangladeshi heritage, but had his citizenship removed when he flew to Bangladesh. He was told he was an “Islamist extremist who had previously sought to travel abroad to participate in terrorism-related activity”. He has never been arrested or questioned in relation to these claims, nor has he been provided with any evidence which substantiates these claims. His citizenship was reinstated after the Home Office accepted he is stateless as a result of having his British citizenship taken away from him. The case highlights the human cost of this power that the Home Office hopes to further strengthen in its controversial nationality and borders bill, which will no longer require notice to be given before taking away someone’s British citizenship. The man’s lawyer, Fahad Ansari of Duncan Lewis solicitors, said: “Depriving people of their citizenship means stripping away their identity, their sense of belonging and their ability to seek protection. As such, it is wrong in principle. That injustice is only compounded when it is carried out without any prior judicial oversight and based on secret evidence which the individual and his lawyers will never see. “Rather than further strengthening the home secretary’s powers by removing the requirement to give notice, the government should be scrapping the deprivation power altogether.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “The Home Office is committed to publishing its transparency report into the use of disruptive powers and will do so in due course. “Removing British citizenship has been possible for over a century, and is used against those who have acquired citizenship by fraud, and against the most dangerous people, such as terrorists, extremists and serious organised criminals.”Just before you reach Chimbote, a seaside city 260 miles (420km) north of the Peruvian capital Lima, you can smell it. It’s like the whiff of a fishmonger’s stall on a hot afternoon. For Peruvians, it’s synonymous with a bad pong; “smells like Chimbote” means something stinks. Once that scent was “the smell of money”, according to another popular expression. A natural superabundance of Peruvian anchovy – known locally as anchoveta – off its Pacific coast makes Peru the world’s biggest producer of fishmeal, a condensed powder or cake made from ground dried fish. The country exported a staggering $1.54bn (£1.13bn) in fishmeal processed into animal feed and pellets in 2019 and $420m of fish oil. A recent Guardian investigation that revealed many fish oil products on western supermarket shelves are rancid has been blamed on the fish oil industry’s vast supply chain – with fish caught in Peru, processed in China and shipped to European and American supermarkets. Chimbote has been the first link in this multimillion-dollar chain since the 1950s. But after many decades, Chimbote residents are reevaluating their role in this industry – one they say is not only harming their health and wellbeing, but is damaging the very ocean itself. About 20cm long when mature, the little anchovy has been a gamechanger not only for the Peruvian economy but also for the global fishmeal industry. Oily and rich in protein, it is said to be the most heavily exploited fish in the world’s history and is preferred for high-quality fishmeal and fish oil. About 4.8m tonnes of anchoveta was caught in 2020, according to Peru’s national fishery society (SNP), which represents the sector. Most of the catch – about 98% – is processed into fishmeal: about 1m tonnes of fishmeal and 171,000 tonnes of fish oil by up to 42 companies operating in Chimbote. Eleven of the largest firms are affiliated with the SNP, which says all is well, not just with the industry but with the health of the fish on which it depends. “There hasn’t been concern about overfishing for more than 30 years, as a result of the fishery management plan, which seeks the sustainability of the ecosystem and the fishing industry,” says Cayetana Aljovín, SNP’s president. She says quotas allow a catch of just 35% of the fish’s adult population, leaving the rest to reproduce. But in Chimbote the picture does not look so rosy. The many factories in the south of town produce constant smell, noise and soot from the chimneys. Residents claim the fishmeal processing plants are making them sick. “The smell is nauseating, the vibrations from the factories break the walls of our homes,” says Lizzety Avila, 58, a community leader in the 15 de Abril neighbourhood, where only a brick wall and a road separate the chimney stacks belching fumes from their self-built brick houses. “Year after year, we’ve been fighting these factories,” she says over the whirring and grinding noise emanating from a nearby plant. “We’ve got people with pulmonary fibrosis, bedridden. We have neighbours who have died of cancer. These factories belong to multimillion-dollar companies and they only think about their profits, not about our quality of life, how we suffer living with this pollution.” In the adjoining Trapezio neighbourhood, baker Liz Estrada, 45, says soot from the plants’ chimneys coats the walls of their homes, the washing and gets into the food. “Many people in the area are dying of cancer. The children are sick. We had a school here, and the parents had to withdraw the children because the pollution was tremendous,” says Estrada. The Guardian could not independently verify claims that the pollution had caused cancer, but residents’ claims that a higher than normal number of children were suffering from allergies, respiratory problems and dermatitis were echoed by paediatrician, Dr Lorenzo Rodriguez, who has run a surgery in the city for 16 years. “In the hotspots, where there is a lot of fishmeal processing in Trapezio and 15 de Abril, in previous years I had suggested [to the parents] that they should move their children,” Rodriguez says. “I said: ‘Your children are becoming more asthmatic, you shouldn’t stay there.’ That’s directly caused by these irresponsible companies who don’t look beyond their wallets. “Sadly, the regulatory bodies, the health ministry and the companies – who should collaborate so that the people see that they are not just merely desperate for money – are not doing their part. The state is not playing an active role … and it’s letting this happen,” he said. The SNP, which represents 11 of the country’s top fishmeal producers, denies there is a rise in respiratory complaints among children indicating that health ministry figures show Ancash, the region where Chimbote is located, is below the national average for such illnesses. It added that the companies in Chimbote had invested $166m (£122m) in recent years to modernise their factories to reduce emissions and to move them away from residential areas. But the impact of the industry is visible everywhere you look. Once at the heart of a region known as the “Pearl of the Pacific”, Chimbote was a major source for guano, the fertiliser made from seabird excrement which powered Peru’s 19th-century economy. Today, the city’s seafront overlooks the Isla Blanca, stained white by centuries of guano – but the cormorants and pelicans are scarcer, and the bay itself, though full of fishing vessels, is no longer teeming with life. Effluent from the factories has polluted this once-pristine coastline for decades, says Romulo Loayza, a biology professor at the National University of Santa in Nuevo Chimbote. On a boat trip into the bay, Loayza uses a small dredger attached to a rope to scoop up foul-smelling sludge from the seabed. “There is virtually no oxygen in this mud. You can see there’s no life,” he said, squishing the dark brown slime between his fingers. “This is organic waste from the factories.” There are about 54m cubic metres of sludge coating the bay’s bottom – in some parts more than a metre thick, according to a 2003 study by Peru’s marine institute, Imarpe. The SNP says most of the sediment comes from El Niño events that have flooded the river, which feeds into the bay. Dozens of piers to individual factories line the bay. Before 2015, lax regulations allowed untreated waste to flow directly into the water. Now a 10km pipeline pumps it into deeper water, but nothing is being done to dispose of the existing waste. Meanwhile, fishers say that the biggest impact of the fishmeal industry is that it’s sucking up all the fish – leaving none for them. In Coishco, one of many nearby fishing villages, the brightly painted boats are pulled up on the white sand – an idyllic-seeming image, but the result of the fishers being forced to find other work. “What affects us most is the scarcity of the resource,” says Edmundo Aparicio, 67, who grew up in the village and recalls a time when fish was so plentiful it was often given away on the beach. “We used to be able to provide for our families, and most importantly, put food on the table for the ordinary folk. Now the fish is scarce, the price goes up, and what we sell in the market goes to restaurants we can’t afford to eat at,” he says. They are also angry with the big fishmeal companies for not treating them properly, they claim. Fishers in Chimbote formed a union 65 years ago. Today, its secretary general, Macedonio Vásquez, alleges that during the first wave of Covid-19 infections the companies brought fishers to work at sea after just one week’s quarantine in a hotel, in violation of the country’s restrictions at the time. Peru has one of the world’s highest death rates from Covid-19 per capita. “The companies did not take the precautions to protect the fishermen,” says Vásquez. “In the hotels, there were many infections which were not taken care of by the companies. The hospitals were saturated.” “Companions died, many died, but the deaths were not attributed to Covid-19 according to the death certificates.” The SNP denied this stating at the time that “the industry adopted provisions beyond what it was legally required to in order to safeguard the health of its employees”. It added the union was forced to retract its allegations after being threatened with legal action. Even if the industry did start to address the concerns of overfishing, pollution and poor labour management, Chimbote’s fishmeal industry could be hit by another problem. Global heating is raising concern about the long-term sustainability of the Peruvian anchovy. Peruvian scientist Renato Salvatteci predicted in Science magazine that anchoveta could disappear from the country’s seas due to warming temperatures caused by the climate crisis. If that happens, Chimbote will be left with nothing more to show for its many decades of exploitation other than a polluted bay, empty fish factories and the white stain of the guano industry. Additional reporting by Richa SyalGood morning. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell has provoked anger after he appeared to imply that African Americans were not Americans in remarks about Black voters. Speaking to reporters after Republicans once again blocked the Democrats’ voting rights legislation, McConnell said: “The concern is misplaced, because if you look at the statistics, African American voters are voting in just as high a percentage as Americans.” Studies suggest that voting restrictions disproportionately obstruct people of colour. Several Democrats called out the comments, which quickly went viral online, with Democratic Illinois congressman Bobby Rush tweeting: “African Americans ARE Americans. #MitchPlease.” Meanwhile, Malcolm Kenyatta, a Democratic Senate candidate in Pennsylvania, described McConnell’s remarks as a “dogwhistle”. What would the bill have done? Banned partisan gerrymandering, protected election officials from partisan interference, required early voting and same-day registration, and restored the pre-clearance provision central to the Voting Rights Act. It comes amid unprecedented concern over the future of US democracy, with one in three Americans believing Joe Biden was not legitimately elected. US accuses Russia of conspiring to take over Ukraine government The US has accused Russia of recruiting Ukrainian government officials in order to take over the Kyiv government. Imposing sanctions on four – two Ukrainian members of parliament and two former officials – on Thursday, the US accused Russian intelligence of mounting a conspiracy against the government of the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. “Russia has directed its intelligence services to recruit current and former Ukrainian government officials to prepare to take over the government of Ukraine and to control Ukraine’s critical infrastructure with an occupying Russian force,” the Treasury statement accompanying the sanctions said. Russian troops have arrived in the town of Yelsk in Belarus and other areas near Ukraine’s border, local media reports, as part of joint military exercises set to begin next month. What has Joe Biden said? The president said: “If any assembled Russian units move across the Ukrainian border, that is an invasion. Let there be no doubt if Putin makes this choice, Russia will pay a heavy price.” What sanctions would be imposed? There is disagreement within Nato, with Germany refusing to send arms to Ukraine. There is also dispute in Europe about whether Russia can be cut off from Swift, the international payments system. Capitol attack committee calls on Ivanka Trump Ivanka Trump, the daughter of the former president, has been asked to cooperate with the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack. Trump, who has been asked to appear for a voluntary deposition, is the first member of the former president’s family who has been called upon. Along with her husband, Jared Kushner, she was a senior adviser to her father during his presidency. The development comes after the US supreme court rejected Donald Trump’s request to prevent the release of more than 700 highly sensitive White House documents. What does the panel want to ask her about? The former president’s plan to stop the certification, and his response to the Capitol attack. The questions will be aimed at whether he presided over a criminal conspiracy involving obstructing a congressional proceeding. Meanwhile, the prosecutor for Georgia’s biggest county on Thursday requested a special grand jury with subpoena power to support her investigation into the former president’s attempts to interfere with the state’s election results. In other news … Dozens of people are feared dead after an explosion caused by a truck carrying mining explosives colliding with a motorbike in western Ghana. The explosion, which destroyed hundreds of buildings, happened around midday in Apiate, near the mining city of Bogoso. The US singer and actor Meat Loaf, born Marvin Lee Aday, has died aged 74, his agent has confirmed. No cause of death was shared. AirTags – small wireless tracking tools – have been used to stalk individuals, police across the US have said. Apple, which manufactures the devices intended for tracking lost belongings like luggage, has said it will cooperate with police and is “committed to AirTags’ privacy and security”. Stat of the day: an average of 16 ‘unruly’ airline passengers reported daily There were a total of 5,981 unruly passenger reports last year, according to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, 4,290 of which were categorized as “mask-related incidents”. In a dramatic example of how the issue persists in 2022, a maskless “disruptive customer” forced an American Airlines flight en route to London to return to Miami on Wednesday. Don’t miss this: Sonny Rollins on jazz landmark The Bridge at 60 In 1959, Sonny Rollins was already one of the undisputed giants of the bebop style of jazz at 28. But despite his fame and critical acclaim, Rollins felt a sense of dissatisfaction with his playing, which led him to drop off the radar. Rather than playing to packed rooms of fans, for two years the saxophonist chose instead to tell his “multitude of stories to the sky”, playing on the Williamsburg Bridge for up to 15 hours a day. Now 91, Rollins speaks about the “spiritual” experience on the 60th anniversary of his return to the recording studio. Last Thing: You be the judge: should my brother give me better birthday presents? This week’s “You be the judge” has all the hallmarks of a classic family grudge: longstanding resentment; unbalanced levels of effort; sibling rivalry. While older sister, Elsie, buys her Ollie designer shirts and AirPods, he sends her “a cheap supermarket card with the sticker still on” (Elsie’s words). Ollie, who is in a lower paid job, argues she “can’t expect” him to match her. You decide who the guilty party is. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comNorfolk has become the latest area in England to start transferring patients to a hotel in order to free up hospital beds. The Norfolk and Waveney clinical commissioning group (CCG) said the hotel would act as a temporary care facility, after the service declared a critical incident this month due to “sustained and unprecedented pressure”. The pilot “care hotel” in central Norwich will cater for up to 15 patients on a short-term basis for three months and will be used for patients who are ready to leave hospital but need extra support before going home. It is expected to open in the next few weeks. The accommodation will be run by home care company Abicare, which has similar services in other areas of the country, including three hotels in the south of England. Cath Byford, the chief nurse at Norfolk and Waveney CCG, said the pilot would “provide a short-term safe, home-from-home environment for people to move to from hospital when they are well enough but not quite ready to go home without support”. “This will help to speed up the passage of patients through our local hospitals so that we can make more beds available for those who need them most,” she said. “This is the first time we have tried this new approach in Norfolk and Waveney, although the model has been used successfully in other regions.” Anne-Marie Perry, the chief executive of Abicare, said care hotels “are an excellent example of a proactive short-term solution that can be readily set up as they are needed utilising resources that exist within the community”. She previously said the severe shortage of domiciliary care workers able to look after people in their own homes is one of the factors behind the need for such services. “The hospitals are on their knees and we are being contacted fairly regularly by clinical commission groups,” she said.Peloton is considering workforce cuts and production changes as investors hammered its share price after a report said it was considering halting the manufacture of its exercise bikes because of a slump in demand. The company’s chief executive, John Foley, said a report by CNBC claiming that it plans to temporarily halt production of its exercise bike and treadmill products was “incomplete, out of context, and not reflective of Peloton’s strategy”. However, Foley said in the message to Peloton’s 3,200 staff that the company needed to “evaluate” the size of its workforce and indicated that production curbs are on the way as he referred to “resetting” manufacturing. The CNBC report cites internal company documents and Foley said in a blogpost published on Thursday: “We have identified a leaker, and we are moving forward with the appropriate legal action. “In the past, we’ve said layoffs would be the absolute last lever we would ever hope to pull. However, we now need to evaluate our organisation structure and size of our team, with the utmost care and compassion.” Describing the halting of all production of bikes and treadmills as “false”, Foley then said the company would be “resetting” production levels, acknowledging that there had been an increase in demand for Peloton equipment when Covid lockdowns were introduced at the start of the pandemic. The easing of restrictions around the world, however, has shifted exercise habits back to gyms and outdoor activity. This week the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced the lifting of work from home guidance – a big driver of demand for at-home exercise equipment – in England. “We feel good about right-sizing our production, and, as we evolve to more seasonal demand curves, we are resetting our production levels for sustainable growth,” Foley said. Peloton’s shares fell 24% on Thursday after the CNBC report, which said the company plans to pause bike production from February to March and its Tread treadmill for six weeks from next month. CNBC cited a 10 January presentation in which the company said it was facing a “significant reduction” in demand around the world as a result of price sensitivity – its bikes start at £1,350 in the UK – and increased competition. Peloton had said on Thursday that it was taking “significant corrective actions” to improve its profitability and estimated second-quarter revenue to be about $1.14bn (£840m), compared with its previous forecast of $1.1bn to $1.2bn. “During the pandemic, there was too little supply to meet the growing demand. Unfortunately, the company took those cues to bulk up supply just as demand began to falter,” said Simeon Siegel, an analyst at BMO Capital Markets. Peloton has been working with the consulting firm McKinsey &amp; Co for a review of its cost structure and could cut jobs, CNBC reported earlier this week.In the pandemic’s darkest days, when our horizons were largely limited to the four walls of our house and the very notion of attending a ‘gig’ seemed completely preposterous, something amazing happened. Across the music industry, artists and bands dug out their webcams (or high quality recording equipment), ushering in the age of the livestreamed gig. Some of these performances were strikingly professional – mammoth pyrotechnic happenings beamed from cavernous super-clubs – while others were endearingly homespun, putting the ‘bedroom’ into bedroom pop. But they all shared an admirable desire to put on a show in trying times. Still, I think I’m finally ready to admit, nearly two years into the ‘age of the live stream gig’, that pretty much all of those performances left me somewhat cold. No shade cast on the performers, who were busting a gut as per. It was simply that, without the thrum of the crowd, the atmosphere frequently felt funereal. It reminded me of the days of Top of the Pops, when a band like U2 couldn’t (or wouldn’t) make it to the studio and would instead play a sterile, audience-less beamed in from LA. It would invariably fall flat, not least when followed by footage of people pogo-ing around to Aqua or someone similarly naff back in the studio. At the same time, I recognise that this is perhaps a churlish position to take. There are plenty of people who can’t make it back to live performances, who are well-served by live streams. There are fans halfway across the world, unlikely to get the chance to see a band live, who are well-served by live streams. There was the music industry itself, which was given a valuable leg-up by live streams at a desperate time. Clearly live streams are a good thing – even if they’re not as good as the real thing. The heartening news, then, is that the return of actual gigs with actual audiences hasn’t killed off the live stream era. Instead, it has enhanced it. Next weekend Jonny Greenwood and Thom Yorke’s new band The Smile play their first ever performances in front of fans (seated and in the round) at a small venue in London. Unsurprisingly it’s a sellout, but Radiohead superfans can at least have the consolation of catching the performances over live stream at home. Or they can go and watch them at a local venue in the UK or the US. This of course is nothing new – globe-straddling, chart-topping artists have been livestreaming performances for a decade or so now. The difference is that, where once the tools of such performances were only available to those at the top of the tree, now they’re accessible to smaller artists too, thanks to canny companies like Hotel Radio, who broadcast gigs from punk, hardcore and metal bands to every corner of the globe. And, in contrast to the old days of getting fleeced by dubious promoters, artists are taking their fair share from these streams thanks to a host of ethical companies. The era of livestreaming has much to offer. I’m all for it – as long as it doesn’t involve me watching someone playing acoustic guitar from a box room. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Eddie Howe again declined to address Saudi Arabia’s dismal human rights record as he confirmed he would take his struggling Newcastle squad to the Gulf kingdom after Saturday’s game at Leeds. Saudi-owned Newcastle are due to fly to Jeddah on Sunday for a week-long warm-weather training camp on the Red Sea coast, where thermometers reached 30C on Friday, with their subsequent game not until 8 February against Everton. Although Howe revealed they were likely to play a friendly he refused to say whether he would meet Mohammed bin Salman, the de facto ruler. “I don’t know any of those details at the moment,” he said. The political temperature has been raised significantly by human rights issues and the Saudi regime’s alleged involvement in the murder of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi in Istanbul in 2018 but Howe maintained he was concentrating purely on football and Newcastle’s attempt to survive in the Premier League. Newcastle’s manager, whose side sit second bottom after winning only one game, said: “It’s a football decision. We’re doing it for the benefit of the players in our fight to stay in the division and that’s my only thought. The facilities and everything around the trip are going to be first class and the players will be very well looked after. “There will be no distraction from my side. It’s about the training and making sure the players are focused on our next game. We’re just doing it in a different environment to bring the players closer together. We’ll try to do some good work and come back as a united squad. “Going away is vitally important. A lot of the Covid protocols you have around the training ground [in England] are encouraging isolation, quite rightly to protect everybody. But it doesn’t help you foster the team spirit and the togetherness that we’re going to need in the battle to stay in the division. It’s important to encourage that unity so going away together is a great idea.” Saudi’s Public Investment Fund holds an 80% in Newcastle and Amnesty International is concerned about the trip. “It could turn into another PR opportunity for the Saudi authorities who are trying to sportswash their appalling human rights record,” a spokesperson said. Howe, meanwhile, conceded he had experienced a frustrating week in the transfer market as he endeavours to reinforce his squad, with moves for the Sevilla centre-half Diego Carlos and the Manchester United forward Jesse Lingard faltering. “We are desperately trying to improve the squad,” he said. “But it has been a fruitless search this week.”The Memory Monster by Yishai Sarid, translated by Yardenne Greenspan (Serpent’s Tail, £12.99) “This is where the illusion we call humankind was erased,” a guide to Holocaust sites tells the visitors on his tour. He is so steeped in its history that he has become corrupted by the horror, increasingly unable to see good in the world (humans are “worms with aspirations”) and even applying its grim lessons (“it’s all about power, power, power”) to his son’s problems at school. Sarid boldly highlights the risks of “harnessing [ourselves] to the memory chariot” and of how remembrance can calcify our views, in this complex, rewarding story of a man brought low by good intentions. Love in the Big City by Sang Young Park, translated by Anton Hur (Tilted Axis, £9.99) It’s a mark of the generous spirit of the South Korean author’s English-language debut that it made me laugh on the first page. The novel’s loosely autobiographical account of a young gay man losing and finding his way in a conservative society isn’t always so funny, but even bad news is delivered with a spark. “Your mother has cancer! In the uterus! Hallelujah.” Despite the loss of friends, lovers and parents, “the only three things floating around my brain were iced Americano, Kylie Minogue and sex”. Kylie’s name later becomes a euphemism for something darker, and the modulation of tone casts out any initial fear that the novel might just skate across the surface. Land of Snow and Ashes by Petra Rautiainen, translated by David Hackston (Pushkin, £12.99) In 1944 Finland reversed its second world war allegiance to the Nazis following a treaty with Russia. This debut novel is set in part during that shaky period, narrated by a soldier working in a Nazi camp in the northern town of Inari, “at the edge of the earth”. His diary alternates with the story of photographer Inkeri after the war, ostensibly reporting on the loss of the local Sámi culture, but really looking for her husband who went missing in the war. In the 1944 sections, we find out what happened to him. Rautiainen’s prose is occasionally clunky as it makes points about cultural domination (“Photography was about power – a form of manipulation”), but the book reveals so much more about a war we thought we knew that it feels like a potted epic. The Child Who by Jeanne Benameur, translated by Bill Johnston (Les Fugitives, £8.99) A woman has disappeared: the central character in this elliptical novella is no longer there. Her son wanders through the neighbourhood in rural France, imagining a dog for company, singing to scare off loneliness. His father and grandmother are also affected by the silence that has taken the woman’s place. Rather than a plot, the book is driven by reflections on the love between parent and child and between husband and wife. And then there’s a first-person narrator who talks to the child directly: “I’d like to say to you that the world is immense and lovely, that there’s a path for you too.” It adds a sweet overtone to the sadness of this curious and pleasing story. Tropic of Violence by Nathacha Appanah, translated by Geoffrey Strachan (MacLehose, £8.99) This brilliantly vivid novel explores lives and afterlives on the island of Mayotte, a French territory in the Indian Ocean. Central to the story is Moïse, a “wild boy” of 15 abandoned by his mother, adopted by nurse Marie, and then alone again when Marie dies. Mayotte is a “sweet, beautiful country” but Moïse is stuck in its run-down “dump” known locally as Gaza. He falls in with a criminal gang, before killing its leader – and all this in the first 20 pages. The pace is kept lively by multiple narrators, some of whom are dead, but as Moïse – still a child, who all along just wants “someone to fix me a bowl of cereal” – discovers, death is not the end.I moved into my present apartment seven years ago, and my six crates of papers moved with me – directly from one closet, where they had squatted undisturbed for five years, to another, where the same fate awaited. For almost two decades, these things have followed me around, and I’ve never had the slightest inclination to go through them. Then last week, in a fit of January decluttering fervour, I decided to reclaim my closet. Everything came out into the living room, where it seemed to me an achievable aim to aggregate these six crates down into a single container. I could probably do it in an hour, I thought. Four days later and here I still am: surrounded by papers, trying to weigh the value of a letter from my mother’s then 17-year-old brother to her in 1967, and whether I should keep receipts from my tax return in 1998. How do people do this? Decide what to keep and what to junk? I come from a long line of hoarders. But, even so, the situation I confront with these six crates is ridiculous. Birthday cards from people I haven’t spoken to in years. Random newspaper cuttings clipped for me by my mother: Helene Hanff’s obituary; a review of a play about Van Gogh from 2002 that has been sitting unread in my closet for 20 years. Cuttings I kept myself, for “historical reasons”: the front page of the Independent when Diana died; bizarrely, Louise Woodward on the cover of the Mirror (the headline was “Stitched Up”). From May 1997, “Blair’s Britain is born.” All pointless, yet poignant with age. The further down I go, the weirder it gets. A receipt for fertility drugs for $1,776 – which I kept out of sheer incredulity, having rocked up at the cash desk of the pharmacist in 2014 thinking I’d be on the hook for no more than $29.99. Down, down I go. My mother’s record-keeping was meticulous and, from this historical distance, exhausting. In one folder, my school reports going back to nursery. (As a three-year-old in 1979, I can inform you, I was “making good progress but inclined to be rather tense” – nothing changes.) It gets worse. At the bottom of the third crate, job references from my mother’s employer for a bookkeeping position she held for a year at the South African Mining Journal, in 1956. (She was, I read, “an intelligent, cheerful and satisfactory worker”.) Everyone in this last exchange is dead. There are a few treasures. Photocopies of letters written to Iris Birtwistle by her old friend Muriel Spark – which Iris, I now recall, gave to me 20 years ago to spite Spark’s biographer. From 7 August 1950 – in Spark’s long, looping hand: “August Bank Holiday and all it implies finds us both somewhat weary, having no garden &amp; park…” A silver dollar from 1865, which I discover, thanks to the internet, is worth $30, $3,000 or nothing at all. Some share certificates leave me excited, before I remember I sold the associated shares six years ago. Ah, shit. And then, towards the bottom of the third crate, the honking great memorial candle given to me by Amersham crematorium after my mother’s funeral in 2003. I’ve been lugging it between addresses ever since. Even at the time, I remember thinking, what am I supposed to do with this? Put it in the window? It’s enormous and has her name on it. I call my children out from their room. “Look,” I say. “This is your dead granny’s memorial candle. We can’t throw it away, so we’ll light it.” “Why would you want to throw it away?” says a child, boggling. “Because it’s ugly.” “That’s rude.” We light it. Seven-year-olds regard the past differently: as more mythical and simultaneously more porous. Candle lit, one daughter chats to it, fetching her most precious items to hold up and show to her dead granny. A sister regards her critically. “Why are you talking to her? It’s not like she turned into a candle.” A letter from the IRS from 10 years ago letting me off a huge penalty; definite keep. An untitled poem, given to me by a friend, by Tahar Djaout (“Silence is death / If you speak, you die / If you are silent, you die / So speak, and die”): keep. Ticket stub from the Empire State Building from 1999: bin. I am so servile that anything looking vaguely official goes into the “keep” pile, which means the Insight Into Industry “certificate of achievement”, issued by my high school for the momentous achievement of going on a year 11 trip to Aylesbury sewage works, will be my children’s to treasure in perpetuity. Ugh, the letters. So many letters. From my mother’s seven siblings, none of whom, at the time of her death, she had seen for more than 25 years, feverishly keeping up appearances until the end. “Won’t you visit? We’d love to see you.” “Maybe next year; won’t you please consider it?” On and on it goes. Five crates are returned to the closet. After four days, I’ve managed to whittle things down by only a single container. And I am one step closer towards my dream of owning a shredder. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistAll pub grub is not built the same. Some is sublime, worth booking ahead for and travelling miles to get to; some is the reheated or deep-fried contents of various freezer bags and flung at plates. My job – and it is a real job – is to decipher what goes in which category. Take the Victoria at Oxshott in Surrey, for example: newly refurbished and reopened, and with Fat Duck alumni at the helm, which feels instinctively like the sort of place you should force your partner to change into trousers for. Charles and I frequently lock horns whenever we set off somewhere like this, which claims to be a pub but in fact serves “pan-fried” stone bass with keta caviar and smoked confit duck with pistachio. “But it’s a pub,” he’ll say, casting a hand over his designer track pants. “No,” I’ll reply. “They do wagyu bavette and rib-eye with bordelaise sauce. It’s trousers, proper trousers.” And off he’ll trudge back to the wardrobe in the manner of a man forced to complete the London marathon in a 140lb vintage deep-sea diving suit. That isn’t to say the Victoria specifies any sort of official dress code; rather that some places just exude a certain level of genteel correctness. The dining room is rather dreamily staged, like an olde English inn with the light blueprint of a pricy West End brasserie, all cosily furnished, with burgundy panelling, low beams and an open fire. Chef director Matt Larcombe was once head chef at The Crown at Bray, and met manager Simon King when both worked for Heston Blumenthal. There’s a bar area for locals and an extensive regular wine list that starts with house white, a grenache blanc, at £25, as well as a “rare wine menu” from which, if you’re really making a night of it, you can blow £9,750 on a bottle of 1997 Screaming Eagle cabernet sauvignon from the Napa Valley. See? I told you it’s a proper trousers type of place. I’ve knocked booze on the head for the time being, leading to a life of shrubs, kombuchas and seltzers, so they made me a “Light and Firey” with Lyre’s alcohol-free cane spirit and ginger (think dark’n’stormy, but without the morning-after clouds). We sat close to the blazing log fire as two thickly beer-battered oysters were brought to our table, perched back in their shells along with a puddle of pale green, seaweed-infused mayonnaise. If you’re someone who thinks they can’t face oysters, deep-frying the slimy blighters really does help, I assure you. Beautifully presented pickled cucumbers arrive with a mildly seasoned homemade gentleman’s relish, after which we share a plate of sweet, almost al dente salt-baked beetroot that’s even prettier than the cucumbers. Food doesn’t need to be a beauty contest, but it takes real skill to take a dowdy beetroot, then peel it, smoke it, pickle it, salt-bake it, top it with curd and scatter it with hazelnuts, and end up with something that wouldn’t look out of place on an afternoon tea cake-stand at the Ritz. There’s a fish and chips main course option at £19, as well as that Trenchmore Farm bavette at the same price, feasibly to stop the locals from rioting, but then prices hurtle upwards rather dramatically, and at a rate that might leave anyone picking up the family’s dinner bill in need of a lie-down in a darkened room afterwards. Beef wellington wrapped in light, crisp-yet-moist puff pastry with a rich, herby duxelles inner casing, for instance, came at a memorable £45 a slice. Chips, of the triple-cooked, stubby genre, were a fiver on top. Now, it must be said that this was almost certainly the finest beef wellington I will eat in this lifetime, filled with a chunk of rare beef similar in texture to chocolate truffle, but it’s rare that I leave a restaurant wondering if we should perhaps have saved a few pennies by going for the whole turbot with red wine and kale to share at £85. I know all too well, however, that restaurants – sorry, I of course mean pubs – such as this are astonishingly expensive to keep afloat. At least four different smart, cheery front-of-house staff served our table, and the desserts are made by the sort of imaginative patisserie wizard who takes the concept of the Snickers bar and reimagines it as a large square of soft, sweet, nutty mousse with chunks of aerated chocolate and an oozing, caramel centre. This is a very, very good pudding, and I doubt I’ll eat many finer things this year. We also tried a banoffee pie at £9, too, but it paled into insignificance in comparison. The Victoria at Oxshott is a very decent, semi-formal destination restaurant hiding in plain sight inside a village pub near Leatherhead. I’m certain the £40 Sunday lunch here would be an outstanding experience, particularly for a special occasion. No jacket required, but if you ask me … well, I’m still insisting on trousers. • The Victoria High Street, Oxshott, Surrey, 01372 238308. Open Weds-Sun, lunch noon-2.30pm (3pm Fri &amp; Sat; 4pm Sun), dinner 6-9pm (last orders; 10pm Fri &amp; Sat). From about £50 a head for three courses, plus drinks and serviceThomas Tuchel seemed to have all the right answers a year ago. In fact, the only time he was unsure about how to respond was when Chelsea approached him about replacing Frank Lampard. After all, Tuchel had just experienced a bitter split with Paris Saint-Germain and the thought of going to Chelsea did not immediately appear to be the wisest move. Questions had to be answered. What if Tuchel found life at Stamford Bridge just as draining as at PSG? Would he ever want to work at a top club again? Or would he decide that he no longer needed to handle star egos and demanding executives? As discussions with Chelsea progressed, though, Tuchel came round to the idea. The powerful director Marina Granovskaia did not listen when the German asked whether she really wanted to fire a club legend. Lampard was gone and Tuchel, who had built a rapport with the club’s technical and performance adviser and former goalkeeper, Petr Cech, was in. The pressure was on. Chelsea had slipped to ninth and the dressing room was an unhappy place. Tuchel focused on restoring harmony, introduced greater tactical nous and, although Chelsea limped into fourth place and lost the FA Cup final to Leicester, the season ended on a high when Manchester City were defeated in the Champions League final. By then Tuchel could do no wrong. He outsmarted Pep Guardiola in Porto and, having signed on an initial 18-month deal, triggered a clause stating that he would receive another two years if he won the Champions League or Premier League. Tuchel, who met Roman Abramovich the morning after beating City, was content. He had embraced the culture at Chelsea, who left him to focus on coaching, and he could trust Granovskaia and Cech not to interfere. Managing upwards was not a problem for Tuchel, who had learned from clashing with his bosses at PSG and Borussia Dortmund, and it seemed that Chelsea were ready to challenge City’s domestic supremacy. Now, though, the notion of Chelsea overtaking City feels improbable. The European champions lie 12 points behind Guardiola’s side and Tuchel was downbeat during his side’s 1-1 draw with Brighton on Wednesday. It is hard not to wonder whether this is the start of a gradual decline. Chelsea have won four of their past 13 league games before hosting Tottenham on Sunday and although the squad is behind Tuchel, problems have cropped up. There is no sign of Antonio Rüdiger, César Azpilicueta and Andreas Christensen extending before their deals run out this summer and Romelu Lukaku’s £97.5m move from Internazionale has not worked out. Hailed as the final piece in the jigsaw, Lukaku mostly looks out of place. The Belgian’s body language was poor against Brighton – his argument with the increasingly unsettled Hakim Ziyech at half-time was revealing – and his controversial interview with Sky Italia remains a source of tension. It felt pointed when Tuchel criticised Lukaku after Chelsea’s defeat by City last weekend. Yet was it a risk? Player power has been a recurring theme during the Abramovich era and Tuchel must know that it would be easier for the club to side with their record signing. Yet it would be absurd to ponder parting with Tuchel. He has made mistakes – he could have rotated more, his approach in both games against City was too passive and he has not got the best out of Lukaku – but they are not terminal. Covid absentees, a draining fixture list and injuries have played a part. N’Golo Kanté has struggled to stay fit and it is not making excuses to point out that Chelsea are not the same without Ben Chilwell and Reece James, their first-choice wing-backs. Part of this is self-inflicted. Last summer Tuchel wanted a right-sided defender, but Chelsea could not agree a fee with Sevilla for Jules Koundé. Now the 32-year-old Azpilicueta is filling in for the hamstrung James at right wing-back when there could have been an opening for Tariq Lamptey or Tino Livramento, two gifted academy products. It is a worrying trend. Livramento has flourished at Southampton and Lamptey has been a revelation at Brighton, but neither youngster saw a pathway at Chelsea. The feeling is that the squad still contains too many players whose time has gone. For instance, it is no surprise that Marcos Alonso has not been as dynamic as Chilwell on the left. The 31-year-old has never been quick. He should have been moved on a while ago and yet, with Lyon reluctant to release Emerson Palmieri from his loan, the only alternative to the Spaniard is Kenedy after his return from Flamengo. Is Kenedy, who has not played for Chelsea since 2018, the solution? Clearly not, yet he is not the only player whose presence raises an eyebrow. Why, for example, is Ross Barkley still around? Is Saúl Ñíguez, who has struggled since joining on loan from Atlético Madrid, more use in midfield than Billy Gilmour or Conor Gallagher? There has to be more regeneration. This squad has been put together by six permanent managers: Roberto Di Matteo, José Mourinho, Antonio Conte, Maurizio Sarri, Lampard and Tuchel. There is no clear playing identity and although a ruthless streak has brought Chelsea plenty of trophies, that approach is beginning to look outdated when City ensure that everything runs smoothly under Guardiola and Liverpool are built in Jürgen Klopp’s image. Chelsea, who have not challenged for the title for five years, need a rethink. This season they have won the Super Cup and could win the Club World Cup and Carabao Cup next month, but that is not enough. The hierarchy must look inward and ask whether they would have given Klopp five years to win a title, or allowed Guardiola to keep building after winning nothing in his first season in England. The difference is stark. City are not significantly richer than Chelsea, but their operation is calmer. They prepared for Guardiola’s arrival, have a clear style and know how to win titles. By contrast Tuchel arrived mid-season and is playing catch-up with Klopp and Guardiola. Admittedly Tuchel’s squad is hugely expensive. He has Lukaku, Christian Pulisic, Ziyech, Callum Hudson-Odoi, Timo Werner, Mason Mount and Kai Havertz in attack, but Chelsea remain blunt. The front players have not improved under Tuchel. This time last year, though, Lampard was talking about how Chelsea no longer had “goal or assist machines” such as Diego Costa and Eden Hazard. The attack feels thrown together. Lampard said that Chelsea were not ready to win the league and not much has changed. It should give Chelsea pause for thought. Cech and Granovskaia worked with Tuchel when Lukaku stepped out of line, but more is required. By repeatedly letting underperforming players off the hook and adhering to a cycle of hiring and firing, Chelsea have become a cup team. It is too volatile and, while there will always be enough talent for a clever coach to make an instant impact, Tuchel’s one-year anniversary next Wednesday should prompt Chelsea to consider why they are behind City. It is not about money, it is about culture, and Chelsea need to let Tuchel create a new one if they want to win the league.Nanoplastic pollution has been detected in polar regions for the first time, indicating that the tiny particles are now pervasive around the world. The nanoparticles are smaller and more toxic than microplastics, which have already been found across the globe, but the impact of both on people’s health is unknown. Analysis of a core from Greenland’s ice cap showed that nanoplastic contamination has been polluting the remote region for at least 50 years. The researchers were also surprised to find that a quarter of the particles were from vehicle tyres. Nanoparticles are very light and are thought to be blown to Greenland on winds from cities in North America and Asia. The nanoplastics found in sea ice in McMurdo Sound in Antarctica are likely to have been transported by ocean currents to the remote continent. Plastics are part of the cocktail of chemical pollution that pervades the planet, which has passed the safe limit for humanity, scientists reported on Tuesday. Plastic pollution has been found from the summit of Mount Everest to the depths of the oceans. People are known to inadvertently eat and breathe microplastics and another recent study found that the particles cause damage to human cells. Dušan Materić, at Utrecht University in the Netherlands and who led the new research, said: “We detected nanoplastics in the far corners of Earth, both south and north polar regions. Nanoplastics are very toxicologically active compared to, for instance, microplastics, and that’s why this is very important.” The Greenland ice core was 14 metres deep, representing layers of snowfall dating back to 1965. “The surprise for me was not that we detected nanoplastics there, but that we detected it all the way down the core,” said Materić. “So although nanoplastics are considered as a novel pollutant, it has actually been there for decades.” Microplastics had been found in Arctic ice before, but Materić’s team had to develop new detection methods to analyse the much smaller nanoparticles. Previous work had also suggested that dust worn from tyres was likely to be a major source of ocean microplastics and the new research provides real-world evidence. The new study, published in the journal Environmental Research, found 13 nanograms of nanoplastics per millilitre of melted ice in Greenland but four times more in the Antarctic ice. This is probably because the process of forming sea ice concentrates the particles. In Greenland, half the nanoplastics were polyethylene (PE), used in single-use plastic bags and packaging. A quarter were tyre particles and a fifth were polyethylene terephthalate (PET), which is used in drinks bottles and clothing. Half the nanoplastics in the Antarctic ice were PE as well, but polypropylene was the next most common, used for food containers and pipes. No tyre particles were found in Antarctica, which is more distant from populated areas. The researchers took samples only from the centres of the ice cores to avoid contamination, and tested their system with control samples of pure water. Previous studies have found plastic nanoparticles in rivers in the UK, seawater from the North Atlantic and lakes in Siberia, and snow in the Austrian alps. “But we assume the hotspots are continents where people live,” said Materić. The researchers wrote: “Nanoplastics have shown various adverse effects on organisms. Human exposure to nanoplastics can result in cytotoxicity [and] inflammation.” “The most important thing as a researcher is to accurately measure [the pollution] and then assess the situation,” Materić said. “We are in a very early stage to draw conclusions. But it seems that everywhere we have analysed, it is a very big problem. How big? We don’t know yet.” Research is starting to be carried out on the impact of plastic pollution on health and Dr Fay Couceiro is leading a new microplastics group at the University of Portsmouth, UK. One of its first projects is with Portsmouth hospitals university NHS trust and will investigate the presence of microplastics in the lungs of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma. The research will investigate whether recently carpeted or vaccumed rooms, which can have a high number of fibres in the air, trigger the patients’ conditions. “Aside from the environmental damage caused by plastics, there is growing concern about what inhaling and ingesting microplastics is doing to our bodies,” said Couceiro. Her recent research suggested people may be breathing 2,000–7,000 microplastics per day in their homes. Prof Anoop Jivan Chauhan, a respiratory specialist at Portsmouth hospitals university NHS trust, said: “This data is really quite shocking. Potentially we each inhale or swallow up to 1.8m microplastics every year and once in the body, it’s hard to imagine they’re not doing irreversible damage.”Across 1 cop shops C  HOPS 5 shadow SH  OW 9 tillages AGES by TILL 10 inside IN + SIDE 12 ghostbuster G  ER(many) 15 relic softwaRE LICence (hidden) 17 partnered PART/(a)N(g)E(r)/RED 19 easel EASE/L(arge) 20 penultimate PE + UNTIL/TEAM (anag) 24 sponge PONG in S(auc)E 25 cineaste CAN SEE IT (anag) 26 shower S  OWER 27 egotists EG/0/SIT(rev)/(velve)T/(cushion)S Down 1 categorise CATE(r) + ORGIES (anag) 2 pillow lace L(ine)/ACE under PILLOW 3 heart HE + ART 4 presumptions P(rince) + RESUMPTIONS 6 hindrance RA  CE after HIND 7 drip D  IP 8 weed WEE/D(uke) 11 storytelling S(ucceeded)/TORY/TELLING 13 trespasses TRES(s)/PASSES 14 adulterers READ RESULT (anag) 16,18 champagne socialist LAST CASINO GAME CHIP (anag) 21 ident 1/DENT 22 uses US/(king-siz)E/(cigarette)S 23 Soho S(trippers)/0/HO &amp;LitCan Eddie Howe choreograph Newcastle’s second win of the season before their flight to Saudi Arabia for a warm-weather training camp on the Red Sea coast near Jeddah on Sunday? It will not be easy, particularly as Marcelo Bielsa knows victory would go a long way towards helping banish Leeds’ own, albeit latterly receding, relegation fears. A key subplot could involve a duel between Raphinha and Newcastle’s underrated left-back Paul Dummett, who impressed against Watford last Saturday on his return from a long-term injury. Louise Taylor Saturday 3pm Venue Elland Road Last season Leeds 5 Newcastle 2 Referee Chris Kavanagh This season G9 Y38 R2 4.44 cards/game Odds H Evens A 3-1 D 5-2 LEEDS Subs from Klaesson, Bate, Gelhardt, Roberts, Rodrigo, McKinstry, Jenkins, Moore, Kenneh, Gray Doubtful Gelhardt (ankle) Injured Shackleton (calf, Feb), Forshaw (thigh, Feb), Cresswell (shoulder, three weeks), Cooper (hamstring, Mar), Phillips (hamstring, Mar), Firpo (hamstring, unknown), Bamford (ankle/foot, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y54 R1 Form DLLLWW Leading scorer Raphinha 8 NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Lewis, Manquillo, Clark, Gayle, Willock, Hendrick, Almirón, Murphy, Krafth, Ritchie Doubtful Ritchie (knee), Clark (illness) Injured Fernández (thigh, Feb), Hayden (knee, April), Wilson (Calf, Mar) Suspended None Discipline Y51 R2 Form WLLLDD Leading scorer Wilson 6Monday Is a Great Easing under way? Superficially, it seems not. In New York, everyone is still masked. Teachers send kids home with Covid test kits at the slightest symptom and advise them to stay away until they have two negative results in the bag. In Chicago, the schools shut down for a week then reopened, while Eric Adams, the mayor of New York, freaked everyone out last Friday by making ominous noises about potential school shutdowns in the city. At the same time, the numbers are nose-diving. This week, daily reported cases in New York were 49% lower than two weeks ago. At the weekend we went to a party for a kid turning seven. It was modest in scope: as well as the birthday girl, just three other kids and their parents, all vaccinated including the children. It wasn’t in a freezing park. We weren’t muffled in masks. It was in an apartment, with pizza, cake, wine and chat of a kind most of us have had with only the closest family and friends for two years. I used to dread kids’ parties, but all week I looked forward to it like a golden-ticketed event. It didn’t disappoint. The party started at 2pm and at 7pm we were still there, sitting on sofas, talking to one another while the kids played with no need for our input. It was an odd thing, to derive such pleasure from something that used to be a chore, while being reminded of the thrill of new people. By the end of the evening, the adults were so high on the novelty of interacting in comfort, we decided to do it all over again in a few weekends’ time. We lost our heads and wondered if, during the forthcoming week-long winter break, we might save ourselves hundreds in camp fees and rotate to each take the kids for a day. We stopped short of devising plans to sell our apartments and embark on a commune, but for a hot second, standing outside the apartment building afterwards, it seemed as if Covid had given birth to a brave new world, beckoning us over the horizon. Tuesday How is Donald Trump not in jail? This is the kind of thought that I’ve enjoyed not having for a year and that resurfaced on Tuesday night after watching Four Hours at the Capitol, the very good HBO documentary about the 6 January insurrection. This week the net closed a little tighter on Trump as the congressional inquiry into last year’s attack on the Capitol requested testimony from Ivanka Trump. Meanwhile, the supreme court turned down Trump’s request to block a release to the committee of White House records. In this context, the documentary was mindblowing. Like a lot of people, when Trump supporters stormed the Capitol and attacked police last year, I avoided absorbing too much of the footage for reasons of self-preservation. I couldn’t take any more of him or his people, or what they were doing to American democracy. To see it clearly now, for the first time, was a shock. One forgets how blatantly Trump fomented the trouble, urging his supporters to march on the Capitol, then refusing to call them off when they breached the boundaries. To hear the then president address people who had just broken into Congress in the gentlest, most encouraging terms – “you had an election that was stolen, but you have to go home now,” followed by “we love you, you’re very special, go home” – was staggering. More shocking was the passivity of the police. One felt for them, massively outnumbered and with Trump failing to call out the national guard. Watching the documentary, however, it was impossible to imagine rioters who weren’t white and rightwing being greeted with a failure to draw their weapons. The privilege of white male rioters shouting “you work for us” at the cops, and the tones in which some of the police replied – “is there any chance I could get you guys to leave the Senate wing?” says one officer – are extraordinary. At the time, there was much discussion about whether the Trump supporters were a well-organised force or a bunch of easily led jokers. A photographer for the New York Times who followed them into the Capitol that day said it best: “There are some people here who are fucking around and playing dress-up, and there are some people here who are not fucking around.” When the mob itself is the weapon, it takes both types for an insurrection. Wednesday Clinging to the vapours of my January self-improvement drive, I cook a massive tray of brussels sprouts, to the dismay of other residents on my hallway. Something has happened to sprouts since I was a kid. It’s not only improved cooking methods, although there is that. My mother, who hated the English for, among other things, overcooking their vegetables, never overcooked a sprout in her life, but she did boil them and god they tasted bad. Metallic, with a bitter aftertaste. Obviously, I roast mine. Anyway, it’s not changing palates or faulty memory, either. If you look into it, seed companies in the Netherlands in the 1990s investigated what gave sprouts that bitter taste and invested in new seed varieties with lower amounts of glucosinolates. Now these babies are the types most often sold in supermarkets and if cooked right they’re absurdly delicious: crisp, nutty, sweet. “Here,” I say to a passing child, “try one, it tastes like candy.” (She ignores me.) Thursday The failure of American Vogue’s Twitter feed to respond in a timely fashion to the death of André Leon Talley, style icon and former Vogue editor, struck many on the platform as a deliberate slight. Leon Talley, who fell out with Anna Wintour towards the end of his tenure at the magazine and spent the last years of his life talking bitterly and with justification about racism at Vogue, died on Tuesday at the age of 73, a fact it took his former employers until the next day to acknowledge. Talley was, in lots of ways, the antithesis to the Condé Nast fashion plate: loud, voluble, expansive, and for all his history of difficulty with food, able to enjoy a large lunch. He took up space in a crowd otherwise committed to an instinctive shrinking inwards and away from joy. Friday My kids are off school with suspected Covid, again. As we wait for the second test result, 24 hours after the first (negative), I fight off flashbacks to the home-schooling months of 2020. I’m not good at hiding my impatience, or dismay. “Do what you like, but I’m not entertaining or educating you,” I say, and retreat to my room to do a Wordle. They repair to their iPads for a solid day of Roblox and Henry Danger. After the last year and a half, it’s a miracle either of them can read.More than a dozen aid organisations have called for humanitarian exemptions to heavy sanctions imposed on Mali after the military leadership postponed planned February elections. The EU has announced support for the sanctions imposed earlier this month by the Economic Community of West African States (Ecowas), which include closing borders and a trade embargo. But this week, 13 international groups working in Mali warned of devastating consequences for the population, a third of whom rely on aid. Humanitarian access is hindered by the Malian interim authorities’ decision to reciprocate border closures with Ecowas member states, except Guinea. Thousands of people demonstrated against the sanctions last week in the capital Bamako, carrying placards saying “down with Ecowas” and “down with France”. The country is in the grip of the worst food insecurity in 10 years. A joint letter signed by the NGOs, including the International Rescue Committee (IRC), Care and the Norwegian Refugee Council, said: “To continue their work effectively, humanitarian actors must have unfettered access for the transportation of life-saving goods including food and medicine, as well as guarantees that they can transfer funds into the country without violating the sanctions.” Mali’s current insecurity dates back to early 2012 when northern separatists rebelled against the government. Islamist militants that initially allied with the separatists, including Ansar Dine, al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), and the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa, ultimately hijacked the rebellion. France, the former colonial ruler, made a military intervention in 2013 on the government’s side against the militants. The UN has also deployed an estimated 18,000 peacekeeping staff, in what was called its most dangerous mission. The Malian military, led by Col Assimi Goïta, has conducted two coups in two years and reneged on promises to hold new elections. The junta’s most recent power grab, in May 2021, was the fifth coup since Mali’s independence in 1960 and it has been unwilling to commit to transition to civilian rule, despite international pressures. Postponement of elections has been blamed on Islamist insecurity, an impasse that has deepened with the arrival of private military contractors belonging to the Russian mercenary firm Wagner Group. European states have condemned Wagner’s presence, concerned it will enable the military to hold on to power. EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell said this month that EU sanctions on Mali were in part in response to the involvement of Russian contractors. France is withdrawing troops, but 14 other EU members, led by Sweden, had established a taskforce to replace them in a three-year mandate. As tensions intensified over the Wagner Group, Sweden said last week that it had decided to withdraw its troops. France, which holds the rotating EU presidency, has been vociferous in its support of sanctions but Russia and China have blocked the UN security council’s move to follow suit. Ecowas has frozen financial aid and Malian assets at the Central Bank of West African States. Elena Vicario, director for the Norwegian Refugee Council in Mali, said: “Malians are already bearing the brunt of the humanitarian catastrophe, punctuated by horrifying attacks against civilians. Sanctions must not hold us back from delivering essential assistance in a country where drought, rising insecurity, and the economic impacts of Covid-19 are already pushing millions of Malians over the edge.” Franck Vannetelle, the IRC’s country director in Mali, echoed Vicario, saying: “Despite more than a third of the country’s population being dependent on humanitarian aid, organisations working in Mali already face severe access constraints. It’s imperative that the international community keeps responding to people’s urgent needs, and that any new sanctions have concrete humanitarian exemptions. These must be monitored and implemented, or the most vulnerable people in Mali will pay the price.”There is a mean-spirited and cynical argument that Michael Lee Aday owed his career to someone else’s talent: the late songwriter Jim Steinman, who wrote everything on Meat Loaf’s 43m-selling breakthrough album Bat Out of Hell, rescued his career when it was in the doldrums by agreeing to make 1993’s Bat Out of Hell II: Back Into Hell and was behind virtually every song for which Meat Loaf will be remembered. Of the 18 tracks on The Very Best of Meat Loaf, only four were not written by Steinman. It’s certainly true that Meat Loaf found things much tougher without Steinman on board. Steinman had hits with other people – the Sisters of Mercy and Celine Dion among them – but not one of the Steinman-less albums Meat Loaf released in the 80s was a hit in the US. European fans remained a little more loyal and he occasionally scored a UK hit, most notably the distinctly Steinman-esque Modern Girl in 1984. But he spent most of the decade relentlessly touring in order to stave off bankruptcy, and the leap in sales between his 1986 album Blind Before I Stop – which had its greatest success in Switzerland, reaching No 22 – and Bat Out of Hell II, a global number one that sold 14m copies, tells its own story. Later in his career, when he and Steinman were on the outs – their famously fractious relationship at one point saw Meat Loaf attempting to sue the songwriter for $500m – Meat Loaf would simply cobble together albums using songs Steinman had written for other people and projects. He could assemble an all-star supporting cast, as he did on 2010’s Hang Cool Teddy Bear – which featured credits for Jon Bon Jovi, Brian May, Jack Black and Hugh Laurie among others – but the difference between a flop Meat Loaf album and a successful one seemed to be whether or not its cover bore the subtitle “Songs by Jim Steinman”. Nevertheless, their partnership was far from one-way traffic. Steinman’s songs were nothing if not unique: wilfully preposterous exercises in more-is-more campy grandiloquence, influenced in equal part by the teenage melodramas of 60s girl groups, Bruce Springsteen at his most chest-beating and – as Steinman never tired of pointing out – Richard Wagner. They were so over the top that it took a very particular kind of vocalist to perform them: “Obviously playing a role, but obviously genuine,” as Steinman put it – a tough trick to pull off. Certainly Steinman himself couldn’t do it, as evidenced by his only solo album, Bad for Good. Nor could many others: Steinman tried to put together bands to perform his material, but there were few takers for Pandora’s Box or the Dream Engine. Meat Loaf, though, could apparently do it with ease. He had a background in musical theatre and comedy, and a powerhouse voice that worked with histrionic hard rock; before Bat Out of Hell, he had sung lead vocals on a Ted Nugent album. It was a cocktail that gave him the peculiar ability to sing the most absurd Steinman lyrics with absolute commitment and sincerity, while the contrast between his exaggerated stage persona – eyes bulging, red handkerchief clutched in his fist – and the everyman he appeared to be off stage let you know he was in on the joke. That fitted Steinman to a tee. Whatever ridiculous extremes his music went to, there was something realistic and relatable about the emotions at the centre of his songs: millions of people didn’t go out and buy Bat Out of Hell in order to snigger at it; they bought it because the saga of the teenage romancers turned warring couple on Paradise By the Dashboard Light or All Revved Up With No Place to Go’s depiction of adolescent self-aggrandising and yearning for escape rang true. You could believe it even when what you were listening to beggared belief, and that was down to Meat Loaf. With the greatest respect to Bonnie Tyler – whose versions of Total Eclipse of the Heart and Holding Out for a Hero are masterpieces of take-no-prisoners emoting – and indeed Cher, whose bravura performance on Dead Ringer for Love is a thing of wonder, absolutely no one could sell a Steinman song the way Meat Loaf did. The simple truth is that no one was interested in Bat Out of Hell until they saw Meat Loaf performing its songs. Its first success came in Australia and the UK when a live video of the title track was shown on TV. The record label that released it, Epic, hated the album – it had been signed by one of their minor subsidiary labels, Cleveland International – and declined to promote it properly until someone came up with the idea of getting Meat Loaf to perform live at the label’s sales convention; steady touring and an appearance on Saturday Night Live saw to the rest. When Meat Loaf and band actually turned up to play on BBC2’s Old Grey Whistle Test in 1978, their appearance caused a sensation. And why wouldn’t it? Look at the footage of them performing Paradise By the Dashboard Light. His voice is already showing signs of the touring-induced wear that would scupper Bat Out Of Hell’s follow-up, but it hardly matters. Meat Loaf is in all his ruff-shirted, pop-eyed, finger-pointing, handkerchief-flapping majesty, while his duet partner Karla DeVito hams it up for all she’s worth, alternately looking bored rigid, furious or contemptuous. They spend the section of the song where a baseball announcer details the progress of a backseat fumble pretending to get off with each other. While DeVito rages at him about marriage, Meat Loaf stares down the camera with an expression that reads “can you believe this crap?” At another juncture, he creeps up behind her, wielding the microphone stand as if he’s about to smash her over the head with it. The song ends with Meat Loaf doubled over, repeatedly screaming “I can’t take it any more!” while DeVito rests her foot on his back and raises her arms in triumph. It still looks completely deranged 44 years on. Now imagine it appearing alongside the rest of the stuff Whistle Test dished up that year: Dean Friedman, 10CC, Dire Straits, Billy Joel, Jefferson Starship. You might have got the odd new wave band in there but really, what price the Vibrators after something this arresting and berserk? It’s hard to think of anyone else who could have pulled off such a performance, who could have done something so simultaneously absurd and thrilling: proof of Meat Loaf and Steinman’s perfectly matched partnership. It’s difficult to work out what Meat Loaf’s career would have been like had he not met Steinman, but it’s equally difficult to imagine what would have happened to Steinman had he not met Meat Loaf. “We belonged heart and soul to each other – we didn’t know each other, we were each other,” Meat Loaf said after Steinman’s death last year. “I don’t want to die, but I may die this year because of Jim.” He was 20 days out. • Share your tributes and memories of Meat Loaf hereScotland’s first black professor has accused fellow academics of discrimination after an explosive row over Edinburgh’s links with slavery prompted calls for him to quit as chair of two groups re-examining the city’s history. The row began when Sir Geoff Palmer – who is leading two separate reviews into the city and the university’s involvement in the slave trade – denounced Jonathan Hearn and Sir Tom Devine, current and emeritus professors at Edinburgh University, as members of “an academic racist gang” after Hearn published an article in the Spectator suggesting the city council review risked being “historically superficial” and Devine stepped in to defend him. Palmer criticised Hearn and Divine in a series of tweets, which focused particularly on their views of Sir Henry Dundas, a controversial figure whose monument in the Scottish capital was vandalised in June 2020 during a Black Lives Matter demonstration. Palmer and others believe Dundas, the leading Whig politician of Scotland in the late 18th century, has been unfairly credited with fighting slavery in Scotland when he held back abolition for a generation by delaying tactics in parliament, and a revised plaque explaining this background was erected at the monument last year. But in his recent article, Hearn argued that historians were still debating whether Dundas delayed abolition and that there was “plenty of evidence to suggest that Dundas’s gradualist approach to abolition – however unsatisfactory it may seem to us in the present day – was the only approach which would be politically successful at the time”. After Palmer’s tweets, Devine called for his dismissal from the review groups, accusing him of “appalling slurs of racism against those whose only fault was to have a different view from his own”. Palmer told the Guardian: “I have been making the same arguments for a long time, but I think this timing has to do with this project, the fact that this work is gaining significance but some historians are unhappy that they are not involved. “This is a public debate and if some people are demanding my dismissal without providing any evidence for it then that is discrimination. If they can provide evidence that I am incompetent and biased then I will step down.” Devine is understood to be taking legal advice, but another prominent academic figure in the city, the UK’s first professor of black male studies, Tommy J Curry, said the row exemplified a naivety in Scottish culture around discussions about race. Hearn said that while he stood by his Spectator article, he had “no ill will” towards Palmer and would be “happy to engage in civil, face-to-face public discussions about our disagreements … My main concern in this is that inquiries into public history need to be conducted in an open manner, with respect for diverse viewpoints.” As the public consultation on the city review comes to an end this week, the council leader, Adam McVey, revealed it had generated thousands of “blatantly racist” responses from supporters of rightwing organisations looking to interfere with the process, saying: “The personal targeting of Geoff that I’ve seen is appalling. I’ve seen groups that are nothing to do with Edinburgh throwing abuse and scaremongering about a process they clearly know nothing about.” He added that the review group, led by Palmer, would now digest the thousands of responses to the consultation in a “considered and mature response”, with the aim “to more honestly tell our city’s history”. Curry, also a professor at Edinburgh University, said the response to Palmer revealed “a naivety of Scottish culture that it wants to have the debate but is not used to having arguments about race where black people themselves have the power to name racism in society”. “This isn’t a difference of opinion,” he said, “it’s about whether history should change based on fact. We’ve acknowledged that Dundas didn’t abolish slavery and did participate in the trade.” Reassessments such as this one had been going on for decades, said Curry, “but there is also a well-established pattern of UK scholars with no knowledge of black or brown scholars’ work in a global context, so everything reads as a political threat, with their only lens of understanding being woke culture of BLM”.Across just five years of recorded output, south London outsider-composer Klein has journeyed from oblique, downer electronica redolent of Burial to a unique and singular warping of classical tropes. Befitting an artist who has released music on both cutting-edge dance labels and legacy European classical imprints, ahead of a milestone show at London’s Barbican next week Klein is performing at a club space in a Salford industrial estate. The first sounds you hear – under pulverising strobe lights – is the clattering club rhythms of Klein’s work performed by a lone percussionist hitting a large kick drum at the side of the stage. Reflecting Klein’s direction of travel, sounds that were once sampled are now far more likely to be organic; last year’s critically acclaimed album Harmattan had been composed for orchestra before the pandemic intervened. Suspended from the ceiling, a single microphone swings across the dark stage, and when Klein uses it to capture her trumpet playing, thick swathes of echo and digital treatment render it startling in its grandeur and scale. If her recent wordless and beatless music toys with the conventions of classical music, then that’s the only thing conventional about tonight. In one of the hour set’s initially stranger moments, a performer introduced as Josie – and friend of Klein – is telling a rambling, surreal joke about a snail appearing on Pimp My Ride. It’s bewildering, before the joke’s awkward payoff is suddenly looped and transformed by Klein – one of the set’s serious highlights as the strange joke echoes, now unrecognisable, around the club for minutes. “How about them jokes!” grins the composer, dressed in an oversized T-shirt and thick knotted tie. Though Klein has rejected the tag of sound collagist, she has an evocative way with fragments, deploying them in sudden changes that can make you feel like you’ve fallen down a trap door. Stretches of celestial ambient or found speech collapse unexpectedly into beer-rattling drone. Klein grabs the swinging mic and begins MCing, which itself dissolves into some of Harmattan’s most straightforwardly pretty textures. It’s abstract but compelling; expectations remain a plaything for one of the UK’s most iconoclastic auteurs of sound. Klein is at Barbican, London, on 30 January.Amazon has confirmed its Alexa virtual assistant service suffered an outage in the UK and mainland Europe but is now back to normal. The Downdetector website reported a wave of Alexa outages in the UK and across Europe on Friday morning at about 7am GMT, with the reports spread throughout the UK. An Amazon spokesperson said: “This morning we had an issue that impacted some Alexa customers’ ability to interact with the service. The Alexa service is now operating normally.” Many users said they had been left unable to wake their voice-activated Amazon Echo smart devices, with some seeing a ring of red lights and a message asking them to try again later or that “something went wrong”. Others complained on social media of being unable to use their Alexa-powered gadgets to play music or radio, access alarms and reminders, or carry out other daily tasks. According to Downdetector, the reports of outages peaked at about 8.20am and had fallen sharply by 9.30am. In December last year, several Amazon services – including its website, Prime Video and applications that use Amazon Web Services (AWS) – went down for thousands of users. At the time the e-commerce company said the outage was because of problems related to the application programming interface (API), which is a set of protocols for building and integrating application software.Since the beginning of the pandemic, communication from the government, epidemiologists and health statisticians appears to rely on the belief that if people are shown enough graphs, enough models, enough statistics, enough information, they will all act rationally and do the right thing. Even when that is deeply at odds with the way people live: closing oneself at home, potentially alone, ceasing all intimate contact with people outside, locking down. This was surprisingly successful in 2020, as a response to a sudden disaster, but it isn’t a realistic long-term strategy. The cultural, social and political history of the HIV pandemic taught us that this epidemiological approach of trying to protect a population chiefly by focusing on ideal individual behavioural guidelines doesn’t work. When I see “doomsday” epidemiologists, for whom the only solution to the pandemic appears to be to lock everybody in until we reach an idealised #zerocovid state, I worry we haven’t yet learned those lessons. I don’t mean to disqualify or question the important work done by epidemiologists in understanding how disease spreads. But there are other forces informing how people decide to behave beyond mere access to apparently straightforward and ideology-free epidemiological data and graphics. Epidemiologists study populations, that is, people in social formations. Putting numbers on risk based on population-level data and models is not the sole driving force of our actions. In the case of HIV and other epidemics, epidemiological models have either been shown to be wrong or at the very least insufficient. Early in that pandemic, epidemiological data arriving from the US wrongly made the virus a cause of concern only for already stigmatised populations – for instance claims that Aids was something that affected only gay men – thus contributing to further social discrimination. And there were unreasonable political decisions made to close down many spaces of gay male sexual sociability, such as the 1985 closure of the Mineshaft bar in New York in an attempt to curb the spread of the virus. But ultimately none of these things were enough. It was not until the 1990s, when virology gave us new hopes to end Aids, that we were able to effectively contain the virus thanks not to the behavioural changes advocated by epidemiologists and other public health specialists in the first decade of the pandemic, but to antiretroviral treatments and prophylaxis that were shown to successfully halt HIV transmission. This, however, doesn’t mean all we did was wait for treatments to arrive. Instead, treatments arrived owing to political pressure from affected communities who recognised that simply expecting people to change their behaviours and do the right thing at all times was not sustainable. We ceased to privilege the statements of truth posited by a single scientific discipline and instead started drawing from knowledge produced across the wider medical sciences, the social sciences, the humanitiesand from activists and patient groups. The Gay Men’s Health Crisis group in the US, for example, was the first to start promoting condom use among gay men when the state didn’t want to do it and was focusing instead on a no-sex approach. And activist groups such as Act Up brought the voices of patient groups and communities to the centre of political decision-making and biomedical research. From this we gained not only a better understanding of the pandemic itself but also of what matters to people and the lives they consider worth living. We must make an effort to understand what drives people to behave in certain ways, why certain behaviours perceived as risky are important to them, and meet them where they are by acknowledging and respecting their value systems. Social, affective and cultural factors are at play. Desire, pleasure, the pull of intimacy, the need for proximity and physical contact are important in determining what people ultimately do. During Covid, we again see the difficulty of drawing conclusions and recommendations about individual behaviours from population-level data, and the ways this abstract approach can easily overlook the social complexity and differences in specific communities. Risk and the ability to protect oneself are often unfairly and unevenly distributed –think of the epidemiologists telling people to gather in “their” gardens, to use separate bathrooms at home if one person falls ill, or to spend a few hundred pounds on air purifiers for their homes. Government regulations have seemingly assumed since the start of this pandemic that everyone lives in a detached single-family home with their loved ones, or that homes are, by definition, safe spaces where we can lock ourselves in without being alone or fear of violence. And, we see the same ineffective messaging brought forward. In the early months of the pandemic, the Terrence Higgins Trust recommended gay men stop having casual sex, a behavioural recommendation unlikely to work in the long term. In contrast, the sexual health activist group Prepster put out a series of comics (similar to the ones by the Gay Men’s Health Crisis in the 1980s), giving advice to queer men on how to manage Covid risk during hookups – a more realistic approach than abstinence-only. The lessons of the Aids crisis are that public health messaging that doesn’t take into account what different people value as being a life worth living, and that is directed at an abstract general public is insufficient – and that epidemiologists can make errors of both science and advice. We need to involve not just scientists but also social scientists, cultural scholars and communities to get a better understanding of what matters to people, while also acknowledging that we don’t always (and will never) behave in a purely rational manner. Models tend to assume that populations are made of autonomous agents who will act only according to reason in response to a given set of information. The problem is that, for those of us who work on the medical, cultural and social histories of an older and still continuing global pandemic – HIV – such views fall short of capturing what happens every time we are faced with a choice. They are ultimately limited and counterproductive. João Florêncio is senior lecturer in history of modern and contemporary art and visual culture at the University of ExeterDebates on the future of the broadcaster that hits its 100th birthday this year always become Hamlet-like: BBC or not BBC? With centenary celebrations muted this week by the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, freezing the licence fee for two years and threatening to axe it completely by the next BBC royal charter in 2028, the familiar standoff resumes between those who argue for no state-dominant broadcaster (Conservative politicians and media) and those who advocate no change (broadcasting unions, liberal columnists). Realistically, though, the BBC’s future lies in a third way the Prince of Denmark didn’t have – being very different. Trying to “save the licence fee” or “leave the BBC alone” (though understandable slogans, given its long and vast contribution to national culture and education) is like aiming for immortality; regardless of strategy, time will beat you. Licence fee purchases have fallen by around a million in the last year. With Dorries effectively promising to end prosecution of non-payers, this trend will only accelerate, and digital consumption makes compliance harder to police. So before a new structure is settled, the BBC must resolve: what is public broadcasting now? How much and by what method can the public reasonably be asked to pay? How does a four-nation British broadcaster survive in a splintering kingdom? (The percentage of licence fee evasion is higher in Scotland and Northern Ireland than England and Wales.) These questions are tough, and many answers are unpleasant. The good news The BBC and its supporters took comfort from the clear retreat between Dorries’s Sunday tweet that “this licence fee announcement will be the last” and her vaguer mutterings in the House of Commons on Monday about consulting on future alternatives, and the present funding being a “dinosaur.” Some hope this softening reflected a rethink after substantial backlash to the threat, but the reason is probably bleaker. Understandably, few people have read section 57, sub-section 5 of the current BBC royal charter but, while it gives the culture secretary the power, from 2022, to fix the licence fee for the next five years (as Dorries has), and to launch a mid-term review (ditto), it also contains a warning. It states that the halfway investigation “must not consider: a) the Mission of the BBC; b) the Public Purposes of the BBC; or c) the licence fee funding model of the BBC for the period of this Charter.” Did Dorries jump the gun? Could BBC lawyers protest that, in declaring there will be no licence fee after 2028, she pre-empted both the mid-term review and the charter renewal process beginning in 2026? This is the end of the good news. The Attenborough question By the next charter, Johnson will be spending more time with his families and Dorries writing her Merseyside erotic historical novels. But the BBC crisis will continue for future governments, whether Tory or Labour – and the latter would probably depend for support on seats held by the Scottish National Party, which, true to its name, aims to replace the British Broadcasting Corporation with a national broadcaster as devolved as the country’s politics. Since Dorries’s announcements, the case for leaving the BBC alone has focused, as it tends to, on Sir David Attenborough, Line of Duty and BBC News. Yet each of those totems is wobbly. Although the embodiment of the BBC, Attenborough, in recent years, has moonlighted at Sky and Netflix, drawn by 3D technology and global reach. And if 2027 does prove to be the last year of the licence fee, let’s hope some of it will be spent on another series by the then 101-year-old Sir David, though alternative justifications for the BBC’s existence may well be needed. As for Line of Duty, Jed Mercurio’s police procedural smash is aired by the BBC but made by an independent company, World Productions. Of the top 10 shows most streamed on iPlayer in 2021, only Silent Witness and Doctor Who were actually made by the BBC, and the Time Lord franchise is about to become a co-production with an indie, Bad Wolf. Of the most-watched shows on UK terrestrial TV last year, only Strictly Come Dancing is an in-house BBC show, and others – Euro 2020 football, Johnson’s lockdown addresses – were shared with rival broadcasters. Emblematically, BBC One’s brilliant recent drama Four Lives was made by ITV Studios. And Mercurio has produced ITV’s next big drama, Trigger Point, which starts on Sunday. So branding – the BBC’s historic strength – is blurred. With the network now producing progressively less of its output, its huge workforce of 22,219 is increasingly hard to justify. Not owning intellectual property rights also makes it trickier to swell commercial income through replay sales. The problem with BBC News Another key part of the BBC’s pitch for massive mandatory cash has always been that it offers unimpeachably trustworthy journalism – a quality much trumpeted amid a British prime minister and recent US president who have spectacularly ramped up political mendacity. Even this virtue, though, is not unequivocal. The original theory of the licence fee was that governments would collect the money then hand it over to be spent by a BBC guaranteed editorial “independence”. In reality, governments of all stripes use the menace of the next settlement to punish perceived editorial insolence or encourage positive coverage. The unusually frequent elections (three since 2015), divisive referendums on national shape and then the pandemic have perilously stress-tested BBC “impartiality”. Its newsrooms’ traditional approach – Chalk says this, but Cheese says that – was unlikely to feel 50-50 to either side of a 52-48 vote (at that point) to leave Europe. Is Boris Johnson honest? Donald Trump fascist? Joe Biden senile? Do lockdowns work? Such stories can’t be covered with 2 mins 45 secs each from left and right. It is true that Tory MPs and media regularly attack the BBC for “bias”, but ITN, Sky and Channel 4 are routinely more critical of Conservative administrations: ITN published the “party invite” email that most destabilised Johnson, Sky’s Beth Rigby interviewed him on Tuesday in a (justifiably) scathing way that would trigger emergency management meetings if Laura Kuenssberg did it. Politicians get angriest with the BBC because it feels like being bitten by a dog they think they own. The way forward Part of the solution might be to break that chain. Another weekend phone-blurt from Dorries’s allies declared “the days of state-run TV are over in Britain.” The language was revealingly misleading: the BBC is not supposed to be run by the state but owned by it, as is Channel 4 (which surely seems doomed to privatisation by that comment). As even Dorries probably isn’t suggesting that there will not be another royal charter – with the BBC an entirely private commercial entity – what might a post-2027 BBC look like? One option is the introduction of a “standard BBC” package, either funded by a cheaper voluntary licence fee or from direct taxation, with top-up options – broadly on the Sky/Amazon subscription model – of movies, sport, comedy, whatever. What would be available to each level of viewer, though, is hugely complex. Content that relatively few would pay for – local news, pre-school and school education (a boon to many parents during lockdown), religious worship, Radio 3 speech and music – would have to be balanced with high-rating treats – Call the Midwife, The Repair Shop, In the Night Garden – to encourage purchase. The question of whether EastEnders, Strictly Come Dancing or Countryfile should be cheaply available (to draw subscription traffic) or sold dearly (to maximise income) would take weeks of meetings. Intriguingly, radio, generally seen by BBC director generals as the inferior medium, may prove to be TV’s saviour, at least in the medium term. Screen use – increasingly likely to be done on mobile devices and through catchup rather than live – adapts easily to a Sky/Netflix model. But listening still flourishes on home or car radios and with allegiance to linear channels, and so is much harder to place behind a paywall – an argument for the licence fee (or a radio-specific one) to continue for some time. Whether any new funding model will support Gary Lineker’s £1.36m for introducing football, or the Radio 4 Today programme dispensing £1.3m between its presenters (some also do some other shows) is questionable. Could subscription cover the 113 BBC managers who earned more than £150,000 last year, or support a BBC website that employs more writers than many of the newspapers this multimillion-pound freesheet undermines? Such are the tough discussions to be had en route to the new BBC. It may help that cuts can hold hidden complexities. Reformers often fall into the trap of wanting to keep the BBC Proms while not having so many musicians (five orchestras, a band, a choir) on payroll, but there is symbiosis, and even cost effectiveness, in keeping both. And which politicians would want the legacy of vandalising that cultural heritage? The BBC situation feels existential, but it need not be fatal. The Corporation can emerge strongly creative and freer from government interference. But, given the seismic changes in broadcasting, Status Quo must be a band that shows up on Top of the Pops 2, not a bargaining tool.Black tights are fashion Marmite. If you love them, you look forward to the first brisk September or October day when it is acceptable to stop pretending that “late summer” exists on these shores and layer a thick pair of tights under your dress. You have strong views on optimum denier count and can debate the relative merits of Falke and Wolford at length. You could happily give a Ted talk on the whether the Edie Sedgwick modern jazz vibe of a matte pair is more chic than the lustre of a velvet or satin finish. The other camp – my camp – would sooner brave horizontal snow and sleet bare-legged than be seen dead in a pair. In fashion, not wearing tights has long been a badge of honour. Around the time that tottering around in high heels all day stopped signalling elegance and began to make you look a bit deranged, going bare-legged took over as the style set’s equivalent of a club tie. Going bare-legged through winter requires a high tolerance for windchill and, depending on your skin colour, a time-consuming fake-tan habit. Still, the bare-legged brigade eschew tights because we think it looks better. I suppose this is all an elaborate justification for the fact that I stopped wearing tights because no one else on the front row was wearing them and they felt kind of scruffy. Going bare-legged made me feel like a contender. Style is a way of insisting on something, as Susan Sontag said, and black tights felt like giving up, like throwing in the towel. In the noughties, when Prada was all about a knee-length skirt, and through the 2010s, when the midi skirt ruled, going bare-legged didn’t mean being cold. I could wear ankle boots with socks, a long-ish skirt and a coat, and I was technically bare-legged but only a tiny bit of flesh was exposed. But now the mini is back. Not just in the theoretical, fashion-week sense, but in real life. Skirts and dresses are shorter – on magazine covers and in shop windows but also on the street, on the bus, in the park. And going without tights while wearing a skirt that ends above the knee calls for a double dose of bravery, not only in the face of cold but in feeling exposed and naked. Which is why, while hemlines have been creeping upwards, tights have been making a comeback. “’Tis the season to start wearing hosiery again” ran an American Vogue headline in September, a declaration that would surely not have had a green light from editor and bare-leg warrior queen Anna Wintour before this year. The black tights renaissance began with polka-dotted sheers, or tights plastered with graphic logos – fancy, fashion-forward hosiery being a way for opaque-sceptics like me to start wearing tights again without losing face. Amina Muaddi – Rihanna’s favourite shoe designer, and 100% the kind of hardcore fashionista who wouldn’t have been seen dead in tights until recently – has designed a range for Wolford that includes a pair with one black lace leg and one plain sheer leg, and stirrup-footed dance tights in high-shine latex. But the crystal dots and the fishnets are just the gateway drug to the hard stuff that is luring us all back in: the true black opaque tight. Bare-leg bravado has been left behind in the olden days, along with spur-of-the-moment city breaks and mask-incompatible lipgloss. Reader, I’m back in my tights. M&amp;S Autograph 100 denier merino wool, since you ask. The world has truly changed.Generous Guardian and Observer readers have raised more than £1m for four charities that are fighting for climate justice and working with communities severely affected by climate-induced extreme weather events. A late surge in donations, coupled with a four-day extension helped push the 2021 charity appeal to £1,005,000 before it closed on Thursday night. It is the seventh year in a row that the appeal has raised more than £1m for charity. Just over 9,500 people gave to the appeal. Donations will be shared between four charities: Practical Action, Global Greengrants Fund UK, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, and Environmental Justice Foundation. The theme this year was climate justice, inspired by stories of people and communities uprooted by climate volatility, whether flooding, wildfire, melting ice or drought, from Madagascar to the Arctic Circle. Thousands of donors emailed to tell us why they had given money to the appeal. Many said climate change was the most urgent issue affecting the planet, with many making the point that the people worst affected by climate crisis, in the world’s poorest countries, had done least to cause it. Each of the appeal’s four partner charities work in developing countries in the global south. “We all have responsibility for the future of our Earth and a further responsibility to support those communities most affected by extreme weather events,” one donor wrote this week. Practical Action’s chief executive, Sarah Roberts, said: “On behalf of all of the communities we work with, I’d like to say a huge thank you to Guardian and the Observer readers. Their generosity will help us enable people on the frontline of climate change get the tools and knowledge they need to take back control of their lives.” Eva Rehse, the chief executive of Global Greengrants Fund UK, said: “Thanks to the readers of the Guardian and Observer for your incredible generosity and solidarity. Your donations are acts of climate justice, and give us hope for a better future.” Steve Trent, the chief executive of Environmental Justice Foundation, said: “The overwhelming generosity of the readers of the Guardian and Observer has meant we are going into 2022 ready to continue our fight for climate justice.” Richard Deverell, the director of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, said: “We can’t thank the supporters of the Guardian and Observer appeal enough. The incredibly generous sum of money raised will make a big difference to the lives of people we work with in Madagascar. Thank you from the bottom of our hearts for your generosity for seeking justice for the victims of climate change and helping us find solutions in nature.”Italian parliamentarians who have Covid-19 may be allowed to cast their ballots for Italy’s new president from a car park. More than 1,000 MPs and regional delegates will begin voting on Monday, and amid a debacle over who the next head of state should be, the coronavirus pandemic is posing logistical challenges. About 35 of the so-called “grand electors” are in quarantine with Covid-19, and to ensure a fair election and that quorum requirements are met, Roberto Fico, the lower house speaker, has suggested allowing them to vote in the car park of Montecitorio palace, the seat of the chamber of deputies. The proposal will be discussed on Friday and will go ahead if the government grants the voters a permit to leave their homes. It is unclear how the “drive-in” vote will work, but according to reports in the Italian press, electors could either cast their votes from a booth set up in the car park, or from their car. Either way, they will not be there to “watch a film, order something to eat or take a Covid test,” Niccolò Carratelli wrote in La Stampa. “We’ve never seen a drive-in polling station before.” Meanwhile, Guido De Martini, a lawmaker in the far-right League party and rebel against Italy’s vaccine mandate, said he felt like “a panda heading for extinction” as he would not be able to travel to Rome from his home in Sardinia without the “super green pass” needed to prove double vaccination. “I can’t get on a plane or ferry without the super green pass,” De Martini told La Stampa. “I thought about booking a private plane, but it costs too much. My battle is one of principle, of liberty … I am not against vaccines, I am against obligatory vaccines.” He added that if there were a smaller stretch of sea between Sardinia and the mainland, he might have considered swimming. “I love running and cycling, but especially swimming in the sea. But the crossing from Sardinia would be too tough.”The boss of BrewDog has been accused of trying to intimidate former staff who are due to appear in a critical documentary that will shine a light on the beer brand’s workplace culture. The self-styled “punk” brewery, which is targeting an eventual £2bn stock market float, apologised last year after current and former employees signed an open letter alleging a “culture of fear” in which workers were bullied and “treated like objects”. Some of the allegations will be revisited in a BBC documentary, Disclosure: The Truth About BrewDog, due to air on Monday evening. But in fresh posts on BrewDog’s “Equity for Punks” forum, the company’s chief executive, James Watt, appeared to attempt to warn sources who gave evidence to the BBC that their identities could be exposed. In the forum, which is seen by investors and some staff, he said: “All of this is very, very likely to end up in court.” He said the BBC “will likely have told sources that their identity will remain anonymous”. But he said anonymity “can never be guaranteed” and a court could order the BBC to name former staff who contributed to the programme. “If anyone is in any way concerned by this, it is not too late to withdraw your consent,” he said. A spokesperson for the Unite trade union criticised Watt’s comments. “Any attempt to intimidate current and former workers taking a stand on systemic mistreatment will not be tolerated,” said Bryan Simpson, an industrial organiser for Unite Hospitality. “We will represent all Unite members fully against efforts by a multimillionaire to silence them.” Watt said: “We … know false information has been given to the BBC, which if broadcast would be highly defamatory. BrewDog fully supports transparency and investigative journalism. However, it must also protect itself from defamatory allegations and will not hesitate to do so.” Last year 61 former workers signed an open letter under the banner “Punks with Purpose”. They alleged that the Scottish brewer’s dizzyingly rapid growth had involved cutting corners on health and safety, espousing values it did not live by, and creating a “toxic” culture that led to staff suffering from mental illness. The company, whose meteoric rise has attracted admiration as well as criticism for its sometimes controversial PR stunts, has since apologised and performed a review of its workplace culture. Watt has repeatedly promised to learn from the experience, while also casting doubt on the integrity of some of the complainants. Disclosure: The Truth About BrewDog is on BBC One Scotland on Monday 24 January at 7pm and will also be on iPlayer.When giant purple billboards advertising Muhammad Malik’s search to find a wife appeared in London and Birmingham in early January, the 29-year-old financial consultant became an overnight celebrity. His quest attracted widespread coverage and messages of support on social media, which Malik said led to 5,000 responses via an accompanying website, findMALIKawife.com. Then last week the Muslim dating app Muzmatch revealed it was behind the stunt, with Malik’s website rebranded, directing hopeful suitors to their site. The revelation prompted mixed reactions on social media, with one user praising the viral marketing campaign, another criticising it as unethical and a third saying it was leaning into Islamophobic tropes as a result of its slogan “save me from an arranged marriage”. Malik, a startup consultant at Nationwide building society, said Muzmatch’s marketing team pitched the campaign to him last autumn. He has previously appeared in adverts and promotional videos for the app, including one called “Farts Break Hearts” where he discusses his dating red flags, which include “that there’s a double life going on”. He denied that the campaign was disingenuous. “This was an idea that was presented to me and I thought: it’s genuine, I’m 100% looking. But these guys just absolutely took it on steroids. I’ve always been a bit tongue in cheek. A bit quirky. I’ve done a bit of standup comedy. So I think it was quite in line with that.” Shahzad Younas, the chief executive of Muzmatch, said: “Malik was very keen to stress that there’s nothing wrong with an arranged marriage. For a lot of people it works. The whole premise touches more upon how young Muslims are increasingly becoming empowered through Muzmatch to find their own partner, but still do it in a way that’s respectful of their faith, their traditions, their culture.” The viral campaign comes as Muzmatch, which has 5 million users worldwide, is defending itself from a claim of alleged trademark infringement brought by Match.com in the high court. Muzmatch was accused of “piggybacking on established dating brands” to improve its success. The court heard that Match brought the legal action after four failed attempts to buy Muzmatch. Hussein Kesvani, the author of Follow Me, Akhi, which explores how British Muslims interact with the online world, compared Malik to the TikTok trainspotter Francis Bourgeois, who was revealed to be a student called Luke Holland, represented by a modelling agency. He was subsequently signed up to feature in an ad campaign for Gucci and the North Face. “The aim is to get people really invested in a character that you’re not quite sure is ‘real’,” said Kesvani. “Muzmatch might argue that ‘Malik’ is more a representation of the kind of clientele of the platform. Which, in this case, seems to be middle-class, fashionable, metropolitan young Muslims for whom faith is a part of their identity and aesthetic. “To me, this represents what MuzMatch is trying to assert itself as, now that it finds itself being the most successful ‘halal dating’ app … It was always going to lead to some identity crisis as it expanded.” Malik, who lives in London with his parents, said he considered himself “more on the orthodox, conservative side” of Islam. “When going on dates, it’s always a chaperone date. From a spiritual angle, the purity is intact in terms of there’s no ulterior motives. What you’re focused on is marriage.” A member of Muzmatch’s marketing team is helping Malik sift through the thousands of responses. Malik said he had personally responded to more than 100 so far. But he said that even if he did not find a wife among them, he was “super content as a singleton”. “I’d be really happy even in a decade if I were to be single, but I would be, maybe, even happier with somebody.”The reigning snowboard cross world champion, Charlotte Bankes, and Sochi 2014 freestyle skiing silver medallist, Gus Kenworthy, are the headline acts in a 21-strong squad of skiers and snowboarders who are aiming to help Team GB achieve their greatest Winter Olympics result next month. Bankes, who has been in sensational form this season, will be competing at her third Games – but her first for Britain. The 26-year-old was born in Hemel Hempstead before moving to the Alps as a four-year-old, was part of France’s team in 2014 and 2018 and is considered Britain’s best chance of a gold medal in Beijing. Meanwhile Kenworthy, who represented the USA in 2014 and 2018, also has a shot if he can return to the form that made him an eight-time world champion. Several other of the GB Snowsport team, announced on Friday, also have genuine shots of making the podium – including Zoe Atkin, Kirsty Muir and James Woods in the freestyle skiing, and snowboarder Katie Ormerod – as Team GB seek to beat their record of five medals at a Winter Olympics. Ormerod’s selection is particularly noteworthy given the nightmare she endured in Pyeongchang four years ago where she split her heel in two while training before the Games. Her injury was so serious it took medics an hour to cut her boot off and her recovery involved seven operations and a year of rehab. “The fact that I’m even here now qualifying for another Olympic Games feels really amazing to me, because it has been a really difficult journey,” admitted Ormerod. “At one point I just wanted to be able to walk again. But I’ve worked extremely hard over the last four years to be in this position now where I’m confidently going into my second Games.” “I definitely think we have a team capable of getting medals,” she added. “Especially Kirsty, James and Charlotte.” Nine ski and snowboard athletes have been selected for Team GB for the first time, while alpine skier, Dave Ryding, and nordic skiers Andrew Musgrave and Andrew Young are each set to appear in their fourth Olympic Winter Games. “It’s such a huge honour to be named as part of Team GB again, and I can’t wait to get out there and get racing,” said Ryding. “As athletes, we take all our competitions seriously, but there’s something undeniably special about representing the country at an Olympic Games. This is a really exciting time for British skiing and snowboarding, and like the whole squad I’m looking forward to giving my all in Beijing.” That message was echoed by Team GB’s chef de mission Georgie Harland, who expects that 50 Team GB athletes in total will go to the Winter Olympics “It is great to see representation across more disciplines than we have taken to a Games before and an equally fantastic mix of both youth and experience as we welcome nine Olympic debutants to the team,” she added. “The squad has proved themselves to be extremely competitive on the world stage over the past few seasons and I look forward to seeing them perform on the Olympic stage in just a couple weeks’ time.”A man on trial for killing a suspected thief has told a jury he was performing a citizen’s arrest and thought the man was faking it when he told him he could not breathe. Nathan Smith, a 38-year-old carer, said he had no intention of hurting Craig Wiltshire, 43, but simply wanted to detain him until the police arrived. He denies manslaughter. Smith pounced on Wiltshire in the early hours of 20 November 2019, pinning him to the ground for 12 minutes and kneeling on his back for nine of them. The jury at Bristol crown court has seen CCTV footage of the incident in which Wiltshire can be heard telling Smith: “I can’t breathe” but his captor replied: “I don’t give a fuck.” Wiltshire died two weeks later, a postmortem giving the cause of death as cardiorespiratory arrest and subsequent brain damage. The prosecution has alleged Smith used unlawful force on Wiltshire and wanted to punish him for crimes he believed he had committed in the neighbourhood. Giving evidence on Friday, Smith said he acted after houses, cars and sheds were broken into, leaving the community feeling worried and frightened. The incident happened when Smith spotted Wiltshire in the area. He told the jury: “I was just going to detain him and allow the police to get there. I pulled him off the bike and held him to the floor so he could not escape. “I was expecting the police to come and take him. The police station is [nearby] so I thought they would be there in a couple of minutes. I had no intention to cause any harm. “He was fighting back. I did not think him saying ‘I can’t breathe’ was genuine – I thought he was trying to get me to let him up so he could escape or attack me. It never went through my mind he couldn’t breathe.” As he waited for the police, Smith said he was fearful. “I was panicking the police were not coming and was just focusing on not letting Mr Wiltshire up. I thought if he got up he would hurt me, hurt one of the other residents or escape. “I was concerned he had a tool or weapon on him and did not want him to go into his pocket. I was just focused on detaining him and thinking I just hope the police hurry up.” After three police officers arrived, it became obvious that Wiltshire was unresponsive. Smith added: “I could not believe it. I felt confused and I was sick. I was very upset and distressed. At no time did I mean any harm to this male – I was simply making a citizen’s arrest.” The defendant said that since the incident in 2019 he had not been the same person. “I am on antidepressants. I used to be quite a happy person but now I just feel mostly sad.” On Thursday, Prof Jason Payne-James, a forensic physician and a leading expert on restraint techniques, said he believed the force used was “reasonable”. He argued that while police and prison officers would have known detaining someone in a prone position could lead to positional asphyxia, an untrained person would not have realised this. Payne-James said he believed “a perfect storm” of conditions and factors contributed to Wiltshire’s death including his small build, an existing heart condition, the presence of the heroin substitute methadone and the sedative diazepam in his bloodstream and the fact that he was struggling. But cross-examined by prosecutor James Ward, Payne-James said it was likely that Wiltshire would have survived if Smith had sat him up when he said he could not breathe four minutes into the restraint. The jury has been told to assume that Wiltshire was the man suspected of committing crimes in the neighbourhood over the previous weeks. The trial continues.If all he had ever done was record the album Bat Out of Hell, Meat Loaf, who has died aged 74, would still be guaranteed his own plinth in the museum of rock’n’roll. Released in Britain in early 1978, the album might have been conceived as the antidote to punk rock, which had been wreaking havoc on the music industry. The unlikely-looking figure of Meat Loaf stood at the centre of a bombastic maelstrom of sound, an operatic blend of heavy rock, fantasy lyrics, a choir of backing vocalists and long, multipart songs. It was rock’n’roll redesigned as gothic movie and Broadway spectacle. Meat Loaf had met the songwriter Jim Steinman, his collaborator on Bat Out of Hell, when he auditioned successfully for Steinman’s musical More Than You Deserve in New York in 1973. The pair worked on the Bat Out of Hell material for several years and were rejected by numerous record companies before the album appeared on Cleveland International label, distributed by Epic Records. The album reminded many listeners of Bruce Springsteen’s Born to Run, and its producer, Todd Rundgren, initially thought that Steinman and Meat Loaf were deliberately parodying Springsteen. Sales of the record got off to a slow start – it took the airing of a three-song video on the BBC’s Old Grey Whistle Test to kick it off in Britain – but the album turned into a slow-burning phenomenon, becoming an almost permanent fixture on charts around the world on its way to selling 43m copies. In Britain, it has spent more than 500 weeks on the album chart. Though Meat Loaf enjoyed a follow-up hit in 1981 with the album Dead Ringer (another collaboration with Steinman and a UK chart-topper), he then suffered declining sales until he made lightning strike a second time by reuniting with Steinman for Bat Out of Hell II: Back Into Hell (1993), which topped the charts in the US, the UK and several other countries, with sales of 20m. He completed the trilogy with Bat Out of Hell III: The Monster Is Loose (2006), although that managed to sell only a couple of million copies. Meat Loaf was born Marvin Lee Aday in Dallas, Texas. His father, Orvis Aday, was a police officer, and his mother, Wilma (nee Artie), a schoolteacher and gospel singer with the Vo-di-o-do Girls quartet. Orvis was a notorious drunk, and Wilma would sometimes leave Marvin with her mother for safety when her husband had been drinking. After Thomas Jefferson high school and a stint at Lubbock Christian college, Marvin enrolled at North Texas State University. A keen football player, he acquired his nickname after an impatient football coach yelled “hey, meatloaf!” at him. When he was 20, a violent confrontation with his father prompted him to leave Dallas. “He came home drunk and tried to kill me with a butcher’s knife,” Meat Loaf told a BBC documentary in 2015. He caught a flight to Los Angeles, where he aimed to make a career in show business. He put a band together, called Meat Loaf Soul, who played their first gig in Huntington Beach as opening act to Van Morrison’s band Them. The band went through several different lineups and names – they became Popcorn Blizzard and then Floating Circus – and in the process of building a local following opened shows for numerous big names including The Who, Iggy and the Stooges, Pink Floyd and the Grateful Dead. When Popcorn Blizzard recorded a single called Once Upon a Time, Meat Loaf’s voice was so loud that the microphone had to be placed on the opposite side of the studio from the singer. Floating Circus split up in late 1968 and Meat Loaf returned to LA. He was working as a car park attendant when a stranger suggested he audition for the stage musical Hair. That led to him spending six months in the Detroit production of the show. As the production came to a close, Loaf and a fellow cast member, Shaun “Stoney” Murphy, were asked to record a duet album for Motown, called Stoney and Meatloaf, and they toured with Jake Wade and the Soul Searchers in support of it. After the tour Meat Loaf joined the Broadway production of Hair, and during the run he auditioned for Steinman’s More Than You Deserve. Their Bat Out of Hell project would grow out of songs that Steinman wrote for another projected musical, Neverland (a version of the Peter Pan story). In the meantime, Meat Loaf appeared in The Rocky Horror Show and the subsequent movie The Rocky Horror Picture Show (1975), and was also recruited to The National Lampoon Show on Broadway as understudy to John Belushi. It was after the Lampoon show ended that Meat Loaf and Steinman focused all their energies on Bat Out of Hell. The record’s vast success was not all plain sailing for Meat Loaf. He and Steinman formed the Neverland Express band to play the material on tour, but in Canada he broke a leg when he fell off the stage. Depressed and unable to perform, he suffered a nervous breakdown and started using cocaine. “I was an angry, violent guy who was out of control,” he later admitted to the Los Angeles Times. “I didn’t know how to deal with being popular.” He also lost his voice, prompting Steinman to turn the proposed follow-up album, Bad for Good, into his own solo album. The singer recovered and made Dead Ringer, which comprised eight Steinman songs and delivered a No 5 UK hit with Dead Ringer for Love, a duet with Cher. Meat Loaf had a falling-out with Steinman, who felt he had not received enough credit for the success, and also became embroiled in litigation with his former manager. He later told the Guardian he had “45 lawsuits totalling $80m thrown at me”, and was forced to declare bankruptcy. In 1983 Meat Loaf released Midnight at the Lost and Found, comprising his own material and that of a variety of songwriters, although not Steinman. The disc was a critical failure and sold poorly. Two follow-ups, Bad Attitude (1984) and Blind Before I Stop (1986), were similarly disappointing, and he was forced to rebuild his career by performing to smaller audiences, playing in the US, Europe and the Middle East, and gradually working his way back to arenas and stadiums. By 1990 the seemingly impossible occurred, and Meat Loaf and Steinman began collaborating again on what would become Bat Out of Hell II. Bat II sold even more quickly than its predecessor, shifting 10m copies in three months and delivering a monster international chart-topper with I’d Do Anything for Love (But I Won’t Do That), boosted by a lavish Beauty-and-the-Beast-themed video. In 1994 the song won Meat Loaf a Grammy for best male rock vocal performance. He promoted the album with a theatrical Broadway-style tour, and his status was now sufficiently restored to earn him a guest spot in Luciano Pavarotti’s all-star benefit concert for Bosnian children in Italy in 1995. His last studio album of the 90s was Welcome to the Neighbourhood (1995), which went platinum in Britain and the US, and yielded the hit singles I’d Lie for You (And That’s the Truth) and Not a Dry Eye in the House, both written by Diane Warren. In his autobiography, To Hell and Back (1999), Meat Loaf recounted stories about dragging his hard-drinking father out of squalid bars, being at Parkland hospital in Dallas in 1963 when the mortally injured President John F Kennedy was brought in, and once picking up a hitchhiker named Charles Manson. He commented that “people in Texas … love stories, and the best stories naturally have some bizarre aspect to them”. The following year the book was turned into the TV movie Meat Loaf: To Hell and Back. This starred W Earl Brown as the singer; Meat Loaf’s teenage daughter, Amanda Aday, had a small role as a grocery clerk. It was not until 2003 that he released a new album, the modestly selling Couldn’t Have Said It Better, though through the 90s and into the new century Meat Loaf had undertaken a string of acting roles in movies including Spiceworld: The Movie (1997), Crazy in Alabama (1999), Fight Club (1999), The 51st State (2001) and Tenacious D in the Pick of Destiny (2006). He also made appearances on TV series including House, Monk and Glee. The Bat Out of Hell musical opened in 2017 in London and received the Evening Standard best musical award. Follow-up albums to Bat Out of Hell II sold in a downward trajectory. Braver Than We Are (2016) was his last collaboration with Steinman, who wrote or co-wrote all 10 songs, and was more a rehashing of past glories than a new musical departure. It reached No 4 on the UK chart and 31 in the US. A collapse on stage in 2003 led to a diagnosis of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. He collapsed again during a 2016 performance. In 2001, he changed his real name from Marvin to Michael. The same year his first marriage, to Leslie Edmonds, ended in divorce. He is survived by his second wife, Deborah Gillespie, whom he married in 2007, and his daughter, Amanda, and stepdaughter, Pearl, both from his first marriage. • Meat Loaf (Michael, previously Marvin, Lee Aday), singer and actor, born 27 September 1947; died 20 January 2022Italy is to apply for Unesco status for espresso coffee, claiming it is “much more than a simple drink”. It follows the art of the Neapolitan pizza-maker being added to the UN agency’s list of the world’s intangible heritage in 2017 as Italy aims to secure the worldwide status for another of its successful symbols. “It is an authentic ritual and an expression of our sociality that distinguishes us around the world,” said Gian Marco Centinaio, the agriculture undersecretary, confirming that the application had been submitted. Espresso quickly became an integral part of the national identity after its creation in Turin at the end of the 19th century. Drinking espresso creates an occasion for an encounter, to discuss politics and football, to complain, to make peace or to pay a debt, or simply an excuse to talk on this and that. According to the Italian Espresso Institute, founded in 1998 with the specific goal of safeguarding and promoting the original espresso, the market is worth more than €4bn (£3.3bn) annually, with more than 90% of Italians drinking a cup of it each day, usually served in a porcelain cup. The institute’s strict regulations for the perfect espresso include the use of a certified coffee blend, certified equipment and even licensed personnel. It specifies that the crema, the lighter froth that sits on the top of the dark caffeinated brew, “must be uniform and persistent for at least 120 seconds from the time the coffee has been dispensed without stirring”. It says its colour should be “hazel-brown to dark brown [and] characterised by tawny reflexes”. Centinaio said espresso’s candidacy was also a way to celebrate Italy’s social interaction, partially halted by the Covid restrictions. Previous attempts to have Italian espresso coffee on the Unesco list have been made but never officially finalised, allegedly because of the country’s turbulent politics. The agriculture undersecretary said he was confident Italy’s national Unesco commission would approve the bid, with the verdict expected some time in the spring.How are you finding the pace of Boris Johnson’s political demise? I once saw a wildlife clip where a snake was eating a live chicken, but stopped for a long rest in the middle of it, leaving the bird sort of half in, half out of the jaws. The chicken veered between shock, which gave the appearance of calm, and distressingly grim bouts of flailing. Though it wasn’t wearing the Facemask of Shame and trying to talk about its vaccine rollout, I did find myself reminded of it this week. Of course, in tribute to Johnson’s gift for political escapology, David Cameron once called Johnson a “greased piglet”. But as David well knows, even pigs get defiled by reality in the end. Speaking of swine, there has been a huge amount to be amused by amid the horror show. It seems pause has currently been pressed on something called the pork pie plot, which must be a relief to the prime minister. I’m not sure Boris Johnson could handle the truly hilarious self-realisation of getting to the Reichenbach Falls and discovering his worthy foe was … hang on, let me get my monocle … ah yes, Gary Sambrook. “Bugger off, Gary – I’m expecting Sherlock Holmes, not some 32-year-old Freemason no one’s ever heard of.” And more on the generational comedy in a bit. We know how bad things are because Johnson keeps saying that the public just wants him to get on with the job. If you ever hear a politician say “I think what people really want to see is us getting on with the job,” you know that what people actually want to see is that guy, specifically, being made to fight a hippo in a pit. Ideally a hippo with tetanus. For now, a range of outcomes remains on the table/in the pit. Some are suggesting that mooted Tory leadership rule changes mean Johnson could stay in post “on probation”. Or, to put it differently, we’d have a prime minister who’s out on a tag. At least he’d get more value out of his Downing Street flat refurbishment that way. Bear in mind this hadn’t been started in November 2020 and ended up costing him at least £142,000, so the Johnsons are currently looking at the best part of four hundred quid per day of use. In the meantime, we’re at the timeworn stage of the biennial Tory Hunger Games when the focus falls on the likes of chief whip Mark Spencer and 1922 Committee chairman Graham Brady. I do enjoy all these burly men, who look as if they drive an S-class Mercedes and would get disproportionately furious if you parked in the wrong field at the Young Farmers’ Ball. Anyway, a lively week. Christian Wakeford is having a medical at Labour. Half the Tory party are acting like they’ve woken up after a midsummer night’s dream and can’t BELIEVE they’ve been involved in donkey porn. The other half would very much like you to know that policemen are getting younger. One report put the average age of plot leaders at 34, and many older Tories are Simply Not Having It on that basis alone. As one raged on Wednesday: “This isn’t like changing your brand of iPod, or your trainers.” Take it easy, Grandpa. Also: what’s an iPod? Warming to their theme, this anonymous elder fumed: “It’s not alright to have this fucked up by a lot of kids.” Quite. You can’t win anything with kids – a line first uttered when the Bishop Auckland MP Dehenna Davison was two, which certainly puts things into perspective. By now you’ll be getting the point, though, and if Nadine Dorries were any quicker on her feet, she’d have been out there screaming about Tory MPs being millennial snowflakes. But it feels telling that it’s this generation who are complaining about the whips’ intimidation of them. Finally, a working definition of levelling up – it’s getting up in some red-waller’s grill and showering them with spittle and the words, “I swear to God, if you don’t save the fat twat I will LEVEL YOU RIGHT UP!” The whips deny all this, but 34-year-old Tory chair William Wragg kicked off Thursday’s constitutional affairs committee session asking his colleagues to call the police on the prime minister and his henchmen for blackmail. Alas, as far as Westminster goes, the Met only investigates future crimes. I suppose you could get a private investigator to look at it for you, but honestly. Forget it, William – it’s Chinatown. Let’s face it, the Houses of Parliament are a place where blackmail is not just fully licensed but expected; where MPs formally found to have sexually harassed a number of their staff still come to work; where you basically do your own bullying investigations. You would call the Palace of Westminster lawless, were it not for the fact it makes literally all the laws of the land. And yet, Conservatives who have spent the past few years honking delightedly that there has been a political realignment have failed to understand that there may just have been a generational one too. The old guard really have internalised some ridiculously abusive behaviour. For decades, many politicians were unable to reach orgasm with their researchers or child’s nanny without their minds immediately racing ahead to whatever ghastly aye vote the whips would eventually extract from them in hush payment. For some, the response has become Pavlovian – even without the presence of a researcher or au pair, male Conservative backbenchers now become aroused every time they hear the division bell. To these deeply damaged, never-did-me-any-harm generations, the actions of the Pork Pies must seem outrageously insouciant. The plotters are apparently now discussing releasing phone recordings and WhatsApp messages from the whips – “the receipts”, in the parlance of the times. It reminds me of that Simpsons episode where some old buffer is sniffing, “I must say that in our day we didn’t talk like that to our elders,” only for Bart to shrug and say: “Well, this is my day, and we do.” You keep hearing allies of Boris Johnson – Boris Johnson! – lambast these youngsters for disloyalty and disrespect for political conventions. To which the only reasonable rejoinder is: “lol can I get a quote about the kettle from the pot?!” It must be said Johnson has seen “no evidence” of intimidatory behaviour. Then again, the PM saw no evidence of a party in 40 people gathering round trestle tables of food and booze. If even a quarter of the claimed threats end up being backed by documentary proof, Mark Spencer and his operation could end up looking like the least appealing whips this millennium, which is quite impressive, considering the silver medallist was played by Kevin Spacey. So there we are – it really is the most fantastic country. Don’t call it a banana republic unless you want to give the Queen her second apology inside a week. Settle on banana monarchy, and adopt the brace position for the Sunday papers. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistThe MyPillow CEO, Mike Lindell, is facing another defamation lawsuit for promoting his conspiracy theory that the 2020 election was rigged against Donald Trump. Smartmatic, a UK-based voting machine company, filed a lawsuit against Lindell on Tuesday claiming that Lindell espoused lies about the company switching votes from Trump to Joe Biden in order to better sell his products. “Crazy like a fox. Mike Lindell knows exactly what he is doing, and it is dangerous,” Smartmatic said in the lawsuit, filed to a federal court in Minnesota. “Lindell intentionally stoked the fires of xenophobia and party-divide for the noble purpose of selling his pillows.” The company noted that the MyPillow brand was “a ubiquitous feature” and was “strategically placed” during his media appearances. Lindell is already facing a $1.3bn lawsuit from Dominion, another voting machine company, that was filed last February. In August, a federal judge gave the green light for the lawsuit against Lindell to move forward to a trial. Smartmatic is seeking unspecified monetary damages in its suit. Multiple investigations into the 2020 election have found no evidence of the widespread voter fraud that Lindell and other Trump allies have been claiming. Lindell has spent the last year advancing his conspiracy theory, funding a three-week bus tour and a three-day “cyber symposium” on the election. In response to Smartmatic’s lawsuit, Lindell said he was “excited” to present evidence that he has against the company. “They’re guilty. They’ve attacked us and were part of the biggest crime in history against our country. And they’re going to all go to prison,” Lindell told Business Insider. Lindell also pointed out that he had lost more than $80m after large retailers dropped his product and that he had spent $30m of his own money trying to prove his election fraud theories. In addition to Smartmatic’s lawsuit, the state of Idaho on Tuesday sent Lindell a cease-and-desist letter ordering him to remove false statements about the state’s election from his website. The state, which voted for Trump in the 2020 election, also billed Lindell $6,558.83 to cover the cost the state spent refuting Lindell’s claims. Despite the multiple lawsuits that he faces, Lindell is still actively promoting his theories on the 2020 election. Most recently, Lindell was seen on a conservative media site saying that he had “enough evidence to put everybody in prison for life, 300 and some million people”, though 159 million people voted in the 2020 election.Meat Loaf’s songs were so inherently cinematic – the hysterical melodrama of I’d Do Anything For Love (But I Won’t Do That), the three-act sex-comedy of Paradise By the Dashboard Light, the biker-movie wildness of Bat Out of Hell – that they seemed to emerge not from the speakers but from a rowdy drive-in or a tumbledown picture palace. Perhaps that explains why he never found (or went looking for) the sort of distinctive movie role that would have decanted his persona on to the screen like David Bowie in The Man Who Fell to Earth, Madonna in Desperately Seeking Susan or Prince in Purple Rain. A single signature movie might have over-egged the Meat Loaf, or else looked measly next to songs that felt like all-night film shows. If any performance distilled his essence, it was the one he gave in The Rocky Horror Picture Show in 1975. His first major role, it came two years before the release of Bat Out of Hell and feels now like a taster for that album. As the biker Eddie, he roars out of the deep freeze and into the pristine laboratory of Dr Frank-N-Furter (Tim Curry) and his guests (Christopher Biggins among them), fouling up the place with his uncouth manner and nasty exhaust fumes. Bellowing out Hot Patootie (Bless My Soul) and parping on his saxophone, he introduces some grubby animal magnetism into the air of camp debauchery. It doesn’t last long: Frank-N-Furter kills him with a pick-axe. The singer’s most prominent role was in Alan Rudolph’s likable 1980 comedy Roadie, where he plays the title character – a big lug largely oblivious to music (he thinks Alice Cooper is a woman) who becomes the best roadie in the world. The film is peppered with cameos from musical stars: Cooper, Roy Orbison, the whole of Blondie. That same two-tier system, with Meat Loaf as a character surrounded by music-industry colleagues playing themselves, was in operation again in the 1992 comedy Wayne’s World, directed by Penelope Spheeris and co-written by its star, Mike Myers. Cooper played himself once more, condescending to be worshipped by the goofy heroes, Wayne (Myers) and Garth (Dana Carvey), while Meat Loaf was cast as a bouncer named Tiny. Not a little odd given that Wayne and Garth, high on the operatic pomp of Bohemian Rhapsody, would surely have been Bat Out of Hell devotees to boot. It was the same story in another music-laden film with “World” in the title. In Spice World: The Movie, released five years later, Elton John and Bob Geldof got to play themselves while Meat Loaf – possibly in homage to Roadie – drives a tour bus. He does at least get to smuggle in the title of one of his biggest hits. Those Spice Girls, he says, he’d do anything for them. But clean the toilets? He won’t do that. There was an essential earthiness to Meat Loaf’s persona that allowed him to play these blue-collar parts without it seeming bizarre that a man responsible for one of the biggest-selling albums of all time was dressing like a teamster. There may have been trouble off-screen – the fights with his Bat Out of Hell songwriter Jim Steinman, the bankruptcy, the well-documented volatility – but it didn’t seep into the performances. Other highlights included Leap of Faith (1992), which marked a move into drama for Steve Martin as a faith healer and co-starred a young Philip Seymour Hoffman, and David Fincher’s Fight Club (1999), where Meat Loaf played a man whose high oestrogen levels give him breasts. Unlike his co-stars in that macho hothouse, he kept his shirt on. A TV movie based on his life, Meat Loaf: To Hell and Back, was directed in 2000 by Jim McBride, who also made the Jerry Lee Lewis biopic Great Balls of Fire! A Meat Loaf movie seems by-the-by, however, when all the cinematic grandeur you need is right there in the records.For the past six months, our three-year-old son has been showing clear favouritism towards me. My partner finds it really upsetting and was recently devastated when my son blankly told him he loves mummy more than he loves daddy. We have another baby due any day now, so I try to comfort my partner by explaining that it’s probably normal behaviour for his age and is likely to be related to the changes that we are going through as a family, but he still gets extremely hurt by it. I feel constantly caught in the middle, which is exhausting and frustrating. I don’t know whether to try to talk to my son about it, or whether to reassure my partner, who is very sensitive and feels he is being rejected. Is my son’s behaviour normal and is there anything we can or should do about it? How can I best support my partner through this? Your son’s behaviour is completely normal and, to a certain extent, so is your partner’s. We all want to be liked, especially by our children, and to feel that we aren’t can tap into something very young in us. I contacted child and adolescent psychotherapist Valentina Levi, whose first reaction was to reassure you that your son’s behaviour is “not worrying at all, but very typical, developmentally”. At this age, children start to realise they are separate entities to their parents and that can cause a lot of anxiety. The “terrible twos” (I know your son is three but it’s a phase that can go on!) are often mislabelled because, actually, children are expressing big emotions – the only way they know how with a limited vocabulary – and not being naughty or difficult. If it’s “terrible” for anyone, it’s for the child who is finding their place in the world. Children also start to understand that their parents have a life that separate from theirs. It’s your husband’s reaction that we need to look at a bit more closely. He is, after all, the other adult. While his reaction is understandable, you describe it as “extreme”. If he’s feeling pushed out, it’s because the intimacy between a mother and her child can feel very excluding, even if it’s not intended that way. “What is it that’s making your husband feel wounded?” asked Levi. “Is it making him think about something in his own history or does something else feel unbalanced between the three of you?” It may be worth looking at what this brings up in you, too. Levi recommended that your husband spend some one-on-one time with his son; after all, he probably will have to do this when the new baby comes along. “This is really important to secure a really good relationship between father and son in preparation for the baby’s arrival.” When the new baby is born, I recommend that you also spend time alone with your son to help him feel he hasn’t lost you. My other top tip is to call the new baby “your sister/brother” rather than “the baby”, as this connects it to him. And, of course, you must never tell him he has to love his brother or sister. It’s important not to let your son know he can upset his father because that’s a heavy burden for a child. Levi recommended saying something simple like: “Sometimes you might feel like that but ultimately we/I think you do love Daddy.” That way you can confirm your son’s feeling, but reassure him that ultimately nothing catastrophic has happened. • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.If you buy whisky only once a year for Burns Night, you might be in for a shock when scouring the shelves for your favourite brand: a 16-year-old Lagavulin, for example, now costs about £70. You can get the sweeter, less complex eight-year-old – a sort of Lagavulin-lite, if you will – for about £57, but the 12-year-old is now a £129.49 special release these days. Granted, you can still pick up own-label whiskies and household names such as Whyte &amp; Mackay and Famous Grouse for about £20 (prices vary hugely, so it’s worth shopping around), but go for more upmarket “expressions”, and you’ll pay a good deal more. Johnnie Walker’s Black Label, for instance, is £20 in Asda at the time of writing (and £30 at Sainsbury’s), but confuse it with Blue Label, and could find yourself shelling out over 150 quid. The whisky market has become all about what is euphemistically called premiumisation – ie, making it much more expensive. That’s partly about rarity: old casks are finite, which makes them highly collectable and a good investment at a time when interest rates have been at a historic low. The average per-bottle price last year was £426.58, according to Rare Whisky 101 (which, incidentally, categorises anything under £1,000 as “more affordable”). Market leader Johnnie Walker’s Pittyvaich, for example, from its Ghost and Rare range of bottlings from closed distilleries, fetches between £229 and £275, which makes the bottles in today’s pick look comparatively reasonable. Macallan, which has long been a collector’s item, fetches many times that for its new Red Collection, which ranges from £11,300-£65,500. The other big driver of whisky prices are the increasingly sophisticated oak treatments currently in vogue. There’s a fashion for unusual finishes, such as the three different kinds of barrels used to make the Isle of Raasay’s single malt, and including the on-trend chinquapin, a species of white American oak (that’s something to drop into conversation with a whisky geek). That said, there is value to be had, if you look for it. I recently came across the Australian-owned Bladnoch, whose head distiller used to work for Macallan and whose excellent sherry and bourbon cask-aged Vinaya (46.7%) is currently on offer for £38.99 at House of Malt, making it quite a bit cheaper than those produced by his alma mater. I also like the Pure Scot in today’s pick, which is a timely reminder of just how good a blend – and a modest ABV – can be. Five special-occasion drams for Burns Night Ardbeg Wee Beastie five-year-old Islay single malt £38 Tesco (or £33 with a Clubcard), 47.4%. Who could resist a bottle with a name like this? Full-throttle, iodiny Islay. anCnoc Highland single malt 12-year-old £32.05 Master of Malt, 40%. A more delicate, restrained style of malt, redolent of heather honey. Pure Scot Signature Blended Scotch Whisky £32.99 House of Malt, £39.95 Master of Malt, 40%. Rich, characterful, and with a lovely, caramelised pear fruitiness that reminds you of the virtues of a blend. Isle of Raasay Hebridean single malt R-02 £48.95 The Whisky Exchange, 46.4%. Less peaty than an Islay, but intriguingly complex thanks to the clever use of different Bordeaux and American whisky casks. One of my favourite whiskies of 2021. Glen Marnoch 12-year-old Speyside single malt £19.99 Aldi, 40%. A classic, crowd-pleasing, award-winning whisky that does exactly what it says on the tin and is hard to beat for value. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comThe creator of reality TV shows including The Voice and Big Brother has been accused of victim-blaming by his company’s female employees after accusations of widespread sexual abuse of contestants on the original Dutch version of The Voice. In a full-page advert in the Dutch newspaper Algemeen Dagblad, a group of employees at the production company Talpa Media castigated its founder, John De Mol, for suggesting that women as well as men had lessons to learn from a scandal that has gripped the country this week and prompted the broadcaster RTL to take Friday’s episode of The Voice of Holland off air. Following a deluge of allegations of abuse made against men on the show, De Mol, 66, said in an interview: “Do not wait. Do not be afraid. You have to open your mouth. Only then can we help you … Women apparently have a kind of shame, I don’t know what it is, but I would like to delve into it.” In response, an advert was published in Friday’s newspaper that said: “Dear John, it’s not the women. Greetings, the women of your company.” In an accompanying statement the group of employees wrote of their “amazement and shame” at De Mol’s comments. It “says a lot about a culture change that is needed within the company, but also in the media world and society,” the statement continued. “And certainly at more large companies where these kinds of thinking errors are still made by men in power. “Women’s behaviour is not the problem. And not the solution either. This statement is of course also for all other victims of sexually transgressive behaviour in the workplace (not just at Talpa), to encourage them.” On Friday night, De Mol said he had been “moved” by the advert and had spoken to the women behind it to “understand this anger and disappointment”. He added: “I now understand that, contrary to my good intentions, I have failed to take into account the fact that I, completely unintentionally, gave the impression that I was putting the blame on women. It has become clear to me now that women will not come forward if the culture in a company is not perceived as being sufficiently safe. I blame myself for the fact that this is apparently the case in my company, and I am 100% committed to changing this.” Talpa Media is run by De Mol but has been owned by ITV since 2015. The Voice of Holland was suspended before Thursday’s broadcast of a documentary on the YouTube channel Boos, which translates as “angry”, and is run by the public broadcasting company BNNVARA. In the documentary, dozens of anonymous women alleged that high-profile men on The Voice had sexually harassed, abused and assaulted them. A spokesperson for ITV Studios said the company was “shocked and dismayed” by the allegations but declined to comment on De Mol’s interview. She said: “Our utmost priority is to provide a safe and supportive environment for everyone who takes part in or works on our shows and there is zero tolerance at ITV Studios for the type of behaviour highlighted in the show. “After ITV Studios received notice from Boos of this behaviour last week we moved quickly to launch an external investigation to fully understand what happened.” Netherlands authorities, including the justice minister, subsequently urged anyone who had been a victim of sexual abuses on the programme to file a complaint with the police so that they and the Public Prosecution Service could investigate The rapper Ali Bouali, 40, a coach on the show who goes by the name Ali B, was accused by one former contestant of raping her when she appeared on the programme as an 18-year-old hopeful. In a statement, he responded: “There are now two anonymous reports that are presented with a lot of fury as news. That is unjustified. I cannot publicly defend myself against this. Nevertheless, it is clear to me that the Public Prosecution Service will in both cases have to decide to dismiss [the allegations]. I am not guilty of what I am accused of in the claims.” Before the broadcast of the allegations, Jeroen Rietbergen, 50, the show’s bandleader, stood down after admitting to having had “sexual contact” with women on the show and sending sexually oriented messages on an app. Rietbergen, until recently the partner of De Mol’s sister, the TV presenter Linda de Mol, said he was not aware of wrongdoing at the time of the alleged incidents. Six other women have made complaints about the singer Marco Borsato, three of them contestants on The Voice and three on The Voice Kids. Borasto denies any wrongdoing. De Mol, who initially made his fortune through development of the reality television series Big Brother, spoke of his disappointment that the HR procedures in his company had not protected the contestants. ITV bought Talpa Media seven years ago for £355m, with further payments dependent on future performance, up to a total potential cost of £920,000. The company has created 75 shows in more than 180 countries. The Voice format, in which singers are selected via public auditions and then coached by professionals before a competition for a recording contract, has been aired in 50 countries. Anouk Teeuwe, a female singer who represented the Netherlands at the Eurovision song contest in 2013, said she had quit as a coach on the programme. “The news is so saddening and a major disappointment,” she said. “I know enough. I’ve decided I don’t want to return to The Voice. It’s a corrupt mess. I don’t want to work at a place where men have, for years, abused their positions and where others have chosen to keep the misconduct silent and look the other way. “You just can’t do that. You’ve got structural issues when you do that. I do not wish to be part of such behaviour, that’s just not me. So therefore, I will not return to The Voice of Holland.” • This article was amended on 26 January 2022 to include mention of the official call for complainants to lodge reports with the police.A year into his term, the Biden administration is in shambles. Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema’s support for the legislative filibuster has killed the Democratic voting rights effort. Biden’s Build Back Better plan, a massive reconciliation package containing initiatives on issues from the climate crisis to childcare is, for now, dead in the water; Manchin and Sinema will determine whether any of its provisions survive in attenuated form. Immigration reform and healthcare reform, both central to Democratic intra-party debates during the 2020 primaries, have fallen entirely off the radar. The US supreme court may overturn Roe v Wade in the coming months. The latest wave of the coronavirus pandemic is still ravaging the country thanks not only to Covid denialists and vaccine skeptics on the right, but an administration that has struggled to keep its promises on easy access to tests. Abroad, Biden’s courageous withdrawal from Afghanistan ⁠– a kept promise even the president’s harshest critics on the left were willing to give him credit for ⁠– has been marred by economic sanctions that have left 23 million Afghans without enough to eat, and the media is already itching to blame Biden for a Russian invasion of Ukraine. None of this is to say that Biden’s first year in office has been bereft of real accomplishments or positive press. But neither the bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act nor the American Rescue Plan ⁠– the president’s two great legislative victories thus far ⁠– have resonated with the electorate. Biden now holds the second lowest approval rating of any president at this point in their term ⁠– the record is still held by his predecessor, Donald Trump. It’s clear across the polls that voters are faulting Biden for inflation and a supposed inattention to the economy. But elevated inflation has been a global phenomenon ⁠– and here, one of the proximate causes has been the strength of an economic recovery boosted by the American Rescue Plan. Really, Biden has been focused on the economy to the exclusion of nearly everything else on the Democratic agenda ⁠– his recent pivot to voting rights came only after the collapse of negotiations on the Build Back Better plan which, in its initial form, was easily among the most ambitious economic packages ever proposed in Washington. Messaging on the plan plainly hasn’t worked. The main individual components of Build Back Better are far more popular than the overall package ⁠– late last year, Politico and Morning Consult found that 47% of registered voters supported the bill, while increasing funding for affordable housing and expanding Medicaid to cover hearing services registered 65% and 75% support respectively. That’s not terribly surprising given that voters have probably heard much more about the intractability of negotiations over the plan in Congress than they have about the plan’s substance. While Manchin and Sinema bear most of the blame for this, some commentators have also taken Biden himself to task for overpromising on his legislative agenda and deviating from the centrism he’d been known for. “The president should remember that he won as a moderate and a unifier,” the New York Times’ Bret Stephens warned on Tuesday. “Biden would do better to move on from defeat and draft legislation with bipartisan appeal.” But as these critics know full well, there’s extremely little that both parties still agree on, and even modest bipartisan proposals like universal gun background checks have been doomed to failure by the legislative filibuster, which forces the 50-member Democratic caucus to win over not just some, but at least 10 Republicans to pass anything besides budget reconciliation. Biden’s supporters and his centrist critics both have an interest in framing him as a visionary. But he isn’t one – the enlarged agenda the centrists disdain has been the fruit of internal party pressure and the sheer scale of our public health and economic crises. There’s plenty of evidence that Biden still favors moderation and restraint, especially in the administration’s executive actions and, on certain issues, executive inaction ⁠– there, the White House has spent the year frustrating party activists on issues including student debt, immigration and policing. It is true, though, that Biden has made a slew of extravagant and under-scrutinized promises. Like his campaign, Biden’s inaugural address last year focused less on making the case for a set of specific policies than on making the case for Joe Biden as our spiritual savior. “Today, on this January day,” he told the crowd, “my whole soul is in this: bringing America together, uniting our people, and uniting our nation.” Here, Biden’s failure should be obvious even to Americans who don’t follow the news closely. The tenor of political debate hasn’t softened; our substantive political divides remain just as deep. The notion that American unity was within Biden’s capacity to achieve was simply a lie ⁠– one of many he has told about the state of our country and where it’s going. During the campaign, he assured voters that the Republican party would reach an epiphany and develop a willingness to work broadly with Democrats once Trump left the White House. In what amounted to open mockery of that claim, Mitt Romney ⁠– widely lauded in the press and within the Democratic party as one of the Republican party’s last voices of reason ⁠– compared Biden’s election reform advocacy to Trump’s post-election shenanigans earlier this month. “President Biden goes down the same tragic road taken by President Trump,” he said in a US Senate floor speech, “casting doubt on the reliability of American elections.” In his press conference on Wednesday, Biden insisted he hadn’t a clue that he’d face this kind of nonsense and opposition from the right. Believing him does no credit to his intelligence. This was another lie, one uttered to advance the strategy Democrats generally turn to when they’re down ⁠– projecting indignation over Republican obstruction while hoping, in this case, that voters don’t notice the Democratic party controls government and can pass whatever it likes provided the party is unified. Biden’s current standing gives us reason to doubt this will work in the November midterms. So does electoral history ⁠– incumbent parties tend to do poorly in them. None of that routine flux, the product of what political scientists call “thermostatic public opinion”, has produced the meaningful change many frustrated Americans hope to bring about at the polls. Inequality and corporate power are growing. Decades of rhetoric and poor policies have failed to bring about much progress on issues from healthcare to education. And both immediate crises like the coronavirus pandemic and long-term challenges like the climate crisis seem beyond our capacity to address. That impotence has been the product of our institutions and the myths that sustain faith in them. Biden has taken a belated and tentative interest in reworking the Senate’s rules; opposition from Manchin and Sinema and the electoral biases of our system have not only hobbled his agenda, but also ensured that Democrats won’t be able to govern on their own again in Washington for many years to come should they lose their governing majority in November. It’s not obvious that there’s anything Biden can do to save the party from that fate. But it’s clear what moral leadership demands from him now. Our federal order is strangling us. He should say so. He should admit too that conflict and dissensus will always define American society. No other future is available for a country as large, diverse and nominally free as ours. And the achievements we take the most pride in today ⁠– from women’s suffrage to the civil rights movement ⁠– simply would not have been possible if leaders had limited their aspirations to objectives that “brought Americans together”. Naturally, there’s not a chance in hell anything like this will ever pass from Biden’s lips. It’s not savvy and it’s not safe. But it is the truth, and the American people deserve to hear it from someone some day. Osita Nwanevu is a Guardian US columnistLondon NHS hospitals struggling to cope with the Covid-19 pandemic bought £36m of cancer care, cardiology and other services directly from the UK’s largest private healthcare group, HCA, last year. Analysis of monthly public data from NHS trusts, published by the Centre for Health and the Public Interest (CHPI), reveals the extent to which London hospitals have become reliant on private providers, prompting concerns about creeping backdoor privatisation of the health service. “Covid has been very much used as a cover for shrinking NHS care and expanding private healthcare provision,” said Allyson Pollock, a clinical professor of public health at Newcastle University and an honorary professor at University College London. She said the money would be better used to invest in NHS staffing, equipment and expansion. This level of spending by individual NHS trusts was unprecedented for cancer care and cardiology, said CHPI. The spending is over and above the £2bn so far handed over from central NHS budgets to private hospitals during the pandemic. In recent years NHS hospitals have bought extra capacity from private providers for simple procedures such as hip and knee operations, but they have not previously spent large sums outsourcing more complex treatments. HCA said its support had allowed 14,000 complex cardiac and cancer NHS patients to receive the care they needed. Many of them were casualties of the widespread suspension of normal care during the pandemic, as resources were diverted away from many specialisms, including cancer, to treat Covid-19 patients. By outsourcing some of the most pressing cases on their backlog to HCA, trusts ensured that those most in need were cared for. Prior to the pandemic, HCA carried out virtually no work for the NHS. Founded in Nashville, Tennessee, in 1968, and listed on the New York stock exchange, HCA is the largest healthcare company in the world and has more than 30 hospitals and clinics in London and Manchester, with another one due to open in Birmingham this year. CHPI’s research shows the company was the biggest private beneficiary of funds spent on cancer care and cardiology direct from NHS hospital trusts in London between December 2020 and December 2021. The biggest spender was Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS foundation trust, which bought more than £20m of services from HCA. Barts was the second largest spender, with £10m. University College London hospital (UCLH), Imperial College, Chelsea and Westminster, and the Royal Free also paid for HCA services. “The extent to which the private sector is now being used to deliver NHS cancer care services is unprecedented,” said David Rowland, the director of the CHPI. “We estimate it is only likely to grow as the NHS comes under more pressure over the next few months.” HCA said it had chosen not to take part in a deal struck between NHS England and private hospitals this month for up to £525m for reserve beds and staff in case of an Omicron admissions surge. A spokesperson for the firm’s UK arm said: “We can safely provide this level of complex care because of the deep clinical infrastructure we have in our hospitals, which includes the highest levels of intensive care and trained staffing support. We work with NHS trusts on an individual basis and in response to their requests for support.” The fees the London NHS trusts paid to HCA were covered either by NHS England, which has agreed to pay private hospitals £10bn over four years to help tackle its backlog, or from the Treasury-funded elective recovery fund, created last summer to help hospitals recover their levels of activity post pandemic. Guy’s and St Thomas’ said the money had been mainly spent on oncology and cardiology, as waiting lists had risen during the pandemic. A record 6 million people are on NHS waiting lists for routine hospital care in England. A trust spokesperson said: “We have worked with HCA to provide complex elective care from admission to discharge, including surgery and supporting diagnostic services, such as scans, while continuing to maintain urgent and emergency care to Covid and non-Covid patients on our NHS sites.” Barts Health NHS trust mainly bought cardiology and breast cancer surgery services from HCA. A Barts spokesperson said: “The trust has used HCA to enable staff to continue to provide planned care in a separate Covid-free environment while hospitals prioritised urgent and emergency care and Covid-19 patients.” He added that as the pandemic eased, it was likely that Barts would continue to use the private sector to assist with reducing waiting times. UCLH spent almost £3m with HCA last year, buying more than 500 procedures, most of them surgery for breast, head, neck, bladder and stomach cancers. Imperial College Healthcare NHS trust spent £2.6m. Chelsea and Westminster hospital bought nearly £900,000 of services from the company, while the Royal free hospital spent £2,000. Chelsea and Westminster said it used HCA mainly to provide colorectal and gynaecology cancer treatment to patients, primarily between December 2020 and March 2021. “This short-term measure must not become a long-term expediency to running down the NHS in favour of the private sector,” said Colin Hutchinson, the chair of the campaign group Doctors for the NHS. “The principal reason the NHS now needs to make use of the private sector is because of long-term underinvestment.”The second caretaker coming of Duncan Ferguson has turned what would have been a toxic occasion under Rafael Benítez, and a gift for Aston Villa, into one of eager anticipation among Evertonians but a formidable task awaits the Scot all the same. He leads a team devoid of confidence after one win in 13 matches against improving opponents managed by someone well versed in spoiling the mood at Goodison Park, Steven Gerrard, and who has Lucas Digne and Philippe Coutinho at his disposal for good measure. As Chelsea discovered in Ferguson’s only previous home game, however, a raucous Goodison can inspire. Andy Hunter Saturday 12.30pm BT Sport 1 Venue Goodison Park Last season Everton 1 Aston Villa 2 Referee Craig Pawson This season G13 Y48 R1 3.77 cards/game Odds H 7-4 A 17-10 D 40-17 EVERTON Subs from Begovic, Tyrer, Lonergan, Patterson, Kenny, Mykolenko, Branthwaite, Gomes, Gbamin, Gordon, Simms, Dobbin, Tosun, Onyango, Rondón Doubtful None Injured Davies (hamstring, March), Delph (illness, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Iwobi (Africa Cup of Nations), El Ghazi (loan terms) Discipline Y35 R1 Form LWLDLL Leading scorer Gray 5 ASTON VILLA Subs from Steer, Sinisalo, Tuanzebe, Philogene-Bidace, Carney Chukwuemeka, Archer, Young, Targett, Smith, Olsen, Konsa Doubtful Konsa (hip) Injured Nakamba (knee, Apr), Bailey (thigh, unknown) Unavailable Traoré, Trezeguet (both at Africa Cup of Nations) Suspended None Discipline Y43 R1 Form WLWLLD Leading scorer Watkins 5Retailers are bracing themselves after a sharp fall in December spending was expected to be the prelude to a tough year ahead as consumers grapple with the impact of higher taxes and rising energy bills. Hopes of bumper Christmas trading were dashed as the arrival of the Omicron variant prompted a more cautious mood among shoppers and led to a 3.7% monthly drop in retail sales. Although anti-pandemic measures are now being eased across the four countries of the UK, the British Retail Consortium said the problems facing its members were far from over. “Customers face strong headwinds in 2022, with energy prices and national insurance contributions both set to rise”, said Helen Dickinson, the BRC’s chief executive. “The remaining disposable income also faces greater competition from a resurgence in tourism, eating out, sport and live music. Rising inflation is reducing consumer demand while increasing the costs for businesses.” Official figures show that in a key month for retailers, there was an across-the-board slump in spending including food, clothing and footwear, household goods and department stores. Retailers had seen some Christmas spending brought forward to November when a 1% monthly rise was helped by Black Friday bargains. Even so, the December fall was much sharper than the 0.6% drop forecast by the financial markets. Bethany Beckett, a UK analyst at Capital Economics, said: “The huge 3.7% month-on-month fall in retail sales in December was much bigger than we and the consensus had expected and supports our view that the surge in Omicron Covid-19 cases in the run-up to Christmas may have dragged down GDP by 0.5% month on month, if not more.” Beckett added that the 4.7% monthly drop in fuel sales was consistent with people staying at home rather than risking a trip to the high street. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said the monthly fall in the last month of 2021 still left retail sales 2.6% above their pre-pandemic level in February 2020. In 2021 as a whole, the volume of retail sales rose by 5.1%, the highest annual growth since 2004, but the ONS said the figures should be treated with caution because of the fall in high street activity during 2020. Over the three months to December 2021, considered by the ONS to be a better guide to the trend than monthly comparisons, retail sales volumes were down 0.2% on the previous quarter, and 0.9% lower than in the final three months of 2020.Elza Soares stood quietly, a few minutes before being born into music. Engulfed by audience fuss and hullabaloo, another of her competitors had been disqualified from the radio talent show she was attending. It was 1953, and Soares had just one chance to bring home the cash prize – she needed it to help care for her unwell son. She was still a teenager and, once on stage, her oversized, ragged dress would make the audience explode into laughter. “What’s the planet you came from?” asked the host, waiting for the gag’s cue. “I’m from Planet Hunger,” she said. Silence took hold of the venue, and Elza sang for the first time. She never stopped, until her death this week aged 91. Over the decades, the Brazilian artist became a staple for samba, a mainstay of her nation’s songbook and a singer that shared a global pantheon with Ella Fitzgerald and Billie Holiday. Dubbed the “voice of the millennium” by the BBC in 1999, Elza met the Planet Hunger as few did: a Black woman born in Rio’s favelas, who faced down racism, sexism and classism with brilliant verve. “My vocal cords are crooked, just like my life,” Elza said on a TV show in the 90s. Born in 1930, the singer developed her signature move at an early age: a deep, vibrato-like tone that melded melody and percussive hints. The technique, operating in the sweet spot between scat singing and vocal fry, printed a rugged and flexible guttural texture on to her voice. Many tried to draw a connection to Louis Armstrong’s singing style, but she always denied it. Not only were their growling voices performed using different regions of the throat, Elza had never heard of the jazzman before their first encounter in 1962. “He called me daughter,” she revealed years later. The opening track of Elza’s first album, A Bossa Negra (The Black Bossa) from 1961, showcases the singer’s powerful and unrestrained vocals; the up-and-coming act had grown to sound sounds like an experienced performer. She juggles with head and chest voices, and wanders with improvisation in the studio while playing around with individual syllables in a growling solfeggio. Elza kept pushing the boundaries of samba in the years that followed, hopping around its various subgenres. She recorded slow-paced, highly orchestrated samba-canções, danceable sambalanço and sambas de gafieira tracks, top-charting bossa nova songs, and cool samba-jazz standards with the likes of Wilson das Neves – all of that while thriving as a crooner on the live circuit, and a singer on radio and TV. Throughout the 60s, Soares epitomised modernity in Brazil’s national music, helping to open a dialogue within a country that that was looking to build for the future under Juscelino Kubitschek’s presidency. Her airy, upbeat approach grew more complex in the 70s. Soares kept on expanding the samba language, bringing more raucous carnaval-style samba, Afro-oriented songs, and innovations such as the partido-alto subgenre – where soloists and choruses jostle playfully with one another – to her repertoire. Her recording of the song Malandro, for instance, helped popularise Jorge Aragão, one of the greatest partido-alto sambistas in Brazil. But the singer also embraced a sense of melancholy. She had been a child bride at 12 and her first husband died when she was barely out of her teens; after the world-famous footballer Garrincha divorced his wife to become Soares’s second husband, she faced a conservative society’s judging eyes. Garrincha’s alcoholism and abuse would later push Soares to the edge – her mother died in a car accident when he had been driving drunk – and she split with him in early 80s. Despite having showed she was more than just a samba singer or a crooner, and pushing forward the persona of a song interpreter – just look at her bright feature on Caetano Veloso’s 1984 rap song Língua – it took until the late 2010s for Soares to regain the success of her early days. That comeback began in 2000 when, after decades of erratic productions and struggles with debts, she debuted a new show, Dura na Queda – Tough as Nails. Her renewed energy was fuelled by a new generation of artists who had rediscovered her grandiloquent vocals. “She crossed Brazilian music from bossa and samba – she’s a gift to us”, said musician José Miguel Wisnik in a video for Elza’s 90th birthday. The pianist was one of her most important music partners in her later career, and together they released the 2002 blaxploitation-flavoured album Do Cóccix Até O Pescoço. In the last decade, Elza finally rediscovered her musical elan. She became a unique figure, an ancestral oracle who was also a willing pupil; she was praised by artists and a younger audience while going further in experimentation and performance. Elza teamed up with artists from São Paulo’s avant garde in the 2015 opera-samba Mulher do Fim do Mundo. “I am the woman of the end of the world,” she sang. In 2018’s Deus é Mulher, she sings – with palpable fury – about the struggles faced by Black women in Brazilian society and the prejudice against Afro-religions and the LGBTQI+ community, all in the shape of broken-tempo samba songs. Planeta Fome, released in 2019, nods to her early days of Planet Hunger while speaking to the famine that made a comeback to Brazil in recent years. Her last three albums, which form a trilogy, mirror a convoluted country. But they also point to fresh routes in society and music – from fusions of samba with rap, to electronic textures. They are full of passion and drama that Soares drew from her life story, and an unbeatable hunger for disobeying what was prescribed for her. Elza Soares did not just embrace the revolutionary, liberating countercultural spirit in Brazil as the 20th century became the 21st – she was that spirit.New York’s new mayor gets his first paycheck on Friday – and as part of his bid to keep the city “on the forefront of innovation”, he’ll be receiving his wages in cryptocurrency. “New York is the center of the world and we want it to be the center of cryptocurrency and other financial innovations,” Eric Adams said in a press release. But even in the center of the world, trying to live on ethereum or bitcoin might be a struggle. The subway won’t take it, and it’s hard to fit dogecoin in the quarter slot at the laundromat. So what will Adams actually be able to do with his paycheck? Will he be able to eat? Yes. Getting groceries might be difficult – in 2019, Whole Foods began accepting cryptocurrency via an app-based payment system called Flexa, but a customer care representative said on Thursday that the company was not currently taking cryptocurrency. But the vegan mayor might have better luck at restaurants. Yelp allows users to filter for restaurants that accept cryptocurrency – though calls to the spots and visits to their websites suggest some of the claims are inaccurate. He could also use a workaround and purchase a gift card with bitcoin using one of various platforms such as Bitrefill and Fold. That could get him a coffee at Starbucks or an order through DoorDash; it also works for Amazon, Netflix and other companies. (Adams’s cryptocurrency paycheck is itself the result of a workaround, since department of labor regulations require the city of New York to pay employees in dollars. The mayor’s office says the paycheck will “automatically be converted” to cryptocurrency before it is made available to him, using the platform Coinbase.) That means that Adams’s paycheck must first be converted from dollars to cryptocurrency, then be converted to a gift card, and finally be used to buy a smoothie. Efficient! Another trick: he could turn to PayPal, which lets users spend cryptocurrency for transactions (Mastercard has a similar program). But the app first converts the cryptocurrency to actual dollars – creating another pointless cycle and contributing to a system that, according to Cambridge researchers, uses more electricity per year than the country of Argentina. Will he be able to keep the lights on? Probably not without turning to his actual bank account. Con Edison, New York’s enormous electricity and gas utility, does not accept cryptocurrency payments, a representative said. Cryptocurrency does a great job of draining the world of energy, but using it to buy some back appears difficult. Of course, he’ll be living in Gracie Mansion, the New York mayor’s residence – meaning, presumably, he won’t be paying these bills anyway. Nor will he have to worry about whether his landlord accepts bitcoin. Will he be able to get anywhere? Not if he wants to take the subway like a normal New Yorker or any other transportation provided by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. The MTA doesn’t accept cryptocurrency, a spokesperson said. If he gets stuck, Adams might be able to hail an Uber using his paycheck, but it could be a long wait at the corner. Uber’s CEO, Dara Khosrowshahi, indicated in February that he was open to accepting bitcoin in the future, but when is unclear. In the meantime, he could buy an Uber gift card. Will he be able to use the very internet that cryptocurrency depends on? Again, he could have trouble. Verizon Fios, New York’s biggest internet provider, does not appear to offer a cryptocurrency option for online payments. Adams may find himself turning to his pre-mayoral savings if he wants to check the price of bitcoin. So what will he actually do? Adams’s office did not immediately respond to a request for comment. But he may well just “hold on to it as an investment”, says Neeraj Agrawal, communications director at Coin Center, a non-profit focused on cryptocurrency policy. “That has become the more common use of bitcoin these days.” Or, if he’s feeling really financially innovative, he could go totally virtual: it won’t get him a ride on the subway, but he could buy the word “MetroCard” as an NFT for the equivalent of about $30.Anecdotal reports of Covid reinfection in the UK are growing, including people testing positive just weeks apart in December and January, or having had the virus three or even four times. Children are also being seen with reinfections. We take a look at the science behind catching Covid multiple times. What is a reinfection? Reinfection figures tend to refer to the detection of a second, or subsequent, Covid infection, regardless of the variant involved. The risk of reinfection is likely to depend on a range of factors: for example, data suggests it is higher in unvaccinated people and potentially in those whose previous infection was more mild with a lower immune response. It also depends on the variant: one expert said the risk of reinfection with Omicron soon after a first Omicron infection would be lower than Delta followed by Omicron, and how long ago someone was vaccinated. Experts say the dose to which someone is exposed may also be important. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) uses the definition of a possible reinfection as a case 90 days or more after a previous confirmed Covid infection, in part because it excludes those who simply shed the virus for longer after infection. How many reinfections have there been? According to the latest figures for England from the UKHSA, from the start of the pandemic up to 9 January this year there were 425,890 possible reinfections, with 109,936 found in the week ending 9 January, accounting for almost 11% of all cases that week. Very few possible reinfections are “confirmed” as that requires genetic sequencing. What’s more, with few people in the community having access to tests in the first wave, many first infections may not have been counted. “With the combination of being two years into the pandemic, a few rounds of antibody waning, two major waves of immune evasion by Delta and then Omicron, there’s fairly rampant reinfection,” said Danny Altmann, a professor of immunology at Imperial College London. Is it easier to be reinfected with some variants? In short, yes. According to scientists at Imperial College London, after taking into account a host of factors Omicron was associated with somewhere between a 4.38 and 6.63-fold higher risk of reinfection, compared with Delta. The team add that this means protection against catching Covid arising from a previous infection within the past six months has fallen from about 85% before Omicron turned up to somewhere between 0% and 27%. The drop is not surprising given that Omicron has been found to have the ability to dodge the body’s immune responses to a significant degree. Do Omicron reinfections happen in a shorter space of time? Potentially, yes. UKHSA data shows that for cases with a specimen date between 1 November and 29 December 2021 there were 2,855 probable reinfections 29 to 89 days after a previous infection – although some of these may reflect ongoing detection from an initial infection. While the UKHSA notes it is difficult to directly compare the situation between variants – as there are many important changing factors at play, including overall levels of immunity in the population – Omicron’s immunity-dodging powers are likely to play a role in these reinfections. It is not yet clear how well immune responses to Omicron protect against a second Omicron infection, or infections with new variants. “I would expect the risk of a second Omicron infection is a lot lower than the risk of Omicron following Delta after all you have developed antibodies to the actual Omicron spike protein,” said Paul Hunter, a professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia. Why has my child had Covid twice this winter? That could well be due to different variants: according to data from the Office for National Statistics released in December, school-age children with Covid at that time were much less likely to have Omicron than Covid-positive adults. In other words, a previous recent infection could well have been Delta, while their latest is Omicron. A UKHSA spokesperson said: “Data shows that those testing positive for coronavirus between 29 and 89 days of a prior infection accounts for a small proportion of all reinfections. Many of these shorter interval reinfections are likely to be school-age children because they had the highest levels of infection in September and October, just before Omicron emerged.” Are reinfections milder? That may seem logical given the body’s prior immune response, and Hunter notes data suggests the viral load in reinfections is lower than in primary infections, suggesting the disease may, in general, be less severe. However, the severity of a reinfection depends on many factors, including the variant involved and a person’s vaccination status. ONS data suggests that when the Alpha variant became dominant, symptoms were less common for reinfections – but this reversed when Delta became dominant. When Omicron became dominant, data suggests people were just as likely to have Covid symptoms in their second infection as their first infection. “There’s no shortage of reinfections, some pretty severe, although not requiring hospitalisations,” said Altmann. How many times can people get Covid? Among those who have had Covid twice are the politicians Kier Starmer and Matt Hancock, while there have also been reports of people having a Covid infection three or even four times, some just a few weeks apart. The UKHSA do not break down reinfections by episode, although they have identified some possible third reinfections. What is clear is that the longer Covid is with us, the more reinfections a person may potentially experience.With every new day in the tennis world, the rise of Carlos Alcaraz becomes even more inevitable. He is the youngest player in the top 100, the youngest to win 30 matches in a season since Rafael Nadal many moons ago, and during last year’s breakout season he became the youngest US Open quarter-finalist in the Open era, winning a title and earning his first grand slam seeding for good measure. But on Friday evening, after four long and exhausting hours of play, Matteo Berrettini, the seventh seed, played the role of a seasoned veteran as he drew on every inch of his growing wealth of experience to delay the Spaniard for at least one more tournament. Berrettini had led by two sets, only to see his lead crumble to an 18- year-old who played without fear or favour, but he eventually recovered to win 6-2, 7-6 (3), 4-6, 2-6, 7-6 (5). “I was telling myself that the guy that would have won the match was the guy that wanted it more. So I guess I wanted it more,” said Berrettini. “But this is just a sentence I was telling myself to feel ready, and I think in the end it’s about fighting and trying and do the right things. I really fought hard. That’s what I think made the difference.” Alcaraz, seeded 31st, has already established himself as one of the brightest young players in the game, boasting athleticism, dynamic weapons and relentless competitiveness. The homework for him in the off-season was to improve his serve, one of the obvious weaker points in his game, and to continue working on his physicality. He has indeed started the season placing his serve far better and the sleeveless shirt he opted to wear in Australia just so happens to demonstrate the clear physical gains he has made. It was the youngster who soared early, seizing control of points with his forehand and suffocating Berrettini in his early service games. He generated five break points early in the opening set, but Berrettini matched them with excellent serving. Alcaraz’s commitment to dominating with his forehand soon became his weakness as he over-pressed and sprayed errors as Berrettini, beaten finalist at Wimbledon last year, moved towards a two-set lead. “I was feeling confident. In the third, there were a couple of games I was 0-30 and I felt the momentum was on my side, and then tennis,” he said, clicking his fingers. “It’s like this.” Alcaraz worked his way back into the match by demonstrating his improved serve, finding his feet through increasingly smooth holds. Then he began to overwhelm Berrettini by pinning the Italian into his backhand corner and dishing out forehand winners. He finished with 23 from that side in total, 12 more than the Italian. A brilliant final set filled with effective serving and one sublime hold from Alcaraz, saving a match point at 5-6, followed. They convened in a super-tie-break – first to 10 and clear by two points – where Berrettini’s composure, experience and supreme serving finally made a difference. As he burst ahead and never looked back, Alcaraz double-faulted on match point. “I’m very proud of the performance today,” said Alcaraz. “I mean, it was my first time two sets down, and then be able to come back like the way I did. I gave everything on the court, so that’s the thing that I want to do, give everything on the court and I’m very proud the way that I did.” Berrettini, meanwhile, only had many positive words for his young opponent: “He’s unbelievable,” he said. “I think at his age I didn’t even have an ATP point. He’s impressive, he can only improve playing matches like this. He showed everybody his potential. Luckily today I won but, really, congrats to him.” The veteran on Friday, at 25, Berrettini is young himself and part of a generation still just settling at the top of the sport. His own pathway remains unique. When the likes of Alexander Zverev and Andrey Rublev sped up towards the top of the game from their youth, Berrettini took his time and slowly caught up. While his limitations are more glaring than some, his backhand in particular, he makes up for it with his steadfast commitment to nurturing his strengths; serve, forehand, backhand slice. He remains a contender in Melbourne. As the youngest player in the men’s draw narrowly lost, the second oldest, also a Spaniard, kept himself in the fight. Rafael Nadal faced his first top-50 opponent since his six-month injury layoff and he passed another test in his comeback, defeating Karen Khachanov, the 28th seed, 6-3, 6-2, 3-6, 6-1, to reach the fourth round. “It’s a very special week for me,” Nadal said. “Tonight I played against a great player. It’s been my best match without a doubt since I came back.”You knew it was going to be a good day when jam roly-poly was served for pudding at school. It’s a proper comfort dish, with just the right level of stodge for a cold January day. I wouldn’t have gone near a marmalade version when I was younger, but that tangy bitterness is a taste I’m glad to have since acquired. Hot custard really is the best sidekick for this, so don’t hold back. Marmalade roly-poly Prep 30 min Cook 50 min Serves 6-8 45g cold unsalted butter, diced, plus extra for greasing 2 tbsp demerara sugar 210g plain flour, plus extra for dusting 2 tsp baking powder 50g caster sugar Zest of 1 orange A pinch of salt 60g suet (or vegetarian suet) 110ml milk 220g marmalade Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Put a roasting tray on the bottom shelf of the oven and half-fill it with hot water. Take a large sheet of foil and lay a sheet of baking paper on top of it. Grease the paper with butter, then sprinkle the demerara sugar over the top and set aside. Put the flour, baking powder, caster sugar, orange zest and salt in a bowl. Add the butter and use your fingertips to rub it into the flour until the mixture looks like coarse breadcrumbs. Stir in the suet. Make a well in the centre, pour in the milk, then use a table knife to stir the mix until it comes together into a soft dough. Turn out on to a lightly floured surface and give it a brief knead to bring it together. Roll the dough into a roughy 25cm x 30cm rectangleand spread the marmalade on top, leaving a little border around the edges. Starting from one shorter side of the rectangle, roll up the dough like a swiss roll, then pinch both ends to seal and carefully lift and place seam side down on top of the buttered baking paper. Wrap up the roly-poly in the paper and foil, and twist the ends like a cracker to seal; don’t wrap it too tightly, though, because the pudding will expand as it cooks. Put the wrapped roly-poly directly on the oven shelf above the roasting tin and bake for 50-55 minutes, until firm; don’t worry if some of the marmalade leaks out. Remove and leave to cool for five minutes, then unwrap, sliceg and serve with hot custard. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoLast month, it was announced that rail fares would rise in March – again. But why are UK train tickets so expensive? I asked Cat Hobbs, the founder of We Own It, a group campaigning for public ownership of the railways. I recently got married in Scotland, and it took eight hours to drive my bickering family up there. It was cheaper to do that – and pay for the therapy afterwards – than all take the train. Why do some experts say our trains are cheap? Some of our advance tickets are cheap, but our walk-on fares are expensive. A ticket from London Paddington to Bristol in 1995 was £28.50. If the price had increased with inflation, it would be double – but it can go as high as £115. The 2011 McNulty report found that the UK’s fares cost roughly 30% more than those of other railways in Europe. And our government is obsessed with passengers footing the bill. The government is quite ideologically driven … Absolutely. Rail is a natural monopoly. When you’re standing on a platform, you don’t have consumer choice. We need profits reinvested. The rolling stock companies are a scandal. Rolling what? Rolling stock companies own the physical trains and lend their “sets” out to operators. During the pandemic, rolling stock companies have paid out a billion pounds to their shareholders. Why are our costs so high? It’s the mess of our system: too many companies, arguing over who should be fined if a train is late. And the government refuses to invest properly. At one point during the pandemic, passenger numbers dropped to 1872 levels. The numbers haven’t recovered, but the government’s talking about cutting rail spending. Train travel is already unreliable; it will get worse. Do British passengers effectively subsidise European rail travel? Yes. Ironically, some companies introduced through privatisation are state owned. So Arriva is owned by the German state and Abellio the Dutch. They make a profit in Britain and return it to their own countries’ railways. You know, when I get interviewed, people always ask about the soggy sandwiches of British Rail. Wait, we had sandwiches on trains? So cool! Sorry to be the 90s kid, but the only sandwich on my trains is a half-eaten Pret … I only remember British Rail a little, certainly not enough to assess the sandwiches, but it was chronically underfunded. Since then, the government’s actually increased railway spend but it’s been flowing into the pockets of shareholders. If we had a spare billion, I’m sure we could do better sandwiches. The public want the railway back, right? Yes – 64% of us do, and the majority of Conservative voters. Boris Johnson is talking about rail reform – they’re calling the replacement for Network Rail “Great British Railways” – but it’s the same privatised system repackaged. Let me guess, a shiny new logo? There is! The government will be in charge of planning, but it’ll still be private companies implementing it, and they’ll sent profits to shareholders. And if they don’t make any profit, the government will bail them out. Private companies want steady revenue, they don’t want to innovate. Why on earth can’t we just do public ownership?Wealthy clients and oligarchs from autocratic countries are using prestigious London law firms to intimidate and silence journalists, MPs have said. A cross-party group of MPs called on ministers to introduce legislation to prevent deep-pocketed individuals and powerful corporations from misusing the legal system to “intimidate and destroy” reporters. Speaking in a debate in the House of Commons on Thursday, the MPs urged the government to better protect the media and citizens from abusive legal action known as strategic lawsuits against public participation, or Slapps. Lawyers and campaigners describe Slapps as a form of legal harassment that exploits lengthy and expensive legal procedures to silence journalists, critics and watchdogs. David Davis, a Conservative MP and former cabinet minister, said “nefarious” actors were using the justice system “to threaten, intimidate and put the fear of God into British journalists, citizens, officials and media organisations.” Davis described such tactics as “lawfare” and cited recent examples where reporters had faced “reputational and financial ruin in defending themselves from these malevolent cases”. The MPs drew particular attention to the work of a series of elite English law firms that specialise in bringing cases against the media. Davis said: “It is very clear that some London-based law firms have found an incredibly profitable niche that they are willing to pursue without too much concern about the outcome. I think the professional bodies for those law firms should be looking very hard at them, as should the government.” Another Tory MP, Bob Seely, said the UK had a “cottage industry of lawfare”. He said: “If we allow the cancer of the selling of intimidation services by high-end legal firms, it will not do us any good in the long run, just as in the long run letting mafias launder money would also be bad for us.” He added: “We need to bring in anti-Slapp legislation, and we need to go after those lawyers – dare I call them slappers – who use such tactics.” The MPs highlighted recent cases brought against investigative journalists including the Financial Times reporter Tom Burgis, who is the subject of libel actions brought by the Kazakh mining company ENRC, and Catherine Belton, the author of a recent book about Vladimir Putin, who last year faced a barrage of libel actions brought by multiple Russian billionaires and the state-controlled oil company Rosneft. Two MPs, Seely and Labour’s Liam Byrne, criticised English firms including Mishcon de Reya, Schillings, Harbottle &amp; Lewis, CMS and Carter-Ruck. Sir Robert Neill, who chairs the Commons justice select committee, said he hoped ministers would consider anti-Slapp legislation but told MPs that “there are very significant regulations relating to the conduct of law firms in the United Kingdom”. “We should not mischaracterise the position by saying that there is a high level of cynicism in the legal profession; there is not, and I do not believe that there is a failure of regulation either,” he added. Responding to the debate, the justice minister, James Cartlidge, agreed that Slapps actions “represent an abuse of the legal system”, but said the government “must be cautious to respond to Slapps in a proportionate way that continues our tradition of balancing individual rights with the public good”. Contacted for comment, a spokesperson for Mishcon de Reya did not provide an on-the-record statement for publication. Schillings, CMS, Harbottle &amp; Lewis and Carter-Ruck did not respond to a request for comment.With her white go-go boots and thick lashes, the Green M&amp;M was the Marilyn Monroe of the confectionery world. Everyone adored her – girls, gays and gamers alike. Green appeared in adverts crawling on her hands and knees at the beach like a 2000s Jennifer Lopez video. She was always engaged in flirtatious lesbian banter with the other female M&amp;M, the coquettish Brown, or putting a piece of chocolate into her mouth before making a joke about premature ejaculation. When the feminist academic Camille Paglia once wrote that “the great sex symbols of Hollywood were manufactured beings, engineered by trial and error, with the mass audience as their ultimate judge and jury”. I like to think she was talking about the Green M&amp;M. Not so any more. In a move that is sure to genuinely rattle Fox News hosts like a box of Tic Tacs, Mars Wrigley announced on Thursday that the M&amp;M squad will be undergoing a “progressive” makeover. Green will now wear trainers in order to “reflect confidence and empowerment as a strong female” who is “known for much more than her boots”. Brown’s heels will also be lowered to a more professional height. Red, the cocksure alpha of the group, has learned to treat his co-chocolates with kindness, while anxious Orange will be “embracing his true self” (ie, tying his shoelaces, presumably because he’s afraid of falling down). Mars has also confirmed that M&amp;Ms will be “moving away from only one body size” and stripped of their prefixes to highlight “their personalities rather than their gender”. The decision was obviously reported as paying “woke” service to Gen Z, but anyone who has spent more than two minutes on TikTok will know that Gen Z’s primary interests consist of asking celebrities to spit on them and making jokes with at least five layers of ironic detachment. On the M&amp;MS website, each candy now has a short interview to reveal more of their personality. Green, for example, announces that her best quality is now “being a hypewoman” while Blue quotes a Beyoncé song from eight years ago. This is what you get when a bunch of executives – who haven’t had much to do for the last two years because the office has been shut – get together and try to “disrupt” their industry by pandering to a demographic they haven’t interacted with for 20 years. Brands think they can appeal to Gen Z by making a slightly more diverse cast of anthropomorphic characters aimed at selling you chocolate-branded boxer shorts, but anxious teens aren’t looking for a role model in an anxiety-ridden orange M&amp;M. They’re looking to escape brands as much as possible by foraging and cosplaying as anime maids on TikTok. If Mars really wanted to appeal to Gen Z, they should have given each M&amp;M a bisexual girlfriend and £40,000 in student debt.Actors have nightmares of going on in a play for which they haven’t been given a script. But some of Britain’s best-known performers – including Sir Ian McKellen, Dame Emma Thompson, Harry Hill and Sanjeev Bhaskar – have volunteered to endure that sweaty scenario for one night at a north London theatre. Shortly before the play begins, that night’s surprise guest star will be taken backstage at the Park theatre and offered a choice of coats, hats, moustaches and wigs, then fitted with an earpiece to be fed the lines of a detective investigating a crime. “It’s quite a terrifying prospect,” says Bhaskar. “But when I saw the list of people who’ve done it already, I thought: that’s a gang I want to be part of.” He is referring to the first run of Whodunnit (Unrehearsed) at the Park in 2019, which featured Gillian Anderson, Jim Broadbent and Matthew Broderick. No theatre could afford so many stars, but both casts signed up for free to raise funds for the Park, which receives no regular Arts Council or local authority subsidy. Needing carefully to manage its finances since opening in 2013, the Park has, like all theatres, been destabilised by the pandemic. Emma Thompson, one of the one-off investigators in Whodunnit (Unrehearsed) 2 in February, says that she became involved as a local theatregoer and resident. She calls the Park “a fantastically important part of the fabric of north London” and says “we’ve never needed the healing, communal experience of theatre more”. Bhaskar is also motivated by being part of a cultural comeback: “I think some people thought, when theatres were closed during lockdown, it just meant a bunch of actors being out of work and they were probably used to that. But it hit electricians, carpenters and front-of-house staff. And cafes, pubs and shops around theatres that lost their custom … The impact was very far-reaching.” Jez Bond, Park artistic director and co-writer (with Mark Cameron) of Whodunnit, suggests that, in some ways, the recovery period may be more perilous than the emergency. During lockdowns, the Park was closed but supported by furlough and Culture Recovery Fund grants. Now, it is fully open but its box office affected by a residual hesitancy among audiences about sitting indoors for two hours with strangers. “Anecdotally, across London, immediately after the Omicron variant was revealed,” says Bond, “sales of tickets went down to around 20% of what they had been the previous day. And that’s a terrifying drop which spoke to the lack of audience confidence. And that – in combination with the lack of any further government support for theatres – makes the situation very tricky.” Comparing the days on which booking opened, the current run took around a quarter of the cash that the 2019 Whodunnit announcement attracted. Bond stresses that the box-office take has now vastly improved. But even so: “People are more nervous about going out and spending money than three years ago, so we have to much more actively go after them.” While those in charge of state and council funding might argue that the Park is lucky to have so many famous neighbours willing to support it, Thompson questions whether the venue should be so dependent on such charity: “One of the most important tools in the government’s hands is the funding of local, small theatres. Less expensive than West End venues, they can offer experiences that, at a time when our collective mental health has been as much attacked as our physical health, would make an enormous difference to our wellbeing.” Guest stars are asked to turn up on their night completely unprepared. Nervous or swottish performers, I suggest to Bhaskar, could talk to colleagues who have done the show or go and watch a performance before theirs. “Either of those pieces of skulduggery is possible. I haven’t been asked not to do that; but I wouldn’t. It may be, as people say these days, ‘technically within the rules’, but, morally, it would be wrong.” Meera Syal, who is married to Bhaskar, is also taking part in the run. “It will be an interesting dynamic in the house,” he says. “But, with Unforgotten [ITV’s cold-case psycho-drama starring Bhaskar], I never tell Meera anything about the plot, even if she asks for hints while watching. So I imagine that’s how we will do it.” Within the general fun of the production, those interested in types and techniques of theatre get to see, unusally, a completely spontaneous performer interacting with a cast who have prepared in the usual way. (Even in the Morecambe &amp; Wise drama, The Play What I Wrote, which uses guest celebrities, they rehearse and learn lines.) “We rehearse it so tightly with different people playing the detective,” Bond explains. “For example, there’s a moment where, for the gag to work, we really need the guest to be at a certain point on the stage. So we make sure the permanent actors rehearse it with people going to different places, so they have to work out how to get round it.” Bond was fascinated by the different approaches chosen by actors. Gillian Anderson went comedic, wearing a moustache, while Adrian Dunbar played the detective DCS Hastings-straight. A number of the invited cast list are comedians, perhaps professionally more likely to ad lib or add business. One aspect is beyond the control of the volunteer. There are popular, possibly apocryphal, theatrical anecdotes about veteran actors relying on a radio earpiece to prompt forgotten dialogue and startling an audience, in the middle of Shakespeare or Chekhov, by suddenly declaiming: “Mrs Hancock, 42 Acacia Avenue to Heathrow airport asap!” Is there a risk of the Park’s guest detectives accidentally receiving taxi communications? “I know those stories, so it’s a very good question,” says Bond. “I don’t think that could happen to us. But we have changed our technology, based on the first run.” Bhaskar, who admits that he has expressed concerns about the prompts dropping out, is reassured by the fact that his career-making series The Kumars at No 42 was “half-scripted, half-ad-libbed”. His general instinct about Whodunnit is that “you have to play it fairly straight to keep the story going. But who knows? I might find myself required to do something utterly ridiculous.” Whodunnit (Unrehearsed) 2 is at the Park theatre, London, 9 February to 12 MarchRory McIlroy’s self-analysis said it all. “I have absolutely no idea,” replied the world No 8 when asked about the state of his game following a second-round 75 at the Abu Dhabi Championship. A converted birdie putt at the 18th should, barring something extraordinary from those due to finish round two on Saturday morning, be enough to afford him another 36 holes to assess over the weekend. This was a curiously brutal desert day. Winds whipped consistently at 20mph and gusted at close to double that. The challenge was not at all what McIlroy and friends had in mind when opting to begin their competitive year at Yas Links. The scene was far from everyone’s cup of tea. “An absolute joke. Ridiculous,” barked Colin Montgomerie as he marched towards his penultimate tee. Either Monty was railing against the course condition or a sand ant had moved at an inappropriate moment as he played the previous hole. McIlroy was more pragmatic – the course at no point appeared unplayable – but acknowledged a weird afternoon at the office. “It’s different,” McIlroy said. “I can’t remember when it’s been like this here. I played in a couple of sandstorms in Dubai and a couple of mornings it’s been cold in Abu Dhabi but nothing like this. “I have played as thought-free as possible and played the conditions with the shots that I needed to play. I thought I drove it all right. A couple of iron shots got away from me but apart from that, I didn’t feel like I did all that badly. I think my sort of lost shots have been around the greens mostly the last couple days.” At plus three, McIlroy is 10 shots from the lead held by Scott Jamieson, who added a 74 to day one’s stunning 63. “It’s windier than Scotland,” smiled the Glaswegian. “It was cold today, as well. This isn’t what I expected. I knew it was going to be windy but thought it would still be short sleeves. “It’s a great test from tee to green, if you want to call it a test, at the mercy of whatever gust you might or might not get. You play for some wind sometimes and don’t get it, and when your ball defies gravity and goes up slopes at times. I am pretty happy with two over par today.” Viktor Hovland, Ian Poulter and James Morrison have Jamieson in their sights from six under. Morrison is among those with an incomplete second round, having reached the 15th tee when darkness halted proceedings. It was no shock to watch Poulter relishing his battle with the elements. “You don’t get to play in this kind of wind very often, especially when you’ve had nine weeks off and it’s never going to be this windy in the off-season, so you don’t really go and practise in it,” he said. “To get this thrown at you early in the season is tricky. “It’s been a while since you’ve had to hit those type of shots. In a way, it’s actually quite nice. We’ve played them in the past, chip-in seven-irons from 120 yards and hitting three-woods from 217. You’ve got to go into the archive and sort of try and remember some of the shots you’ve played back then.” Collin Morikawa should, like McIlroy, survive the cut by a shot. Among those definitely heading for early exits are Robert MacIntyre – who followed up a 69 with a wounding 80 – and Nicolai Højgaard.Congressman Henry Cuellar of Texas has had his home and campaign office raided this week as apart of a federal investigation into Azerbaijan and US businessmen who may have ties to the country, according to senior officials. On Wednesday, the FBI searched Cuellar’s property, in what it described as “court-authorized law enforcement activity”. Witnesses said at least a dozen federal agents moved through Cuellar’s home and office, carrying out various items and cases, as first reported by the Monitor of McAllen, Texas. An FBI spokesperson, Rosanne Hughes, acknowledged the search in a statement on Wednesday night, though Cuellar was not named and few details on the wider investigation were offered. “The FBI was present in the vicinity of Windridge Drive and Estate Drive in Laredo conducting court-authorized law enforcement activity,” Hughes said. “The FBI cannot provide further comment on an ongoing investigation.” During the search, Cuellar’s office also released a short statement. “Congressman Cuellar will fully cooperate in any investigation. He is committed to ensuring that justice and the law are upheld,” read the statement. Cuellar, a moderate Democrat, has served in the House of Representatives since 2004, representing a district in Texas that extends from the US border with Mexico up to the eastern outskirts of San Antonio. Cuellar also has a seat on the House appropriations committee.Former Lloyds boss António Horta-Osório watched England’s defeat in the final of football’s European Championship at Wembley on the same day as he allegedly breached quarantine rules to watch the Wimbledon men’s tennis final, according to a person briefed on his movements. Horta-Osório resigned as chair of the board of Credit Suisse last weekend after the bank investigated allegations that he had repeatedly broken Covid-19 rules. He had managed only nine months setting the strategy for the struggling Swiss bank, despite being brought in to steady it after a series of scandals and disastrous client failures. He has publicly admitted breaching Swiss quarantine rules, apologising for what he described as an “unintentional” error. However, neither he nor Credit Suisse have commented on the allegations of rule-breaking in England. Horta-Osório attended the Wimbledon tennis tournament on 10 and 11 July 2021, after flying from Switzerland to the UK. At that time Switzerland was on the UK government’s amber list of countries that required arrivals to isolate for 10 days to prevent coronavirus infections. The banker entertained Credit Suisse clients at the men’s final, in which Novak Djokovic came from a set down to beat Matteo Berrettini, according to a person close to him. The Euros culminated later on the same Sunday at Wembley stadium in London, with England losing to Italy 3-2 on penalties. Horta-Osório entertained a French Credit Suisse client and the client’s family, but also brought two of his children along, using Credit Suisse hospitality tickets that had not been taken up, a person close to him claimed. The Financial Times first reported his attendance at the game. Banks – and particularly wealth managers – often host high-paying clients at sporting and cultural events as an incentive for them to keep their business there, although the practice has reduced since the financial crisis. The investigation run by Credit Suisse also covered Horta-Osório’s use of the bank’s private jet. The chair and another senior Credit Suisse executive flew to Singapore for a week of meetings. On the return trip to Zurich the jet is claimed to have stopped to refuel in the Maldives in the Indian Ocean, where Horta-Osório joined his family for a holiday. The person close to Horta-Osório said an internal Credit Suisse audit had found that all his use of the corporate jet was within the bank’s policies. He will only receive pay covering the nine months he worked at the bank, because of Swiss laws banning large “golden parachute” payouts for departing bosses. His pay for that period was worth 3.8m Swiss francs (£3m). Horta-Osório was born and educated in Lisbon – where he gained a love of tennis – before embarking on a banking career that saw him move from his native Portugal to Brazil, Spain and then the UK, where he was appointed by George Osborne, then the chancellor, to run Britain’s biggest high street bank, Lloyds Banking Group. He received pay of more than £60m over his decade as head of Lloyds. He is now a British citizen, and was knighted in June, shortly before the alleged UK quarantine breaches. Credit Suisse declined to comment. A spokesperson for Horta-Osório declined to comment.Summon up an image of Charles Dickens, and his luxuriant “doorknocker” beard will be one of the first things to come to mind. But an “extremely rare” portrait of the author, depicting the “glorious” moustache he sported for few years only, is set to show his more dapper side. Dickens is thought to have first experimented with a moustache in 1844, and seems to have been immensely pleased with the new look. “The moustaches are glorious, glorious. I have cut them shorter, and trimmed them a little at the ends to improve their shape,” he wrote to his friend, the artist Daniel Maclise. “They are charming, charming. Without them, life would be a blank.” Later, on discovering that his brother Fred had also become moustachioed, Dickens wrote to his wife, Catherine: “He has a moustache … I feel (as the Stage Villains say) that either he or I must fall. Earth will not hold us both.” A sharp, detailed daguerreotype profile portrait of Dickens sporting his moustache was made in around 1852-55, when he was writing Bleak House and Hard Times. It was donated to the Charles Dickens Museum in London by a private collector last year, and the museum has put it on display for the first time, until 31 March, limiting the time it is shown to ensure its conservation. The image had previously been in the private collection for 20 years, after it was rediscovered in the collection of a reclusive Irish photography enthusiast, Charles Cloney. Emily Smith, the museum’s curator, said the portrait was “extremely rare”. “A moustachioed Dickens is hard to find,” she said. “While his bearded visage in instantly recognisable, Dickens’s early experiments with face furniture are far less well recorded and evidence is scarce. Dickens was image-conscious, definitely a dandy; his public image was carefully crafted and presented and portrait sittings, though not always enjoyed, were not taken lightly.” Not everyone was impressed by the author’s new look, however. According to British Library curator Andrea Lloyd, Dickens’s friend John Forster described the moustache as a “hideous disfigurement”, and delayed a portrait of the author that he had commissioned because of it. The moustache, however, developed: by 1853, Dickens had added a “Newgate Fringe”, or hair under the chin. Travelling in Italy with Wilkie Collins, author of The Woman in White and The Moonstone, the pair entered a facial hair-growing competition. Dickens wrote to his wife Catherine: “You remember how the corners of his mouth go down, and how he looks through his spectacles and manages his legs. I don’t know how it is, but the moustache is a horrible aggravation of all this. He smooths it down over his mouth, in imitation of the present great Original.” By 1858, it had mushroomed into the full beard he is known for today – something which friends feared aged Dickens. But the author said it “saved him the trouble of shaving, and much as he admired his own appearance before he allowed his beard to grow, he admired it much more now, and never neglected, when an opportunity offered, to gaze his fill at himself”. The Charles Dickens Museum’s daguerreotype was made by John Jabez Edwin Mayall at his 224 Regent Street studio. His technique involved covering the centre of the image with “blackened zinc” before exposing the whole image to light, which wiped out all details except for those protected by the zinc. “The technique produced highly detailed images,” said the Charles Dickens Museum, which is at 48 Doughty Street, Dickens’s only surviving London house. “In the Mayall portrait, Dickens’s tousled hair, broad moustache and the individual lines around his eyes and mouth and on his forehead are vividly reproduced.” Writing to his friend, philanthropist Angela Burdett-Coutts, in 1852, Dickens spoke of how he had sat for a portrait with Mayall, saying that “I am disposed to think the portrait, by far the best specimen of anything that way, I have ever seen.”Below you will find today’s stories and videos from the Australian Open. That’s all from me. Thanks for reading. See you soon for more. QUIZ! The match schedule for tomorrow can be seen here on the official Australian Open website. In the women’s singles, three matches to look out for are Vondrousova v Sabalenka, Swiatek v Kasatkina and Halep v Kovinic. Paire v Tsitsipas, Rublev v Cilic and Britain’s Dan Evans v Felix Auger-Aliassime are three choice ties in the men’s singles. “I’m not God. I can’t win every match.” Naomi Osaka with a dose of perspective after her defeat by Amanda Anisimova: Mannarino speaks and answers the first question as follows: “I didn’t listen, sorry.” Yes, he really is that tired. The interviewer has another go and he responds: “I was enjoying it. The ride was fun. I was feeling in shape today. It was pretty cool to play ... I was looking at the clock sometimes, and I was like: “Fuck!” “I don’t feel good ... I’m exhausted right now. As I say, it was cool. I was so focused on what I had to do, I was not thinking about the fact I was tired. “The crowd was cool, they had a couple of drinks I guess, and they were commentating more than anybody.” (This brings a big cheer from a couple of people in the stands.) Mannarino looks and sounds utterly knackered. Which, let’s face it, is perfectly understandable. A massive effort is rewarded with his first fourth-round match at the Australian Open. Respect to Aslan Karatsev, too, who fought through the pain of what looked like a hamstring problem later in the match. A belter of a contest to round off day five. And it’s 2.40am in Melbourne right now. Mannarino eases to 30-0 then limply finds the net with a forehand. No worries: next up, he belts an ace down and wins two match points. Karatsev saves the first one ... but then nets on the next rally, a typically punishing one, and Mannarino has done it! Four hours and 38 minutes of relentless action. Hats off to both players. *Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 7-5, 5-4 Karatsev (*denotes next server) The Frenchman will serve for the match. Christelle emails to point out that Mannarino has in fact reached the fourth round of a slam - he’s done it three times at Wimbledon. That’ll teach me to trust the commentators’ facts and stats. I guess they must have meant to say he’s never done it at the Australian Open. Correct me if I’m wrong but Lleyton Hewitt’s 2008 Australian Open clash with Marcos Baghdatis, which lasted until the ludicrous time of 4.34am, is the latest-ever finish at any grand slam tournament. Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 7-5, 5-3 *Karatsev (*denotes next server) Karatsev looks a little more sprightly now. He moves to 15-30 before an unforced error gives Mannarino 30-30 and the Frenchman smacks an ace out wide for 40-30, his ninth of the match ... however, another error by Mannarino means it’s back to deuce. And another error by Mannarino, who has the finish line in sight, but nets a forehand to hand Karatsev the advantage. The Russian misguides a forehand on the next point, however, so it’s back to deuce, and the Frenchman then comprehensively wrong-foots his opponent to win the advantage back. Karatsev won’t roll over though and a clean winner means we’re back to deuce. This is captivating and draining in equal measure. Needless to say Karatsev wins the advantage, but then misses on the next point, finding the net and sending it back to deuce ... the seemingly endless back-and-forth of deuces and advantages goes on before Mannarino digs out two big serves and finally moves to within a game of progress. Mannarino, the commentators tell us, has never before reached the fourth round of a grand slam event. That feels surprising, but there it is. The match timer is now at 4 hours and 17 minutes. *Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 7-5, 4-3 Karatsev (*denotes next server) Karatsev begins the game by opting to leave a ball which bounces on the baseline and hands Mannarino the first point. Mannarino goes on to fashion a break point, but the Russian fires back, continuing to take on his shots and go for the corners. Karatsev crashes a volley into the net to give the Frenchman a third shot at a double break ... but he nets a forehand and it’s back to deuce. Karatsev edges to the advantage, but Mannarino fires a stunning double-handed backhand down the line to force it back to deuce ... this is exhausting! Mannarino nabs another break point as Karatsev hits long, but he then puts an attempted drop shot into the net and we’re back to deuce ... Karatsev smashes down his 15th ace of the night, and finally seals the game. Tumaini Carayol reports on Carlos Alcaraz’s gallant defeat by Matteo Berrettini earlier today: Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 7-5, 4-2 *Karatsev (*denotes next server) Mannarino races to another hold. This next game should tell us plenty about Karatsev’s condition ... Karatsev trudges back out on to the court to receive Mannarino’s serve. *Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 7-5, 3-2 Karatsev (*denotes next server) Huge! The 33-year-old Frenchman battles his way to another break of serve. Karatsev takes a medical timeout and gets some attention from the physio, and explains the pain he’s feeling in his leg. It looks like a hamstring problem ... Meanwhile the match timer clicks around to four hours. It’s 1.55am in Melbourne! Mannarino sits in his seat, fidgeting, looking across to Karatsev. He looks fresh and ready to go. Has he finally worn his opponent down? Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 7-5, 2-2 *Karatsev (*denotes next server) Mannarino races to another service hold, in contrast to Karatsev’s previous service game, in which he saved four break points. Karatsev is pictured holding the back of his right thigh, but appears to be moving reasonably well. *Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 7-5, 1-2 Karatsev (*denotes next server) Mannarino forces it to 0-40 on the Russian’s serve. Karatsev, as you’d expect in this ding-dong affair, roars back to deuce, the last point in that sequence being a sweet ace down the middle. There’s something about this match which means that both players are producing a fine level of tennis, but neither is intimidated by the other, neither player tightens up when they find themselves (for instance) 0-40 down on their own serve. They keep on taking their shots. It’s making for a great encounter which deserves a bigger crowd in the arena. I guess that’s compensated by the fact that tennis fans across the world will be glued to this. Karatsev, as stated, hits back from 0-40 down and holds to take a 2-1 lead in the fourth. Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 7-5, 1-1 *Karatsev (*denotes next server) Mannarino responds with a quick service hold to 15. *Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 7-5, 0-1 Karatsev (*denotes next server) The Russian holds serve at the start of the fourth. Neither of these two are household names, sure, but they are producing a consistently high level, and as the scoreboard suggests, their styles are incredibly evenly matched. Karatsev botches a break point to force a tiebreak ... and Mannarino, tenaciously staying in every point, hits back and closes out the set with a wonderful down-the-line forehand winner. *Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 6-5 Karatsev (*denotes next server) The Frenchman breaks again! Karatsev hits wide at the end of another well-matched rally, and Mannarino, looking full of energy and running after more than three hours – nearly three and a half hours in fact – jogs to his chair for a drink and a bite to eat. The auditorium DJ cranks out a blast of Wham!, probably to keep himself awake, let alone the crowd. Perhaps needless to say there aren’t many spectators in at this time of night but there are a handful. Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 5-5 *Karatsev (*denotes next server) Mannarino falls 0-30 down, but produces a succession of booming serves to hold on. We’re all square. *Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 4-5 Karatsev (*denotes next server) Mannarino must serve to stay in the third set. *Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 3-4 Karatsev (*denotes next server) A break of serve for each player, and we move relentlessly deeper into this third set on Margaret Court Arena. The world No 6 Andrey Rublev’s hopes of a maiden Grand Slam title will face a stern test in the form of the seasoned Marin Cilic at the Australian Open on Saturday, with the big Croatian looking to challenge for major honours again. Rublev was barely troubled in the opening two rounds, but the Russian may have to raise his game against former US Open champion Cilic, who reached the final at Melbourne Park four years ago. Rublev, however, will take confidence from his recent performances against Cilic, having comfortably come out on top in their last four meetings. The ninth seed Felix Auger-Aliassime could be a potential opponent for Rublev if the Canadian comes out unscathed against Britain’s Dan Evans, while world No 4 Stefanos Tsitsipas takes on Benoît Paire following the Frenchman’s surprise win over Grigor Dimitrov. Both the men’s and women’s second seeds are also in action as Daniil Medvedev plays Dutchman Botic van de Zandschulp, and Aryna Sabalenka, whose campaign so far has been plagued by service woes, faces 31st seed Marketa Vondrousova. Former French Open winners Simona Halep and Iga Swiatek are the other big guns who will take the court on Saturday, with Danka Kovinic and Daria Kasatkina standing in their respective ways for a place in the fourth round. (Reuters) Eurosport are having a chat with John McEnroe, via Zoom, and they also just spoke to Alexander Zverev. The Mannarino v Karatsev match is live on the app, so the production crew (or some of them at least) in Melbourne are pulling a late one. If you need some football news in your life, Barry Glendenning’s got the weekend football countdown right here – live! *Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 2-3 Karatsev (*denotes next server) Mannarino breaks straight back! At deuce on Karatsev’s serve, the two players indulge in another rally of searing groundstrokes ... Karatsev cracks first, and sends a backhand wide, and Mannarino closes out the game to strike back at the earliest opportunity. Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 1-3 *Karatsev (*denotes next server) Karatsev breaks! He forges a two-game lead in the third. Mannarino may be the lower-ranked player but these two look very evenly matched overall. “I would definitely say I’m proud of myself for this,” Naomi Osaka said of her defeat against Amanda Anisimova. “I was really focused throughout the entire match, and I didn’t have a dip. So that’s really good. Hopefully as the season continues, I’ll be able to keep this up, and get even better at it.” “I fought for every point. I can’t be sad about that,” Osaka said, adding that she was yet to decide on her schedule before the WTA 1000 event in Indian Wells in March. “I’m not God! I can’t win every match. The last match that I played in New York I think I had a completely different attitude. Of course I lost [today], but I’m happy with how it went. I just want to go into this year knowing that I’ll play the whole year and I’ll just have the greatest attitude ever.” (Quotes via Reuters) *Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 1-2 Karatsev (*denotes next server) The Russian, who was born in Vladikavkaz, edges back ahead in the third set. The time approaches 1am in Melbourne. How many of you are reading this in Australia, and are you planning to hit the sack soon? You can email me here and let me know if you like. The American Amanda Anisimova praised Naomi Osaka for her authenticity after knocking her out of the Australian Open, saying it was “inspiring” to see the Japanese player speaking out on mental health issues. Osaka withdrew from last year’s French Open after being fined and threatened with expulsion for refusing to do media duties, which she said had contributed to the depression she had struggled with for years. The four-times Grand Slam champion, who also skipped Wimbledon in 2021, exited the Australian Open on Thursday as Anisimova recorded a 4-6 6-3 7-6 (10-5) win in the third round. “I think she’s really inspiring. What she’s done the last couple of years is amazing, and just how authentic she is,” Anisimova said. “It was really cool to finally play her today. “She just tells the truth about how she feels. I know she’s gone through a really tough year last year, so I kind of feel for her today. I’ve gone through a couple of hard years, and I don’t mind posting stuff on social media and just try to spread awareness for people who are also going through tough things. I think it’s great to be relatable to other people who follow us.” The American reached a career-high ranking of 21 in 2019, but has struggled in recent years, falling to her current ranking of 60th. “Yeah, last year was a huge struggle for me,” Anisimova said. “Sometimes you doubt it, like what if I get injured and I’ll never be able to play in a Grand Slam again? Yeah, last year was just not great, all my results I wasn’t happy with. “I’m just really happy that I had a great pre-season with my team. They’ve done incredible work with me. So it’s also really important, the people that you surround yourself with, and that’s what really helped me after this past year.” Anisimova will play Australian world No 1 Ash Barty in the fourth round, to whom she lost in the semi-finals of the French Open in 2019. (Reuters) Mannarino 7-6, 6-7, 1-1 *Karatsev (*denotes next server) So, in the final match of a very long day, which is taking place on Margaret Court Arena, Karatsev took a 14-minute service game at the start of the third set, only for Mannarino to hold his own serve with ease. It’s all square on the scoreboard but Mannarino is in the ascendancy. Here’s the report, from a little earlier, of Naomi Osaka’s shock loss against the world No 60 Amanda Anisimova: Khachanov waves, and receives a warm ovation from the crowd, as he leaves the court. And now Rafa has a chat: “Of course, it’s a very special week for me, coming back from where I’m coming, every single time I’m able to play here is just a very special thing ... tonight I played against a good player and a good friend on tour ... that was the best match I’ve played since I came back [from injury] ... I wish him all the very best for the season, I wish him well. “In the past year and a half I have been going through some very tough times ... but nights like tonight give me a lot of energy ... that’s something to put in my pocket ... it means everything, I’m super happy, thank you very much everybody. “People here in Australia appreciate sport in general ... thank you to Tennis Australia for all the support we receive during our careers.” Ended with an ace and a love hold. What a player, what a performance, what a ... something else! Could this be Nadal’s year? He looks incredibly together, incredibly focused, with everything operating at maximum level. Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 1-5 *Nadal (*denotes next server) On Rod Laver Arena, meanwhile, Khachanov unloads a couple of sensationally powerful groundstrokes to take it to 30-30 on his own serve. But Nadal stamps on his opponent immediately, cracking a forehand to the corner which Khachanov can only stand and admire, and then winning the double break with a frankly ludicrous passing shot. 5-1 and Nadal is serving for the match. Thank you John. Time in Melbourne: 12.12am. Time left in Mannarino v Karatsev? Loads. *Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 1-4 Nadal (*denotes next server) Khachanov gets on the board in the fourth set with a hold but Nadal does likewise to maintain his advantage. Meanwhile, Karatsev has two set points at 6-4 in the tie-break … and he takes the first. He wins the second set against Mannarino, we’re 1-1, and it’s only taken a mere 2hr 13mins. They’re on schedule to finish sometime around 3am in Melbourne. For all that and more, I’ll hand you back over to my colleague Luke McLaughlin. *Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 0-3 Nadal (*denotes next server) Nadal holds imperiously to love and you wonder if Khachanov’s will might be broken now. Meanwhile Karatsev and Mannarino seem determined to still be playing into next week. Karatsev is serving for the set at 6-5 but gives up a trio of break points from deuce. His French opponent initially can’t press home his advantage but it’s third time lucky. A break back, it’s 6-6 and they go into another tie-break. Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 0-2 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Nadal looks to put the breaks on the Khachanov momentum and holds his serve comfortably. He puts a bit of pressure on the Khachanov serve too, fighting back from 30-15 to earn a break point … then getting another shot from deuce … and from the second opportunity he takes full advantage! What a way to bounce back. That’s some effort from Khachanov, who looked down and out after the second. Meanwhile, at 5-5 Karatsev earns three break points on the Mannarino serve … and he makes it stick. He’ll serve for the second set. Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 6-3 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Khachanov races into a 40-0 lead but we all know it’s not going to be that ea… oh, wait. Yes it is. The No 28 seed holds to love. We go into a fourth set. *Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 5-3 Nadal (*denotes next server) Khachanov is going to have to serve this out. Nadal holds to 15. Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 5-2 Nadal* (*denotes next server) Khachanov holds to 15 to move to within one game of the third set. Meanwhile, it will surprise no one to learn that Mannarino and Karatsev remain on serve in the second set, Mannarino 4-3 up as it stands. *Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 4-2 Nadal (*denotes next server) Khachanov earns a couple more break points from deuce but Nadal fends him off this time. Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 4-1 Nadal* (*denotes next server) So is the comeback on? Um, maybe. But the No 28 seed is having to work so hard for it. Nadal earns himself two break points on the Khachanov serve but the Russian brings it back to deuce once more. He saves another then finally gets over the line to establish a 4-1 lead. Meanwhile over on Margaret Court Arena, Mannarino are doing anyone in the Melbourne crowd who has to get up early tomorrow no favours – they’re 2-2 in an attritional second set. *Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 3-1 Nadal (*denotes next server) Hello all. On Rod Laver Nadal races into a 40-0 lead but the dogged Khachanov brings it back to deuce … then, stunningly, converts it into a break of serve. Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 2-1 *Nadal (*denotes next server) Khachanov digs out another hold of serve. He’s not making many dents in Nadal’s armour but he is competing a little better. Mannarino and Karatsev are now 1-1 in the second set. That one really does have the look of a marathon, 1.30am finish special ... I’ll hand you over to John Ashdown for the next hour and will be back for more soon. *Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 1-1 Nadal (*denotes next server) No worries for Nadal on his first service game of his third set. Physically and mentally the Mallorcan looks in ominous form. The absence of Novak Djokovic is obviously a significant factor in the men’s draw, but on this kind of form, Nadal would have taken some beating regardless. Khachanov 3-6, 2-6, 1-0 *Nadal (*denotes next server) The Russian – who, as you know, was born in Moscow but now resides in Dubai – holds at the start of the third. He’s being made to work for pretty much every point. It’s just before 11pm in Melbourne and this one looks like it could go the distance ... the Frenchman grabs the first-set tiebreak! One particularly crushing angled forehand, on a fractionally short ball from his opponent, sends Nadal on the way to another comfortable hold of serve, which seals another comfortable set for the Spaniard. Can Khachanov come back from two sets down? It may be a two-horse race, and he still has a chance, but it’s looking highly, highly unlikely. Khachanov 3-6, 2-5 *Nadal (* denotes next server) Khachanov hammers down three aces in a row on his way to a love hold. He wasn’t taking any prisoners there. But Nadal will now serve for the second set, and looks to have one foot in the fourth round already. *Khachanov 3-6, 1-5 Nadal (* denotes next server) A looping backhand by Nadal drops in, with Khachanov running in the opposite direction, and Nadal edges closer to the second set. Karatsev holds serve against Mannarino for 6-5 in the first. Mannarino 5-5 *Karatsev (* denotes next server) It’s shaping up to be a decent – and long – match on Margaret Court Arena, between the 18th-seeded Karatsev and the Frenchman Mannarino. Karatsev is ranked 15th in the world, while Mannarino is down in 69th. Khachanov 3-6, 1-4 *Nadal (* denotes next server) And quick as a flash, Nadal breaks again. He is streaking away with this second set having been tested in the fourth game. Sorry, I initially posted it was 2-2 in Khachanov v Nadal, it is of course 3-1 Nadal after he held serve. *Khachanov 3-6, 1-3 Nadal (* denotes next server) After I said this match isn’t promising to explode into life, it immediately explodes into life. Khachanov produces the shot and the point of the match so far, threading a spectacular double-handed backhand around Nadal and down the line, and all that after having fallen over in hitting his initial return of serve ... The Spaniard is taken to deuce and eventually edges over the line to hold. That was a massive contest though and if Khachanov can continue to exert than kind of pressure on Nadal’s serve, it could be a longer night than we thought. Khachanov 3-6, 1-2 *Nadal (* denotes next server) Khachanov holds, in much more straightforward fashion than the last time. Still, this isn’t a match which is promising to explode into life – Nadal is firmly in control of his opponent. *Khachanov 3-6, 0-2 Nadal (* denotes next server) Nadal holds and opens up a 2-0 lead in the second set. Karatsev and Mannarino, the final match on today’s programme, are 2-2 in their first set. A match report from Naomi Osaka’s shock exit against Amanda Anisimova: Khachanov 3-6, 0-1 *Nadal (* denotes next server) Nadal, finally, wears his Russian opponent down and breaks him after a marathon opening game in the second set. It looked like Khachanov might squeeze out the hold of serve but the quality of Nadal’s returning, and his trademark groundstrokes, was too much in the end. “We Rafa fans were worried about Khachanov but if things continue like the first set it’s not looking good for him,” emails Margaret. “Hopefully Rafa’s foot, back, knees, wrist [did I forget a body part?] won’t cause him any problems. It would be great if he gets his second Oz title.” Khachanov is currently being forced to work insanely hard just to hold at the start of the second set ... Amanda Anisimova is the story of the day after her remarkable three-set win against the defending champion, Naomi Osaka. Anisimova progresses to meet the world No 1 Ash Barty in the next round, so it’s not going to get any easier. But she may well possess the weapons to trouble Barty. Rafa finally loses a point on his serve, but it hardly matters. He closes out the hold, and closes out the set, 6-3. A plus one from me. A recap of women’s singles results today: 1-Ashleigh Barty (AUS) beat 30-Camila Giorgi (ITA) 6-2 6-3 Amanda Anisimova (USA) beat 13-Naomi Osaka (JPN) 4-6 6-3 7-6 21-Jessica Pegula (USA) beat Nuria Parrizas Diaz (ESP) 7-6(3) 6-2 5-Maria Sakkari (GRE) beat 28-Veronika Kudermetova 6-4 6-1 (RUS) 4-Barbora Krejcikova (CZE) beat 26-Jelena Ostapenko (LAT) 2-6 6-4 6-4 24-Victoria Azarenka (BLR) beat 15-Elina Svitolina (UKR) 6-0 6-2 Madison Keys (USA) beat Qiang Wang (CHN) 4-6 6-3 7-6(2) 8-Paula Badosa (ESP) beat Marta Kostyuk (UKR) 6-2 5-7 6-4 Khachanov 2-4 Nadal* (* denotes next server) The Spaniard is firmly in control, a break up in the first set, and will serve to move within one game of taking this first set. The Spaniard is yet to lose a point on his own serve. The winner, Amanda Anisimova, has a chat on court: “I’m speechless, I absolutely love playing in Melbourne ... honestly it’s so much fun ... I mean, I can’t stop smiling even though I should be serious, I can’t help smiling, some of the stuff you guys say sometimes ... “Going into this match I knew I had to be playing sharp if I wanted to give myself a chance, Naomi is always going to be playing well ... she’s an absolute champion ... I knew I had to step up my game and be aggressive and I think that’s what I did in the second set. Honestly I’m so grateful that I was able to play so well today and get this win, it means a lot. “Honestly, stepping on to the court, all I’m thinking about is having fun ... every single day here is just an amazing experience and opportunity for me, I’m so grateful to be playing on this court ... I’m just having fun and getting on the win on this day is a huge bonus, I’m just looking forward to my next round.” Nadal is 3-0 up against Khachanov. What a match, what a display from both players. Brilliant. Osaka smiles and shakes Anisimova’s hand and clearly gives credit to her opponent for a stunning effort. At 8-5, Anisimova puts a wide serve down, and wins the point with an astonishing volley controlled into the right of the court ... A change of ends at 8-4 now to the world No 6, Amanda Anisimova, in the final-set tiebreak. A lovely down-the-line back-handed forehand and Anisimova is now just three points away at 7-4 in the final set tiebreak. Can Osaka react again? 6-4 to Anisimova. Both players continuing to hit with fearsome power. 5-2 in the tiebreaker to Anisimova! Again she opens up the court with that big wide serve. Osaka needs a response and she finds one, crashing a backhand into the corner for 5-3. At 3-2, Osaka butchers a second-serve return which flies long. Advantage Anisimova. If she can pull it off, this would be the biggest win of her career. Osaka finds a couple of big serves and it’s 3-2 in this first-to-10 tiebreaker. Anisimova, with some crushingly accurate hitting, moves 3-0 ahead in the tiebreak against Osaka! Anisimova 4-6, 6-3, 6-6 *Osaka (*denotes next server) Anisimova holds impressively easily, conceding just a single point, and we’ll have a first-to-10 tiebreak to settle it. This has been a truly memorable match. Rafa Nadal is about to stride on to Rod Laver Arena for his match against Karen Khachanov. *Anisimova 4-6, 6-3, 5-6 Osaka (*denotes next server) Anisimova forces deuce on the Osaka serve ... but the Japanese player again finds a way, and now leads 6-5 in the final set of this enthralling match. Helpfully, Eurosport have ended their TV coverage of this game in favour of skiing, so I’ve had to race over to the app to catch the end of it. Nip and tuck in the service game for Anisimova, with the American producing her eighth ace of the match for 30-30 ... and then grinding out a superb rally to save a first match point. She then hits wildly wide with a double-handed backhand to give Osaka a second match point. On second serve, Osaka cracks a backhand into the net and it’s back to deuce, and Osaka then nets a forehand return to give Anisimova the game point. Another punishing rally, however, ends with the American finding the net and it’s backk to deuce. Again the wide serve makes the difference for Anisimova, who fashions another game point, and makes it 5-5! *Anisimova 4-6, 6-3, 4-5 Osaka (*denotes next server) After a couple of lightning-fast service holds for each player, Anisimova must now serve to stay in the match. Barty speaks after a ruthless win which sets up a match against either Osaka or Anisimova: “I thought tonight was really clean, I looked after my service games really well ... I was able to keep momentum going really well ... “I felt like I was out of my weight class, the way she hits the ball ... all in all I was able to use my slice effectively, particularly that short one.” “Both incredible ball strikers (Osaka and Anisimova) ... either match up is a little bit different, and I will change a few things up ... but the sliced backhand will come out, I promise.” Anisimova 4-6, 6-3, 3-4 *Osaka (*denotes next server) Anisimova destroys a down-the-line forehand, on Osaka’s second serve, for 15-30. There are two pointed “Come ons” from Osaka as she claims the next two points for 40-30. And another, as she rounds off the hold with a thumping ace down the middle. Again, asked the question, Osaka comes up with the answer like the champion she is. Anisimova 4-6, 6-3, 3-3 *Osaka (*denotes next server) This accurate serve out wide from Anisimova is causing so much damage. She holds to love. It’s 3-3 and nothing to choose between the players. Barty is 5-3 up in the second against Giorgi and serving for the match. *Anisimova 4-6, 6-3, 2-3 Osaka (*denotes next server) A no-nonsense hold for Osaka. Both players are feeling the intensity of this match. Can Anisimova last the pace as they go deep into the third and final set? We are about to find out. Anisimova 4-6, 6-3, 2-2 Osaka* (*denotes next server) A double fault brings 30-30 but Anisimova hits another booming wide serve which opens up the court and brings her game point. She holds for 2-2. This is a really exciting, close battle and although both players are making errors there is plenty of ambitious shot-making too. Barty* 6-2, 4-2 Giorgi (*Denotes next server) It’s all going swimmingly for Ash Barty on Rod Laver Arena, a break up in the second set. *Anisimova 4-6, 6-3, 1-2 Osaka (*denotes next server) At 30-30, having just hit fractionally wide, Osaka hits long and it’s break point for Anisimova. Anisimova climbs into the second serve, but Osaka is absolutely rock-solid, winning back control of the rally and forcing the error, and saving the break point. Having said all that ... Osaka double-faults on the next point, sending her second serve wildly long, and hands her opponent another chance. Anisimova misses out, netting a big chance to take the game! Anisimova then crashes a forehand into the net on Osaka’s second serve, at deuce, and chucks her racket on to the floor in disgust. Osaka closes out the game. That was a big, big game in this match and Anisimova will be regretting those missed chances. Maybe she’ll get another one, maybe she won’t. In the men’s singles, Rafal Nadal (6) is due on court in about 20 minutes, against Karen Khachanov (28). Anisimova 4-6, 6-3, 1-1 Osaka* (*denotes next server) A strong first serve down the middle for 15-0. An excellent serve out wide, and an unerring crosscourt double-handed backhand makes it 30-15. But then another double fault from Anisimova, and a fine angled drop from Osaka brings the two-times champion a break point. And yet ... a lovely volley at the net saves the break point, and Anisimova takes it up another gear to hold her serve and make it 1-1 in the first. Anisimova* 4-6, 6-3, 0-1 Osaka (*denotes next server) Another unforced error from Osaka brings 15-30 for Anisimova on her opponent’s serve. Osaka produces a big first serve for 30-30, then Anisimova hits long, and looks frustrated to do so, to bring up game point for Osaka. Another error by Anisimova as she dumps a forehand into the net ... and Osaka edges ahead in the third set. We move into the third, decisive set in this increasingly enthralling match between Anisimova and Osaka. Barty, the world No 1, has won the first set against Giorgi, 6-2. Anisimova 4-6, 6-3 Osaka Osaka has a chance to make it 0-30 but misses it. Anisimova edges back ahead but then coughs up a double fault for 30-30. Another unforced error by Osaka brings a first set point, and again, Osaka dumps the ball into the net to concede the second set. We’re into a decider ... *Anisimova 4-6, 5-3 Osaka (*denotes next server) Anisimova will serve for the second set after a reasonably comfortable hold for Osaka. Anisimova looks increasingly focused, but needs to hold her nerve here. Anisimova 4-6, 5-2 *Osaka (*denotes next server) A hold to love for Anisimova, who is ranked 46 places below her opponent, at No 60 in the world. You wouldn’t know it at the moment. Osaka must serve to stay in the set. *Anisimova 4-6, 4-2 Osaka (*denotes next server) Osaka holds, hitting the ball with authority and wrestling a bit of control back. Barty 5-2 *Giorgi (* denotes next server) The Australian world No 1 moves to within a game of the first set. Anisimova 4-6, 4-1 *Osaka (*denotes next server) Now a regulation hold for the 20-year-old. Her confidence is clearly increasing. Osaka had been living with her, and controlling the match, but Anisimova is now in the ascendancy in this second set. Anisimova* 4-6, 3-1 Osaka (*denotes next server) Anisimova breaks Osaka’s serve! And does it in style, with a beautifully disguised backhand drop shot which glides over the net. Osaka can only watch it drop into the court. Anisimova smiles and allows herself a little fist bump into the bargain. That was top-class. Anisimova 4-6, 2-1 Osaka* (*denotes next server) A hold for the American. Only one break so far, in the first game of the match, and Anisimova (ranked 60) is competing well. Before the fourth game of the second set, the umpire asks three arriving spectators to sit down. They appear oblivious to begin with but eventually get the message. Elsewhere, Giorgi gets on the board against Barty: It’s 3-1 there now. On Rod Laver Arena, Ash Barty (1) has begun her match against Camila Giorgi (30) and raced into a 3-0 first-set lead. Anisimova* 4-6, 1-1 Osaka (*denotes next server) Anisimova starts to muster some impressive returns of serve, one in particular from out wide on the forehand side which she somehow manages to direct back across court, the ball flashing past Osaka before she has a chance to react. Osaka saves a couple of break points, much to the frustration of Anisimova, who is attacking Osaka’s second serve determinedly. At deuce, Anismova has almost an open goal, a short ball on her forehand with Osaka well out of position, but she puts it into the net ... Osaka eventually holds, keeping her composure, and closing out the game in the face of some fierce hitting from the American. Anisimova 4-6, 1-0* Osaka (*denotes next server) Attacking the net, Osaka hits a highly accomplished, powerful and accurate forehand volley on the run to make it deuce on her opponent’s serve, making Anisimova work to hold at the beginning of the second set. However, the American holds, and edges 1-0 ahead in the second. Osaka rounds off a hold to love, sealing the first set, with a crunching smash that leaves her opponent motionless. The 20-year-old American started seeing the ball nicely at times in the that first set, but Osaka is firmly in control. Anisimova 4-5 Osaka* (*Denotes next server) Osaka will now serve for the first set against the American. Zverev speaks: “I had my struggles on the court today, I didn’t feel perfect, but who is perfect? Luckily enough I won, and I’m happy about that.” Regarding his next assignment, in the fourth round, against the big-hitting 14th seed Denis Shapovalov: “He’s playing well, today’s match was a high level from him. We’re both going to be happy that we’re in the second week. Hopefully I can win. But it’s going to be a great match as well.” How is he going to prepare for the match against Shapovalov in a couple of days?“I’ll probably get drunk at some time tonight. That’s very popular here in Australia, so why not try it out? [Laughs] ... No, I won’t do much. You won’t see me out on the streets.” The German steamrollered Millman in the previous round, and that was less straightforward against the Romanian who is ranked 124, but it’s still a comfortable win. Anisimova 3-4 Osaka* (*Denotes next server) The American is hitting it nicely now and holds for 4-3. On John Cain Arena, Zverev has a third match point against Albot now for a straight-sets win ... Anisimova* 2-4 Osaka (*Denotes next server) After a nervous start, Anisimova is growing into this, and forces a first break point. There’s then a slice of luck for the two-times Australian Open champion as a groundstroke flicks off the top of the net and she wins the point. Eventually she closes out the game, but this isn’t going to be easy. Over on Margaret Court Arena, Naomi Osaka leads Amanda Anisimova 3-2 in the first set, a break up. Albot and Zverev, meanwhile, are 4-4 in the third, with the German third seed two sets to the good, 6-3, 6-4. Berrettini speaks and is first asked about his opponent, Carlos Alcaraz: “He’s unbelievable ... he’s impressive and he’ll only improve playing matches like this, he showed everyone his potential. Luckily I won but congrats to him. “I was feeling confident, and in the third, there were a couple of games I was love-30 and I felt the momentum on my side, but I got broken, and that’s tennis ... I feel like every match something has to happen [injury wise - he had an ankle problem] but this is my body.” A stunning effort from the 18-year-old Spaniard, Alcaraz, to fight back from two sets down. But Berrettini eventually had a little too much in the first-to-10 tiebreak. Alcaraz crushes that forehand of his with astonishing power and accuracy, and has a very exciting career ahead of him. Alcaraz v Berrettini: 2-6, 6-7, 6-4, 6-2, 6-6, 5-8 tiebreak Berettini makes it 7-5. Alcaraz, impressive under pressure again, hits a decent backhand drop shot and although Berrettini gets there, he can’t get it back ... it’s 8-5 Berrettini but it’s a first to 10 tiebreak so he still has work to do. Osaka’s match against the unseeded Anisimova has begun, with the 2019 and 2021 champion breaking straight away, Anisimova starting nervously and serving up two double faults. Final set, first-to-10 tiebreak! Alcararaz 2-6, 6-7, 6-4, 6-2, 6-6 Berrettini, 3-3 The match moves into a fifth hour with Alcaraz taking a mini-break on the first point after a thrilling rally. Berrettini wins that straight back on the next point before edging ahead 3-2 after another rally of incredible intensity and power with both players hitting it sweetly ... next up, Alcaraz winds up a power-packed forehand that Berrettini can’t get back. 3-3 Tiebreak! Alcararaz v Berrettini: 2-6, 6-7, 6-4, 6-2, 6-6 (*denotes next server) Berettini takes it to 30-30. Alcaraz mixes it up in the next rally with a drop shot. Berrettini shows impressive mobility to chase that down, then run down the resulting lob ... Alcaraz has a volley on the forehand side which he should put away, but puts it long! Match point for Berrettini! But, impressively, Alcaraz hangs tough on match point, Berrettini produces the error by finding the net from the baseline, with Alcaraz tucking away a better volley for advantage Alcaraz and game point. The next rally is a work of art from Alcaraz as he works Berrettini around the court with some punishing groundstrokes ... and we have a tiebreaker to decide it! Alcararaz* v Berrettini: 2-6, 6-7, 6-4, 6-2, 5-6 (*denotes next server) The Italian tonks down a few massive serves and easily holds to move, again, within one game of victory. He then smokes a wonderful crosscourt forehand winner, which kisses the line, for 0-15 in this potentially decisive Alcaraz service game. Alcararaz v Berrettini* – 2-6, 6-7, 6-4, 6-2, 5-5 (*denotes next server) Alcaraz, who is seeded 31 and is only 18 years old, holds to love for 5-5 in the fifth and shakes his fist in celebration, looking to his team in the stands. He battled back into this from two sets down! Hello everyone. What’s occurring at the Australian Open today? Quite a lot, as it turns out. Right now, Carlos Alcaraz and Matteo Berrettini are duking it out in a fifth set, with Berrettini (seeded seventh) having just served to make lead 5-4 in the final set. Plenty more to come, too, with Alexander Zverev currently two sets up on Radu Albot, and Naomi Osaka due to be up against unseeded Amanda Anisimova any second now.The veteran TV presenter David Dimbleby has suggested the BBC licence fee could be linked to council tax to make it fairer as the government questions future funding of the broadcaster. Dimbleby, who presented Question Time on the BBC for 25 years, said: “The licence fee is something that I absolutely believe in. I don’t think you can have public service broadcasting without paying for it through the public purse in that way. “But what I do think is the BBC should acknowledge that £159 paid by the poorest as well the richest is just unfair, it’s inequitable,” he told BBC Radio 4’s World at One. “And there’s a simple way in which the BBC can get on the front foot, which is by suggesting the licence fee figure, the gross figure of £159, should not be paid flat-rate by everybody, but the richest should pay more and the poorest less. And the simple way of doing it would be to attach an element of the licence fee to the council tax band.” Asked if this could mean a sharp price rise for wealthier users, he replied: “Some people might pay double, some people might pay half.” He added: “Why should the poorest pay the same as I pay? It’s just not fair.” The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, announced on Monday that the annual fee paid by households would be fixed at £159 until April 2024, before rising with inflation for the following four years. A number of alternatives to funding for the licence fee have been floated, including an opt-in subscription service similar to that used by streaming firms such as Netflix, the introduction of advertising, or a broadband levy. The BBC has criticised the two-year freeze, arguing it will lead to “tougher choices” that will affect viewers. Bosses at the corporation have called the move “disappointing” as Dorries even came under criticism from her own side while arguing it was necessary to tackle the rising cost of living. Labour has accused the cabinet minister of trying to distract from Boris Johnson’s woes while waging a “vendetta” against the broadcaster. Asked that if cuts were needed, what should be cut, Dimbleby said: “If you stick with everything you’ve got and you have less money, then inevitably the quality deteriorates. So maybe you do have to make cuts and I don’t know where they would lie. Maybe you have to have some services that are subscription, some specialised services.” Dimbleby also said the BBC must do more to keep in “lockstep” with public opinion, saying it has strayed “a bit”, on issues such as immigration. “Over the years the BBC has not been strong on looking at the reasons that people in some parts of Britain were uneasy about the scale of immigration,” he said.A BIG RELEGATION ONE-/TWO-/THREE-/SIX-POINTER Watford and Norwich City may be near the bottom of the Premier League, but both of these clubs can claim to be on a run of form. Whether that means they’re at the start of one, or in the middle, or coming towards the end, is a moot point, given that Norwich’s current sequence is one win in a row, while Watford are on a one-draw tear-up. OK, as form goes, neither trend is quite as hot as Manchester City’s 12 league victories on the bounce, or Fulham’s 19-goals-in-three-games scoring spree, but you have to make the best of things and enjoy life while the going is good. It’s later than you think. Whichever way you spin it, Watford and Norwich are both currently in a better frame of mind than fellow relegation strugglers Newcastle, pegged back late last weekend by the Hornets, and Burnley, who haven’t won or indeed played a game since the days of Bob Lord. Newcastle have gone backwards since the dismissal of Steve Bruce, currently basking in the lukewarm glow of borderline vindication, and face a difficult test at re-energised Leeds on Saturday. Burnley meanwhile have a Sunday showdown with a wounded Arsenal team looking to bounce back from their Worthington Cup no-show against Liverpool. A chance, then, for Watford or Norwich to build a small cushion o’comfort by claiming all six points that are sort of on offer when they meet at Vicarage Road on Friday night. Watford and Claudio Ranieri both have reasons for feeling bullish. The Hornets have won their last five league matches against Norwich, and while Ranieri wasn’t in situ for any of them, he’s been winning his own battles with the Canaries, with three wins and a draw from his four career meetings. On the other hand, Watford are the only team in the top four divisions without a clean sheet, while Norwich, who had previously gone six matches without scoring, rediscovered the art last weekend while getting Rafa Benítez the sack, a performance that, depending on your point of view, either condemns Everton to the relegation battle, or saves them from it. Plenty riding on this game, then. We predict a tense tussle, a goalless draw, a classic relegation two-pointer. You’ll thank us for tempting fate when the decisive ninth goal flies in after 98 minutes. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott Murray from 8pm GMT for hot Premier League MBM coverage of Watford 0-0 Norwich. QUOTE OF THE DAY “It’s a football decision. We’re doing it for the benefit of the players in our fight to stay in the division and that’s my only thought” – Eddie Howe again declines to address Saudi Arabia’s dismal human rights record, confirming he will take his Newcastle squad there after Saturday’s game at Leeds. RETRO QUOTE OF THE DAY “I thought, I don’t want to go on and say I’m a Manchester United fan or a Liverpool fan – I’m gonna go down to the third level. And so I picked Hartlepool. I read about them and I found that the people of Hartlepool had hanged a monkey thinking he was a Frenchman, and I loved that story. I read everything I could about every game they played. I knew all the players. I knew who the coach was. I knew there’d been major criticism of the coach, about whether he should have put one player in or not. I was ready” – how it entered folklore that the unlikeliest of rock stars was also the unlikeliest of Hartlepool fans. RIP Meat Loaf. “We are glad to have been the team to which he dedicated his passion for football,” said a club spokesman. FIVER LETTERS “Re: yesterday’s Fiver letters. I’d heard and enjoyed that anecdote about Frank Worthington’s holiday hi-jinx before, but it really shouldn’t come as much of a surprise given the title of his autobiography from whence it came” – Alan Cormack. “If the likes of Liverpool start taking Milk Cup seriously, where is the future for teams like Arsenal? (And Spurs and Manchester United?)” – Krishna Moorthy. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Alan Cormack. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your listening gear around the latest Football Weekly Extra podcast. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Victor Lindelof will not be involved for Manchester United against West Ham on Saturday after a “very traumatic” break-in at his family home as he played against Brentford. Brighton boss Graham Potter has tested positive for Covid and will miss his side’s Premier League game at Leicester. Farhad Moshiri has increased his stake in Everton to 94%. “I promise you that my determination to deliver for Everton will not waiver!” he roared in an open letter to fans. Derby manager Wayne Rooney has not exactly distanced himself from speculation linking him to the Everton job. “I’m the same as everyone else, I see the speculation on social media [disgraces] and in the newspapers,” he come-and-get-me-plead. “Of course Everton is a club I grew up supporting. I’m flattered to get brought up in those conversations, but I know Everton know that to have any communication with me they have to go through the administrators.” Tanguy Ndombele is heading out of the door marked Do One at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium and strolling towards the one marked Bienvenue at PSG’s Parc des Princes. Arsenal are keen on signing USA! USA!! USA!!! goaltender Matt Turner from New England Revolution. England are to host Ivory Coast in a friendly at Wembley this March – the first time the Three Lions will meet the Elephants outside of a particularly graphic episode of Planet Earth. Sam Kerr’s five goals in a flamin’ 18-0 win over Indonesia at the Asian Cup have made her Australian football’s greatest international goalscorer, surpassing Tim Cahill’s record of 50 international goals. “Timmy’s a legend in Australia, so to be even in the same conversation as him, it’s an amazing honour,” she cheered. And Bruno Lage says he will try to keep Adama Traoré out of Tottenham’s clutches. “We have a top player with us, a lovely guy,” he mused. “I remember how much Tottenham protected Harry Kane at the beginning of the season.” STILL WANT MORE? Two Out of Three Ain’t Bad. Rock and Roll Dreams Come Through. Objects in the Rear View Mirror May Appear Closer Than They Are. I’d Lie for You (And That’s the Truth). And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ‘THE SIRENS ARE SCREAMING AND THE FIRES ARE HOWLING’A man has been charged with the murder of an 86-year-old woman and the attempted murder of her husband, 88, after they were attacked in their home. Freda Walker was found dead at the scene in Langwith Junction, Derbyshire, on Saturday, while Ken Walker was found with life-threatening injuries and remains in hospital in a critical condition. Vasile Culea, 33, was arrested at his home in Church Warsop, Nottinghamshire, on Thursday. He has been remanded in custody and will appear at Nottingham magistrates court on Saturday. The assistant chief constable David Kirby said: “While today’s charge is clearly positive news, and one that I hope brings a degree of reassurance, the investigation into the incident continues and I would once again appeal for anyone who has any information to come forward. “The incident has had an understandable impact on the community of Langwith Junction and the wider Shirebrook area. I would like to thank all those who have come forward and supported the investigation so far. “Our thoughts remain with the couple’s family and friends – and I, along with the whole of Derbyshire constabulary, send our best wishes to Ken.” The couple were found by a concerned neighbour at 9am on Saturday. Ken Walker, a member of Shirebrook town council and previously a councillor on Bolsover district council, is in a critical but stable condition in hospital, police said this week.Rishi Sunak is renowned at Westminster for burnishing his brand in preparation to make a bid for the top job – but it now appears he may get the opportunity much sooner than expected. If he does succeed Boris Johnson in No 10, he will be one of the wealthiest prime ministers in history. And if it happens before his 42nd birthday, in mid-May, he will be the youngest in more than 250 years. Well-tailored and whip-smart, the chancellor has been assiduously wooing Conservative MPs, and polls suggest he is well-liked by the public – or certainly more so than his beleaguered boss. An Ipsos Mori poll taken in the past few days gave Sunak a net favourability rating of +7, against Johnson’s -39, and -14 for the Labour leader, Keir Starmer. But with a cost of living crisis looming, some at Westminster are questioning whether Sunak’s political worldview is the right one for this moment – and asking if he is “streetwise” enough to make the move next door. The son of Punjabi immigrants from east Africa, Sunak studied at Winchester public school before graduating from Oxford in philosophy, politics and economics. While his classmates were partying, the nerdy Sunak became president of the Oxford Investment Club and he went on to pursue a career in the City, breaking off to take an MBA at Stanford in the US, where he met his wife, Akshata Murthy. They certainly wouldn’t need to raise funds for wallpaper. Murthy owns a 0.91% stake in Infosys, the Indian tech giant founded by her father, according to its annual report. The chancellor’s investments from his days as a hedge fund manager are tucked away in a blind trust – but Murthy’s share of the family firm alone is worth more than £700m at current prices, and the pair own a string of properties, including a substantial Georgian house in his North Yorkshire constituency. The richest ever prime minister, according to Guinness World Records, was Edward Stanley the 14th Earl of Derby (1799-1869), with the equivalent of about £444m today. And there was Archibald Rosebery (1847-1929), a hereditary peer with an ancestral castle who married Hannah de Rothschild, heir to a banking fortune. Sunak and his wife were granted planning permission last year to build a swimming pool, gym and steam room in their paddock. In 2020, he posed for pre-budget photos with a £180 coffee mug. He was already a junior minister under Theresa May, but it was the fellow Brexiter Boris Johnson who gave him the plum role of chief secretary to the Treasury just four years after he was first elected to represent leafy Richmond. Sunak came out early for Johnson, penning a joint op-ed with two other young MPs, Robert Jenrick and Oliver Dowden. “The Tories are in deep peril. Only Boris Johnson can save us,” they warned melodramatically in a Times article coordinated by Johnson’s campaign team. All three men went on to be cabinet ministers under Johnson – though Jenrick was unceremoniously sacked in last autumn’s reshuffle. Sunak’s peers say his time at Stanford, in the California sunshine, was key to informing his politics, as well as his penchant for hoodies and sliders. “He thinks of himself as a tech bro. He kind of believes it, it’s infected him,” said one person who has worked with him. That makes Sunak, as well as an evangelist for innovation and a fan of low taxes, sceptical of how much good the government can do by meddling in the economy. Sunak is also firmly committed to balancing the books – both because he believes in it economically, and because he thinks it’s a crucial political dividing line with Labour. The latter informed decisions such as insisting on an increase in national insurance contributions (NICs) to fund the NHS and social care; cutting the aid budget, and reversing the £20-a-week rise in universal credit that helped some of the UK’s poorest families through the pandemic. Perhaps ironically, the decision Sunak is best known for – the furlough scheme, which paid millions of people’s wages during the crisis – is one that cuts against his political instincts. He embraced the need for a big, generous scheme to protect jobs in the extraordinary conditions of the pandemic, when the government was literally ordering businesses to close, but was keen to turn the spending taps off again as soon as possible. In November 2020 he was forced into a last-minute U-turn, extending furlough just hours before it was due to come to an end, as the Treasury belatedly realised that abruptly withdrawing support as Covid cases rose once again could be disastrous. Today, with inflation rocketing and fuel bills set to jump in April, Sunak’s national insurance rise is deeply contentious. His likely leadership rival Liz Truss let it be known that she had challenged it in cabinet at the time, and the leader of the Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, has called for it to be cancelled. That’s one reason some colleagues are sceptical about Sunak’s low tax, small state politics, particularly given the Tories’ new electoral coalition, which since 2019 runs through a swath of former Labour seats where voters have been promised “levelling up”. “We’ve got an entirely new voter base in an entirely new part of the country. Cutting spending to reduce the deficit isn’t going to do it for them; it’s not 2010,” said one Tory aide, adding: “The voters of Bolton North East didn’t rush to the polling station holding a copy of Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations.” That concern was echoed by a frontbencher who attended one of Sunak’s recent meetings with MPs on the cost of living crisis – which turned out to be a thinly veiled leadership pitch. “Rishi wants to be like Nigel Lawson, but he [Lawson] set out a theoretical, foundational understanding of where the country was and where he could take it. He was the leader of political thought at the time, coming out of a time when we were over-regulated, where the state was too big. “Modern politics is not in the same place, it doesn’t matter whether Rishi thinks it should be or even if I think it should be. Boris is actually closer to where the public is. But the Treasury has somehow convinced itself that what the party wants is hairshirt fiscal austerity. It’s bollocks, utter bollocks.” One economist said Sunak was “a lot like Philip Hammond, just with a bit more charisma”. His defenders say there’s reason for his fiscal caution: he believes he was only able to spend an extraordinary £400bn on cushioning the economic impact of Covid because of the fiscal repair work done by his predecessors. “He very much believes if it wasn’t for the decisions made by Hammond and [George] Osborne before him, he wouldn’t have been able to act in that way,” says an aide. They also claim the clamour for state intervention on issues such as energy price rises is conditioned by the unprecedented support put in place during the pandemic. “Covid broke maths,” the aide says, suggesting it is Sunak’s job now to inject some realism. And they point to the fact he was already warning about inflation and its potential impact on the public finances in December 2020, before it was widely seen as a looming problem. The chancellor’s scepticism about the government’s net zero targets, or at least the state’s role in achieving them, also concerns some colleagues – though it warms the hearts of those Tory backbenchers who fear the consequences of green policies for their constituents’ pockets. Treasury insiders describe Sunak with respect rather than warmth. They appreciate his undeniable intellectual ability, decisiveness and dedication to hard work – but some say his smooth veneer is hard to penetrate. One official who has worked closely with the chancellor describes many of his relationships as “transactional”. “All his interactions with you are about: he wants something, can he get it? And then it’s over. There’s very little forming a human relationship or bond with anyone.” Colleagues also say they have always been conscious of Sunak’s intense ambition. He was unexpectedly made chancellor when Sajid Javid resigned rather than accept a plan hatched by Dominic Cummings to sack Javid’s advisers and set up a new joint team handpicked by No 10. At the time, Sunak was derided as “chino” – chancellor in name only – for accepting the bargain, but insiders say with Cummings out, the Treasury effectively took control of the team, leaving No 10 with little economics expertise of its own. “No 10 is just so chaotic, the Treasury spends a lot of time managing the chaos,” said one Whitehall-watcher. As well as savvy economic advisers, Sunak employs Cass Horowitz – co-founder of a creative agency called The Clerkenwell Brothers – to manage his personal brand, which is carefully honed with slick social media posts and branded hoodies. Treasury old-timers looked on with something approaching horror in the summer of 2020 when posters advertising the “eat out to help out” scheme were plastered across cafes and restaurants up and down the country, featuring a prominent facsimile of Sunak’s signature. Research later suggested the £850m scheme had contributed to one-sixth of Covid clusters over that summer, though the Treasury rejects the claim. Sunak’s Labour opposite number, Rachel Reeves, has repeatedly pointed to his tendency to disappear, rather than face difficult questions. That was a tactic pioneered by May, who was dubbed “submarine May” when she was in David Cameron’s cabinet. It served her well in emerging unscathed from six years as home secretary – but perhaps masked her shortcomings as a campaigner. A Labour source pointed out that Sunak tends to be prickly and irritable when attacked by Reeves across the dispatch box. “You can see it in his face: he hates it.” Colleagues on his own side of the House of Commons also fret about whether he has the political battle-scars to succeed in the top job. One former cabinet minister pointed to Sunak abruptly ending a TV interview when he was repeatedly asked about his support for Johnson. “The interview he gave this week where he walked out as he was asked for his support was deranged. And actually you know, it’s made people think – is he a bit green? He has not had a long time in politics actually, he’s been thrust into this huge position at a time of complete chaos but is he streetwise?”The man convicted of killing the children’s author Helen Bailey in 2016 appeared calm after the death of his wife and there were no signs he had tried to revive her, a paramedic has told a court. Ian Stewart, 61, is on trial accused of the murder of Diane Stewart, 47, at their home in Bassingbourn, Cambridgeshire, in 2010. Spencer North, a paramedic who attended the scene on 25 June that year, said he was let through the gate by Stewart and found Diane in cardiac arrest in the couple’s back garden. North said there were none of the usual signs of panic from Stewart at such a scene and no evidence that he had tried to perform CPR on his wife. “From my professional experience, when you go to a death of a loved one or a family member [people] typically show a heightened emotional state, screaming, crying, upset,” said North, adding: “In this particular case he appeared dissociative and was simply answering questions calmly.” He told jurors at Huntingdon crown court that Stewart appeared “initially distracted, idly pacing”. Asked by the prosecutor, Stuart Trimmer QC, how Stewart appeared “emotionally”, North replied that he “didn’t seem particularly distressed or anxious at all”. North said Stewart told him his wife had epilepsy and that he had found her unresponsive when he arrived at home. The paramedic said there “didn’t seem to be any effective CPR but we were told when he came out of the gate that he was just doing CPR”. He said: “Generally effective CPR causes trauma. You crush the ribs, they pop, they snap, the airway is normally open. Not everyone knows how to do it but that’s what you normally see if effective CPR is commenced.” The paramedic said he saw none of this. North said he saw “blood-stained saliva” on Diane Stewart’s mouth. “If there had been effective mouth-to-mouth, what would you expect to see?” asked Trimmer. “That would have been everywhere,” North said. He said there were “no obvious injuries” to Stewart. An ambulance service form completed at the scene gave the call time as 11.24am. The ambulance was on scene at 11.41am and death was pronounced at 12.02pm. PC Matt Gardner said he attended and completed a coroner’s report form as he did not assess the death to be suspicious. Asked how Stewart was when he was with him, he said: “He answered my questions clearly, I wouldn’t say distressed, distraught, but people act very differently under such circumstances.” He agreed that he ascertained that Stewart was the last person to see his wife alive, recording that time as 10.30am on 25 June. Stewart denies the murder of his wife. The trial continues.Wolves have arguably been the surprise package in the Premier League this seasonand a fourth victory in five league games for Bruno Lage’s side at Brentford would raise hopes of challenging for a European place. Wolves’ form has been built on a solid defence – conceding three in their past nine league games – and they will fancy their chances of another clean sheet against a Brentford side that have been struggling in attack with four goals in their past seven matches. Stephen Hollis Saturday 3pm Venue Brentford Community Stadium Last season n/a Referee Peter Bankes This season G7 Y34 R0 4.86 cards/game Odds H 9-4 A 13-8 D 2-1 BRENTFORD Subs from Thompson, Lössl, Forss, Ghoddos, Valencia, Peart-Harris, Bidstrup, Racic, Baptiste, Wissa, Roerslev Doubtful None Injured Jørgensen (hamstring, Feb), Dasilva (hip, Feb), Jeanvier (knee, unknown), Raya (knee, unknown), Fosu-Goode (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Onyeka (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y39 R1 Form LLWLLL Leading scorer Toney 5 WOLVES Subs from Ruddy, Moulden, Cundle, Hoever, Campbell, Silva, Giles, Jordão, Lembiska, Sanderson, Kawabe, Chiquinho, Dendoncker, Marçal, Trincão Doubtful None Injured Mosquera (hamstring, Feb), Jonny (knee, Feb), Neto (knee, Feb), Hwang (hamstring, Feb), Boly (calf, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Saïss (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y34 R1 Form LLWDWW Leading scorers Hwang, Jiménez 4The energy firms Chevron and Total have announced they will withdraw from Myanmar, a breakthrough for activists who have campaigned for the companies to cut off what is a major source of revenue for the military junta. In a statement, Total, which renamed itself TotalEnergies last year, cited the worsening human rights situation in Myanmar, which was plunged into chaos almost a year ago when the military seized power in a coup, ousting the democratically elected government of Aung San Suu Kyi. The French company said the human rights situation and deteriorating rule of law “no longer allows TotalEnergies to make a sufficiently positive contribution in the country”. The US firm Chevron said it too was planning to leave “in light of circumstances”. Since the coup, the military has attempted to crush any opposition to its rule, prompting civilians to form armed defence groups. At least 11,651 people have been arrested for opposing the military’s rules, while 1,488 have been killed, according to the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners, which monitors military abuses. On Friday a military tribunal handed down death sentences to two men convicted of terror offences – Phyo Zeyar Thaw, a member of Aung San Suu Kyi’s ousted National League for Democracy party, and prominent democracy activist Kyaw Min Yu, better known as “Jimmy”. The junta has sentenced dozens of anti-coup activists to death as part of its crackdown on dissent but Myanmar has not carried out an execution for decades. The oil firms’ announcement is a major victory for campaigners, who have called for all companies to cut commercial ties with the state-owned enterprise Myanmar Oil and Gas Enterprise (MOGE), which has deep links with the military. According to Human Rights Watch, natural gas projects in Myanmar generate more than $1bn in foreign revenue for the junta each year, its single largest source of foreign currency revenue. TotalEnergies has operated the Yadana gas project off Myanmar’s south-west coast since the 1990s and owns a 31.24% stake. Chevron owns 28.26% of the project, which supplies Myanmar and Thailand. PTTEP, a subsidiary of the Thai national energy company PTT, and MOGE are the remaining shareholders. Yadanar Maung, a spokesperson for the activist group Justice for Myanmar, welcomed the decision, saying: “TotalEnergies has finally taken heed of the calls of Myanmar people, local and international civil society to stop the flow of funds to the terrorist junta. It is now essential that international governments move ahead with targeted sanctions on oil and gas to deny the junta funds from the remaining oil and gas projects.” TotalEnergies said it had approached the French authorities to consider putting in place targeted sanctions that would “confine all the financial flows of the various partners to escrow accounts without shutting down the gas production”. The company added it had not identified any means for doing so. The firm said contractual agreements stated that in the event of withdrawal its interests would be shared between the current partners, unless they object to such allocation, and that the role of operator would be taken over by one of the partners. A spokesperson for Chevron said: “In light of circumstances in Myanmar, we have reviewed our interest in the Yadana natural gas project to enable a planned and orderly transition that will lead to an exit from the country. As a non-operator with a minority interest in the project, our immediate priority remains the safety and wellbeing of employees, safe operations and the supply of much-needed energy for the people of Myanmar and Thailand.”The US singer and actor Meat Loaf has died aged 74, his agent has confirmed. Born Marvin Lee Aday and later legally known as Michael, the musician died on Thursday with his wife, Deborah Gillespie, by his side. No cause of death was shared but unconfirmed reports suggested he had died of Covid-19. “We know how much he meant to so many of you and we truly appreciate all of the love and support as we move through this time of grief in losing such an inspiring artist and beautiful man,” his family said in a statement. “From his heart to your souls … don’t ever stop rocking!” Written and composed by Jim Steinman, Meat Loaf’s 1977 debut album Bat Out of Hell remains one of the biggest-selling albums in history. Steinman and Meat Loaf’s 1993 album Bat Out of Hell II: Back Into Hell produced the global hit single I’d Do Anything for Love (But I Won’t Do That). It was his only UK No 1 single, spending seven weeks at the top. He completed the Bat Out of Hell trilogy with The Monster Is Loose in 2006. The three albums have sold more than 65m copies worldwide. Meat Loaf also had a breakout role in the 1975 film version of The Rocky Horror Picture Show playing Eddie, an ill-fated delivery boy who sings the song Hot Patootie. He appeared in more than 50 films and TV shows, among them Fight Club, Wayne’s World and Spiceworld the Movie. In 2021, he signed a deal to develop a relationship competition series titled I’d Do Anything for Love (But I Won’t Do That). The news of the rock star’s death prompted numerous fond tributes. Alice Cooper called him “one of the greatest voices in rock’n’roll” and one of his closest friends in showbusiness, and recalled their work together on the 1980 comedy Roadie. “He plays the ultimate roadie on this quest to be the best in the world,” said Cooper. “But that’s what he did in life too – he always wanted to be the best at what he was doing and I think he succeeded. There was nobody, and I mean nobody, like Meat Loaf.” Stephen Fry recalled performing a sketch with him on the UK sketch comedy show Saturday Live in the 1980s. “I hope paradise is as you remember it from the dashboard light, Meat Loaf,” he tweeted. Of their appearance together, he wrote: “He had the quality of being simultaneously frightening and cuddly, which is rare and rather wonderful.” Adam Lambert recalled his kindness: “A gentle hearted powerhouse rockstar forever and ever.” “The vaults of heaven will be ringing with rock,” wrote Andrew Lloyd Webber. “Give my best to Jim.” Music industry executive Pete Waterman called him a “larger-than-life character with a unique voice”, a take echoed by Bonnie Tyler who said he had the “stage presence to match … One of those rare people who truly was a one-off talent and personality.” Aday was born in Dallas, Texas, on 27 September 1947. He was an only child, his mother a school teacher and gospel singer and his father a former police officer who developed alcoholism after being medically discharged from the US army during the second world war. Aday acted in high school productions, studied at Lubbock Christian College and later North Texas State University. After his mother’s death, he moved to Los Angeles – where he worked as a car park attendant and believed that he once picked up a hitchhiking Charles Manson – and formed his first group, Meat Loaf Soul, taking the name from a nickname given to him by a football coach. In Los Angeles, Meat Loaf turned down three early offers of recording contracts and the group plied their trade live, supporting acts such as Van Morrison’s band Them, Taj Mahal, Janis Joplin, the Who, the Fugs, the Stooges and the Grateful Dead. As band members came and went, the group changed its name with every new lineup – among them Floating Circus and Popcorn Blizzard. Popcorn Blizzard moved to Michigan, released an album in 1967 and sold 5,000 copies. Meat Loaf, however, told NME in 1978 that he was “going crazy out there in the woods” and so he moved back to Los Angeles and joined the cast of Hair. He was playing a long game, he explained, exploring other avenues of entertainment that he hoped would ultimately allow him to make music on his terms. “I went into the theatre ’cause I hate bars; I didn’t want to be stuck in a bar band and go sing Top 40 material. To me that’s as bad as selling out. Instead, why not do something that lets your mind be creative?” His role in Hair led to an invitation to record for Motown in collaboration with Shaun “Stoney” Murphy. An album, Stoney &amp; Meatloaf (misspelled) was released in September 1971. After some singles chart success Meat Loaf left the group when Motown replaced his and Murphy’s vocals on the song Who Is the Leader of the People? with those of Edwin Starr. He found success again on stage, starring in an off-Broadway production of Rainbow and a Broadway production of Hair. Auditioning for a production of More Than You Deserve, he met his future collaborator Jim Steinman. In 1973, Meat Loaf was cast in the original Los Angeles production of The Rocky Horror Show, playing Eddie and Dr Everett Scott. He took on the role of Eddie in the later film. His rising fortunes dovetailed with the proper start of his collaboration with Steinman on Bat Out of Hell in 1972, which prompted him to sideline the theatre world. The album had a long gestation, rejected by many labels who didn’t understand its genre-defying style. Todd Rundgren proved the album’s saving grace, producing the record and playing guitar. Finally, Epic imprint Cleveland International Records took a chance and history was made. “I have the patience of a cat,” Meat Loaf told NME. “I’ll sit tight and wait until everything is right.” His debut solo single, You Took the Words Right Out of My Mouth, was released in 1977 and reached the US and UK Top 40. Bat Out of Hell came out at the height of punk, rendering him, a critic for Mojo later suggested, “the uncoolest man in the universe”. Meat Loaf responded: “Put it this way. I got used to it quite easily when the album started selling in its millions.” Nevertheless, he didn’t enjoy success. “The music was epic, the success was epic, everything that came with it was epic,” he told Mojo. “Maybe that’s every teenager’s fantasy. But it wasn’t mine. I hated it because it was not based in reality. To me, the whole celebrity thing was and is a lot of bullshit.” Despite his cool attitude to fame, Meat Loaf had a nervous breakdown following Bat Out of Hell. A mooted follow-up album, Bad for Good, was blighted by Meat Loaf losing his voice thanks to a combination of touring, drugs and exhaustion. Instead, Steinman released Bad for Good as a album and wrote 1981’s Dead Ringer for Meat Loaf, who sang the title track as a duet with Cher. However, Steinman and Meat Loaf fell out and sued one another – the first of several estrangements – leaving the latter to resort to songwriters-for-hire for his next album, Midnight at the Lost and Found. He was unable to convince his record label to pay for two Steinman songs that Meat Loaf said were written for him – Total Eclipse of the Heart, later a No 1 hit for Bonnie Tyler, and Making Love Out of Nothing at All, a No 2 hit for Air Supply. Although a big live draw, Meat Loaf’s records foundered commercially in the 1980s. That decade, he made forays into comedy, performing in the UK with Hugh Laurie, but he also struggled personally. He told Mojo, “I went off the rails because I was fighting the record company and I was fighting the mob because I was being ripped off. It was then I discovered what a tough motherfucker I was.” But Meat Loaf’s crowning moment was yet to come. Reunited with Steinman, and defying widespread scepticism about his comeback, he released Bat Out of Hell II: Back Into Hell, a global smash that won him Grammy and Brit awards. Critics often asked him about the caveat of I’d Do Anything for Love (But I Won’t Do That). Meat Loaf remained cryptic about the answer, responding that it was all in the song if anyone cared to listen properly. His subsequent 90s albums went platinum in the UK and his profile remained high into the new millennium, but on 17 November 2003, during a performance at Wembley Arena, Meat Loaf collapsed of what was later diagnosed as Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. After a surgical procedure, he continued to tour and recorded Bat Out of Hell III with Steinman, released in 2006. A single, It’s All Coming Back to Me Now, charted in the UK at No 6, his highest chart position in almost 11 years. He released his 12th and now final album, Braver Than We Are, in 2016. That year, he collapsed on stage in Canada – leading the New York Post to wrongly report his death – and subsequently committed to better protecting his health. In 2017, the Bat Out of Hell musical opened in the UK. It won the Evening Standard theatre awards prize for best musical. On 19 April 2021, Jim Steinman died of kidney failure. Despite the death of his long term collaborator, Meat Loaf told fans in November that he was due to return to the studio in January 2022 to record songs for a new album. Meat Loaf is survived by his wife, Deborah Gillespie, his daughter Amanda Aday and stepdaughter Pearl Aday from his first marriage to Leslie G Edmonds. Despite the stage name, he was for a time a vegetarian. In 2001, he legally changed his name from Marvin to Michael, having always associated the name Marvin with a Levi’s ad from his youth with the strapline: “Poor fat Marvin can’t wear Levi’s.” He also admitted to social anxiety that prevented him from socialising. Speaking to Mojo, he characterised the public perception of his act: “That I’m overblown, pompous, melodramatic, self-indulgent. I’ve heard it a million times. And the first person to describe me like that was me. It’s supposed to be overblown. The entire history of rock’n’roll is a comedy … Rock’n’roll was never meant to answer the questions of the universe. It’s a laugh. I’m a laugh. So laugh at me if you like. I have no problem with that.”It was a month after the Manchester Arena attack when Martin Hibbert learned the catastrophic toll of his injuries. He and his 14-year-old daughter, Eve, on a “daddy daughter day” to an Ariana Grande concert, were 5 metres from the explosion that killed 22 people and injured hundreds more in May 2017. Hibbert, 45, from Chorley in Lancashire, was told he would never walk again. Eve would probably never see, hear, speak or move – if she made it out of hospital. They were the closest to the bomb to survive. Nearly five years on, Hibbert describes every day as “like climbing a mountain” as they continue to recover from their injuries. He is, however, preparing to tackle his biggest peak yet: in June, he will attempt to scale Mount Kilimanjaro to raise £1m for charity to support people with debilitating spinal injuries. “The climb is to say: don’t write me off because I’m in a wheelchair. Look at what someone in a wheelchair can do with the right help and support,” he said. Hibbert, a football agent, will tackle the 45-mile ascent on a custom-made handbike, using push-and-pull levers to navigate the often harsh terrain on Africa’s highest mountain. It will take about a week of gruelling 12- to 14-hour climbs to reach the summit of Kilimanjaro, where temperatures can fall as low as -20C. If he succeeds, it is believed he will be one of the first people to reach the top with a complete spinal cord injury. The risks are considerable. About one in three people who attempt Kilimanjaro never make it to the summit, according to mountaineering websites, and he estimates there is a 10% success rate for those in wheelchairs. One of the greatest risks is infection, given the length of time he will be in a specially adapted chair, so a skin nurse will be among the medics guiding him to the top. “The odds are against me but the paramedic that saved my life didn’t think I was going to survive the journey to hospital,” he said. “Failure is just not an option.” Since the blast, Hibbert has become an ambassador for the Spinal Injuries Association and a motivational speaker. Far from blocking out the arena atrocity, he uses it to help counter his depression and post-traumatic stress disorder. “There are times when it does get tough and I don’t want to get out of bed and you’ve got to find the strength,” he said. “I just use Salman Abedi or [the thought that] if I don’t get out of bed today, the terrorists have won. They don’t want me sat here with you today during this interview. They don’t want me living life to the full. They want me sat in the corner crying about it.” He added: “If you could see what I’ve seen, it would finish you off. To see all those people around us dead and blown up – but we’ve survived. That’s what gets me out of bed, because if I don’t live life to the full I’m letting those 22 people down and their families.” Hibbert has already raised almost £400,000 of his £1m target for the Spinal Injuries Association. His greater goal, he said, was for a “revolution” in how Britain thought about disabled people. He said he had been shocked by the lack of assistance for those in wheelchairs, for instance in hotels, restaurants or cinemas – and was appalled to learn that only one-third of the roughly 2,500 people a year who sustained a spinal cord injury sought specialist support to help them regain their independence. “When you’re disabled I think members of the public either think you’re a Paralympic athlete or a benefits scrounger. There’s nothing in between,” he said. “It’s not the spinal cord injury or the wheelchair that makes me feel disabled, it’s people’s attitudes, it’s the landscape, it’s the environment.” Hibbert, a lifelong Manchester United fan, said he had been inspired by the footballer Marcus Rashford’s successful campaign for free school meals and that he would lobby the government on behalf of people with life-changing injuries: “This is about changing the landscape for disabled people. If all we do is raise a million quid, I’ll be disappointed. I’ll see it as a failure.” When he reaches the summit Hibbert will scatter the ashes of his mother, who died in October and was “incredibly proud” if not overly enthusiastic about his Kilimanjaro attempt. He will also carry a picture of “my princess” Eve, now 19, whose recovery has astounded the medics who treated her for 10 months at Manchester children’s hospital. Despite the early prognosis, she can see, hear, talk and has begun to walk unaided: “I keep saying to her: when she is ready, she will inspire the world.”Kanye West has demanded that Netflix allow him to approve the edit of its forthcoming documentary about him, Jeen-Yuhs. Writing on Instagram, he said: “I’m going to say this kindly for the last time. I must get final edit and approval on this doc before it releases on Netflix. Open the edit room immediately so I can be in charge of my own image. Thank you in advance.” Directed by Coodie Simmons and Chike Ozah, the film is in three parts, and features footage filmed across West’s career in music, fashion and politics, spanning more than 20 years. It is scheduled to premiere at the Sundance film festival on Sunday before airing on Netflix from 16 February. Speaking to Variety this week, Simmons said that West told him he trusted him “100%” with the cut of the film, but acknowledged: “When his team and the businesspeople have gotten involved, they’re of course going to have their say. But I needed to tell this story. It’s not about making Kanye likable or not. The footage doesn’t lie. What makes the film special is that it’s not something definitive; it’s his journey through my vision.” Simmons and Ozah have not commented on West’s request. The Guardian has contacted Netflix for comment.It should have been perfect flying weather when Zara Rutherford set off from Palo Alto in California for Seattle, a month into her attempt to become the youngest woman to fly solo round the world. But while the skies were clear, wildfires were raging on the ground. She tried to avoid the towering plumes of acrid smoke by climbing to 12,000ft, but to no avail. “I couldn’t see in front of me,” she said. “It was all kind of a brownish, smoky, orange, dirty colour. I could smell the smoke as well, which was quite unpleasant.” By the time she was enveloped in smoke and could no longer see the ground from her plane, she realised she would have to turn back. She was only in the smoke for a few seconds, but it felt “like for ever, especially because the turbulence went from zero to everything very quickly.” The incident was just one of many heart-stopping moments on Rutherford’s record-breaking journey, which took in 31 countries over five continents and ended on Thursday. “I am really happy. I think it’s finally kicking in,” the 19-year-old said in a Zoom interview from her home outside Brussels. Phones were pinging and the Rutherford cats miaowed as she was momentarily interrupted by a luxuriously furred grey tabby who hogged the screen. The domestic calm was a far cry from the Belgian-British teenager’s 155-day odyssey, which took in some of the coldest, smoggiest and wettest places on earth, all experienced in a two-seater Shark microlight, a plane so easy to manoeuvre that one person can push it along the runway. The flip side of the plane’s carbon-fibre ultra-lightness is its susceptibility to severe turbulence. Flying over Bulgarian mountains a week ago, the turbulence was so severe it triggered a G-force warning that Rutherford described in her typically understated way as “very uncomfortable”. Even on the final hop from Frankfurt to Kortrijk in western Belgium on Thursday, she hit her head on the canopy. Her journey started in August in Belgium, from where she headed west over the UK to the Americas via Greenland and on to Russia, then down to south-east Asia, looping north over India, the Middle East and finally back to Europe. Rutherford, who was first taken up in small planes by her pilot parents when she was a toddler, gained her flying licence at 17. But temperate Belgium had not prepared her for the extreme conditions she would encounter on her epic trip. One of her most daunting tasks was flying over Siberia. “It is beautiful but it is intimidating … The ocean is frozen at this time of year. There are no trees, there are no people, no roads, no electricity cables. In terms of wilderness there is nothing quite like it.” The flight over the snowy vastness was nerve-racking because she knew if her engine were to fail, there would be a long wait for rescue. “Spending hours in -35C, I don’t know if that’s achievable really, and I didn’t have quite the survival gear needed to spend hours and hours outside.” Unable to fly at night or in clouds, she was often racing against time – and the weather. Rather than dwell on what might happen, she concentrated on flying her plane: “It’s about living in the present; the next five, 10 minutes, rather than the next four hours, because in four hours the weather can change.” Music helped her stay focused in the cockpit. She set off with “a huge playlist” of pop songs from 2010 to 2019. Her tunes also eased the culture shock of being far from home. “It was good to have things I was familiar with, because especially in Siberia, Saudi Arabia and most of Asia, everything was so different, the culture, the climate the people – everyone was very generous and very kind, but I felt so, so far away from home, so having music I could sing along to was really helpful.” Avoiding bad weather meant she often had to change her plans. A thunderstorm prevented her from landing in Jakarta, forcing a diversion to the small domestic airport at Ketapang on the island of Borneo. As the terminal had no immigration office, she had to stay in the airport for two days – “the people were very generous [and] I got some very good local food”. The young pilot is aware of the environmental impact of her journey. She had hoped to make the trip in an electric plane, but found that wasn’t possible and said her plane used far less fuel than a commercial jet. “For my whole trip around the world it uses the same amount of fuel as a Boeing does in about 10 minutes, so although it has a negative impact, it’s not as big as it seems at first glance. And I was also doing some carbon offsetting.” Rutherford, who plans to study electrical engineering in the UK or the US, thinks she could be involved in making aviation greener. “Right now obviously aviation is not sustainable whatsoever, but it is heading in that direction.” More immediately she hopes her trip will inspire women and girls to fly planes and study science, engineering, technology and mathematics. “Aviation is a very big industry and it’s not going anywhere. As we go towards electric aircraft, we will continue to need pilots, so I am hoping to get more women involved.”Manchester City have won 12 league matches in succession and, in such irresistible form, look very likely to make it 13 at Southampton. A swathe of pundits believe City need to sign a striker before the window closes and possibly this would help Pep Guardiola finally get over the line in the Champions League, but domestically they are cruising to glory without the frivolities of an out-and-out No 9. In the process they are making the rest of the top flight rather red-faced as no one seems able to stop City’s Rube Goldberg goal machine. Ralph Hasenhüttl’s side will need to be supremely focussed from the off and that’s just to avoid a thrashing. Graham Searles Saturday 5.30m Sky Sports Premier League Venue St Mary’s Stadium Last season Southampton 0 Manchester City 1 Referee Simon Hooper This season G7 Y23 R0 3.29 cards/game Odds H 23-2 A 3-10 D 11-2 SOUTHAMPTON Subs from Lewis, Stephens, Long, A Armstrong, Small, S Armstrong, Elyounoussi, Valery, Walcott Doubtful Walcott (Covid), Elyounoussi (Covid) Injured McCarthy (hamstring, Feb), Smallbone (calf, Feb), Livramento (knee, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Djenepo (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y41 R2 Form LDWDWL Leading scorer Ward-Prowse 6 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Palmer, Fernandinho, Aké, Mbete, Delap, Jesus, Egan-Riley, Wilson-Ebrand, Lavia, McAtee, Gündogan, Laporte Doubtful Delap (match fitness) Injured None Suspended None Unavailable Mahrez (rest after Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y30 R1 Form WWWWWW Leading scores Silva, Sterling 7Seth Meyers Late-night hosts tore into the Senate’s failure to pass voting rights protections this week, and in particular two Democratic senators, Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, who supported the measure but refused to end the filibuster that allowed Republicans to block it. To recap, “Senate Republicans representing a minority of Americans filibustered voting rights legislation favored by a majority of Americans, which would’ve passed if not for the filibuster,” Seth Meyers explained on Thursday’s Late Night. “So Senate Democrats, who represent a majority of Americans, then tried to change the filibuster, but they couldn’t because two Democrats who voted for the voting rights bill also voted to keep the filibuster, which prevents them from passing the voting rights bill they support. “And let me be clear: that is a sentence that makes no fucking sense whatsoever,” he continued. “I hope at the very least this is a moment when we can step back to fully digest just how ass-backwards our system is.” Meyers noted that the opposition from all 50 Republican senators was “sad but predictable”, but the refusal by Manchin and Sinema to end the filibuster, the procedural rule that requires 60 votes to advance legislation to a final vote, in the name of bipartisanship was “especially infuriating”. “When it comes to voting, there’s only one side,” he said. “Republicans are the ones waging war on democracy. You can’t compromise with the side that’s doing the damage. When you’re putting out a fire, you don’t call the fire department and the arsonist and see what they can work out together.” Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah mocked Manchin’s speech on the Senate floor defending the filibuster as playing an “important role in protecting our democracy from the transitory passions of the majority and respecting the input of the minority in the Senate”. “Joe Manchin is right, everything in the Senate should be as difficult as possible,” Noah deadpanned. “If Democrats want to pass a bill, Chuck Schumer should have to carry it through a stage of American Ninja Warrior first.” Though both Sinema and Manchin have said they support the voting rights bill, “they just don’t support making sure that they pass”, Noah noted. “Which, when you think about it, is actually so inspiring, you know? Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema believe so strongly in the power of voting that they use their vote to block voting rights for the entire country. They were unvoting voting by voting.” “What Joe Manchin is saying is: I want to help you out of the water. I’m not going to throw you a rope, but I want to throw you the rope,” Noah concluded. “And any drowning man would agree, it’s the thought that counts.” Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert observed the first anniversary of Joe Biden’s term in office. “It seems like just yesterday our democracy was being held hostage by a cabal of obstructionists who didn’t want every vote counted. Oh wait, that’s yesterday,” he joked. The anniversary was not a good day for the former president, as the supreme court voted 8-1 to reject Donald Trump’s request to keep the National Archives from releasing documents to the House select committee on 6 January. “He’s losing so much, he’s going to get tired of losing,” Colbert joked. Among the material Trump wanted to keep hidden are proposed talking points for the then press secretary, Kayleigh McEnany, a draft text of Trump’s speech for the “Save America” rally preceding the attack, and a handwritten note concerning January 6. The note’s author is unknown, Colbert noted. “All we know is that it was written on a burger wrapper.” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel blasted Senate Republicans for uniformly rejecting new legislation for voting rights which would ensure more Americans are able to vote. “Republicans want to add restrictions to voting because they are worried about voter fraud, even though it’s almost completely non-existent,” he explained. “Hey, you know what, you guys believe climate change is non-existent, right? How about coming up with some restrictions for that? Let’s compromise on this,” he added. After the vote, the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, “poked his little old head out of his shell to accidentally say what he really means” about his reasons for blocking the measure. Asked by a reporter how he would respond to people of color worried about their right to vote, McConnell answered: “The concern is misplaced, because if you look at the statistics, African American voters are voting in just as high a percentage as Americans.” “He means ‘regular’ Americans – the pink ones, like him,” Kimmel noted.This is a genuine six-pointer in which Manchester United can leapfrog West Ham into fourth if they win, whereas if David Moyes’ side take the spoils they will pull five points ahead of United. After Cristiano Ronaldo drew criticism for his visible unhappiness at being replaced during Wednesday’s win at Brentford there should be no surprise if, neck problem permitting, the 36-year-old sparkles against West Ham. Jamie Jackson Saturday 3pm Venue Old Trafford Last season Manchester United 1 West Ham 0 Referee Jon Moss This season G14 Y27 R4 2.21 cards/game Odds H 10-11 A 3-1 D 11-4 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Heaton, Henderson, Shoretire, Mata, Hannibal, Mengi, Lingard, Martial, Jones, Rashford, Van de Beek, Matic, Cavani Doubtful Ronaldo (neck), Cavani (knock), McTominay, Sancho (both match fitness) Injured Pogba (thigh, Feb), Wan-Bissaka (illness, Feb), Lindelöf (compassionate leave, unknown), Shaw (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Bailly (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y44 R2 Form WDWLDW Leading scorer Ronaldo 8 WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Randolph, Ashby, Oko-Flex, Baptiste, Zouma, Alese, Longelo, Johnson, Lanzini, Vlasic, Yarmolenko, Kral, Perkins Doubtful Zouma (hamstring) Injured Noble (knee, unknown), Ogbonna (knee, unknown), Fredericks (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y27 R2 Unavailable Benrahma (Africa Cup of Nations) Form LLWWWL Leading scorer Antonio 8The UK government faces a £150m bill after a court confirmed tens of thousands of severely disabled people were discriminated against as a result of being left financially worse off after being moved on to universal credit. A scathing judgment handed down on Friday marks the fourth victory in a six-year fight for justice against the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) brought by two disabled men who had their disability benefit payments cut by £180 a month after they moved house more than five years ago. The men, known as TP and AR, began their legal challenge in 2016 and 2017, arguing the deduction was discriminatory and had caused them serious hardship. Despite rulings in the pair’s favour by both the high court and the court of appeal, the DWP still refused to compensate their full monthly loss, offering instead just £120. Friday’s judgment found the DWP had once again discriminated against the men. The judge, Mr Justice Holgate, said the secretary of state for work and pensions had been unable to show “an objective and reasonable justification” for her differential treatment of people in TP and AR’s position. The judgment also found in favour of a disabled mother and child, known as claimants AB and F, who had lost disability payments in child tax credit when they moved on to universal credit without transitional relief. They had suffered discrimination “manifestly without reasonable foundation”, the judge found. According to evidence provided by the DWP to the court during the claim, Friday’s ruling will affect up to 50,000 claimants, while the cost of providing transitional relief will involve sums of £20m to £30m a year over a six-year period. Responding to the ruling, TP said: “I am relieved that the judge agrees that the DWP treated us differently than other severely disabled benefits claimants and that it was wrong to do so. The past six years have been immensely stressful as I have struggled to get by on a lower income. I just hope that the DWP will put all of this right as soon as possible so that those of us who have been badly affected by this unfair policy can get on with our lives.” AR said: “The policy has caused me and others serious hardship and I am glad that the court has seen the sense in our argument. Hopefully we will be ‘fourth time lucky’ and finally have reached the end of the road fighting this unfair policy.” Tessa Gregory, a partner at the law firm Leigh Day, which represented the pair, said she did not understand why the DWP kept fighting the case. “Following the three previous findings of unlawful discrimination the DWP should have ensured our clients were not losing out on severe and enhanced disability payments following their move from legacy benefits to universal credit. “Instead after each judgment the DWP has made further attempts to short-change this group of highly vulnerable claimants who faced a cliff-edge loss of income when none of their disability needs has changed.” Before moving on to universal credit, both men had been in receipt of the severe disability premium (SDP) and the enhanced disability premium (EDP) benefits, which were designed to meet the additional care needs of severely disabled people living alone with no carer. Despite being advised by DWP officials that they would receive transitional relief – meaning in effect their income would not change – when they moved on to universal credit and their EDP and SDP payments stopped, each had £178 a month deducted, leaving them unable to meet key care needs. TP moved house on clinical advice after he was diagnosed with a terminal illness, non-Hodgkin lymphoma and Castleman disease. AR, who had mental illness, moved after the bedroom tax forced him to find a cheaper home. Both were moved on to universal credit automatically. A DWP spokesperson said: “We are considering the court’s judgment and will respond in due course.”Just because Boris Johnson approaches every issue thinking only of Boris Johnson does not mean we have to do the same. Even the crisis that now engulfs the prime minister, and sees his fate hang on Tory MPs’ reaction to a Sue Gray report that could come next week, is not only about him. It’s tempting to see it that way – to look for the roots of the partygate scandal in Johnson’s arrogance, entitlement and narcissism – but it’s a double mistake. As a matter of politics, it’s unwise because it would allow the Conservatives to ditch Johnson, pick a successor and claim to be a new government exorcised of its demon, with no need for the electorate to turn to Labour. But it’s also wrong. For Johnson may be a loner, but he did not act alone. That’s narrowly true, in the sense that there were plenty of others who knew about or attended those rule-breaking parties and plenty more who are covering for him now. Every Conservative MP who defends Johnson, every activist or donor who does not demand his resignation, makes themselves complicit in the damage his actions have caused. But it’s true in a deeper sense, too, in that the shaming events in Downing Street are a function of a Conservative party that is now something else. Despite the name, that organisation is no longer conservative in the way that was previously understood and in which it once took great pride. Consider the two parties that Johnson himself did not attend, the ones that rocked the basement and saw a suitcase full of booze wheeled into No 10 the night before the Queen buried her husband. Forget Covid and the restrictions that were broken. There was a time, not so long ago, when no Conservative would have dreamed of partying in a government building on the eve of a royal funeral, even if there was no pandemic. They would have been affronted by the very idea of it. Or take the actions of two of Johnson’s most loyal cabinet ministers as they moved to save their boss. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, announced the end of the licence fee, essentially passing a death sentence on the BBC as we know it. Admittedly, Tory ministers have always enjoyed bashing the BBC, threatening to take it down a peg, but they have not called for its effective destruction. Yet now a minister who calls herself a Conservative can look at a world-class, century-old institution that all but defines Britishness, and think her mission is not to preserve and protect that institution but to smash it into pieces. Meanwhile, Jacob Rees-Mogg, who likes to cosplay as an Edwardian high Tory, sought to defend Johnson by attacking the elected leader of the Scottish Conservative party as “a lightweight”, thereby belittling the Scottish Tories who had chosen him. Once upon a time, a member of the Conservative and Unionist party would have understood that the fate of the union is imperilled if Scottish voters believe Westminster regards them with contempt. But Rees-Mogg couldn’t care less. The origin of all this – a Conservative party happily trampling on the union, the monarchy and the cultural organisation that binds these islands together like no other – is not hard to fathom, though it has become impolite to mention it. It’s Brexit that transformed the Conservative party. Where once Tories revered tradition, Brexit filled them with revolutionary zeal. Suddenly, and in a reversal of the teaching of the conservative theorist Michael Oakeshott, they preferred the unknown to the familiar, the untried to the tried, the possible to the actual, utopian bliss to present laughter. Brexit saw the Tories succumb to the lure of abstract nouns – Freedom! Sovereignty! – and supposedly creative destruction. One minister can’t shake the image of Dominic Cummings, minutes after the referendum result came through, leaping on a table at Vote Leave headquarters, giving a speech and then punching a hole in the ceiling: “Destructive fervour in his moment of triumph.” Vandalism became a Brexit habit – hardly surprising for a project dedicated to uprooting a tangle of connections with our continental neighbours that had grown dense and thick over half a century – and this is the Brexit government. Like all revolutionary endeavours, it believes that the end justifies all means, no matter the damage to those things conservatives once cherished. This, remember, was the movement that promised to restore parliamentary sovereignty – only to suspend parliament illegally to get its way. So we should not be too surprised that the Vote Leave Downing Street behaved the way it did. Of course it had contempt for the rules, even those it wrote itself. This was the government that boasted on the floor of the House of Commons of its willingness to break international law, if that’s what its purist Brexit required. And naturally it bridled at restrictions of any kind, even those essential to keeping our fellow citizens alive. A crude libertarianism always ran through Brexit, with Brussels seen as the source of pettifogging rules imposing a nannying health-and-safety culture on John Bull. No wonder Johnson, Cummings and the others thought they were above such things. Freedom was always their rallying cry, and they were going to damn well have it, even as they were denying it to everyone else. Besides, they saw themselves as granted a special licence that put them beyond the reach of the usual constraints. The Brexiters believed the referendum result had given them a super-mandate that trumped any conventions or norms: it made them anointed instruments of the will of the people, who could brook no challenge. The landslide victory of 2019 reinforced that conviction. It was a toxic combination: part Marie Antoinette drinking and laughing while outside the walled garden the obedient public were dying lonely deaths, part revolutionary politburo convinced that whatever satisfied its personal interests served the cause of the people. We need have no illusions about the Conservative party of old. We know its record. We know that Margaret Thatcher had her own kind of revolutionary zeal, just as we know the destructive impact of David Cameron’s austerity. But there were lines it dared not cross, monarchy and the union among them. This is a different animal. Brexit transformed it from a conservative party into a national-populist party. Its instincts now are those of Viktor Orbán, funnelling public money and jobs to ideological allies, ready to burn down even the most valued institutions that stand in its way. Of course, it has contempt for the people, as all populists ultimately do. It even had contempt for the Queen on the night of her greatest grief. So let’s not pretend these faults were Johnson’s alone. Brexit is the virus. Boris Johnson was only ever its most visible carrier. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistA senior Met police officer who deployed spy cameras to film naked women has been sentenced to three years in prison in a case the judge said would “impact public trust” in the police. Neil Corbel, a 40-year-old detective inspector who resigned after being suspended by the Met, concealed spy cameras in keys, glasses, phone chargers, air fresheners, tissue boxes and headphones. Corbel, who planted the devices in rented rooms such as hotels and Airbnbs, posed as an airline pilot booking photoshoots and targeted unsuspecting models and escorts. Police discovered files involving 51 women on Corbel’s hard drive, with some videos up to four hours long. The former counter-terrorism officer pleaded guilty to 19 counts of voyeurism. One victim, who told the trial how her life had been affected, said: “I have pulled so much of my hair out with stress I have bald spots and have had to turn down work.” She showed the courtroom her scalp. Some victims drew parallels between Corbel and Wayne Couzens, who as a serving Met police officer kidnapped, raped and murdered 33-year-old Sarah Everard while she walked home and sparked a national reckoning on violence against women. Corbel’s sentencing at Isleworth crown court in London comes after a slate of incidents involving serving officers some say have driven a wedge between the police and the public. After Couzens’ sentencing in September, last month two Met police officers were jailed for taking and sharing pictures of two Black murder victims. Concerns over mistrust in the police were echoed by the judge in Corbel’s case, Martin Edmunds QC. One of the 19 victims who gave statements against Corbel said: “The fact that he is policeman is a huge deal. These people are meant to protect us. Following the murder of Sarah Everard this feels like a very frightening time to be a woman.” Sentencing Corbel to three years in prison, Edmunds said there was no evidence Corbel used his role as an officer to locate or intimidate the women. “However, it is clear that the revelation to your victims that you were a serving police officer has for many of them seriously undermined their trust in the police, something that for those individuals, given their various lines of work, is a particularly serious matter, just as the revelation of your offending must impact on public trust.” Corbel, who was formerly attached to the Met’s continuous policing improvement command and whose police career spanned 13 years, was caught after a model became suspicious of a digital clock. An internet search of the brand name revealed the device was a spy camera that could be smartphone-operated. “You used a range of deceptions to induce women to take off their clothes in your presence so you could record videos for your sexual gratification,” Edmunds said. “It is clear that you derived satisfaction from breaching [personal] boundaries by committing these offences rather than seeking out persons who might have offered the opportunity to video them without deception.” The offences took place in cities such as London, Manchester and Brighton, with Corbel sometimes planting up to nine cameras.New data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has revealed that unvaccinated adults infected with Covid-19 who are 65 and older are 49 times more likely to need hospitalization compared to those who have received third shots or booster doses. The CDC also found that in December, unvaccinated adults in that same age group experienced a rate of Covid-related hospitalization 17 times higher than those who are fully vaccinated. This group includes people who received two doses of an mRNA vaccine or one single-dose vaccine, but have not necessarily been boosted. For unvaccinated adults between 50 and 64, they are 44 times more likely to require hospitalization compared with those who are fully vaccinated and boosted. In that same age group, unvaccinated adults were also 17 times more likely to experience Covid-related hospitalization. According to the CDC, adults who are 65 and older and have received both doses of either the Pfizer or Moderna vaccine showed a 94% reduced risk of Covid-related hospitalizations. Unvaccinated adults aged 18 to 49 are 12 times more likely to be hospitalized, whereas unvaccinated adolescents who are 12 to 17 are nine times more likely to be hospitalized compared with their fully immunized counterparts. “Getting very sick means that older adults with Covid-19 might need hospitalization, intensive care, or a ventilator to help them breathe, or they might even die. The risk increases for people in their 50s and increases in 60s, 70s, and 80s. People 85 and older are the most likely to get very sick,” the CDC said on its website. “Get vaccinated as soon as possible,” the agency added. Last Friday, international regulators at the International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities published a report that reaffirmed the importance of obtaining a booster dose. “Reviewing data on the impact of Omicron, the participants concluded that current vaccines offer less protection against infection and mild disease caused by this variant. However, vaccination continues to offer considerable protection from hospitalisation and severe Covid-19 with Omicron, especially after a booster dose,” the regulators said. “It is becoming increasingly clear that a booster dose is needed to extend vaccine protection,” they added. Nevertheless, the regulators also acknowledged that “the administration of multiple booster doses at short intervals is not a sustainable approach in the longer term,” adding: “There is a need to develop a long-term strategy on the types of vaccines needed to manage Covid in the future.” According to Johns Hopkins data, the US has recorded more than 69m cases as well as over 860,000 deaths since the pandemic began. Approximately 63% of Americans have been fully vaccinated. Earlier this week, the US’s top medical adviser Anthony Fauci said that there were five stages of the pandemic and that the world is still currently in the first phase, “where the whole world is really very negatively impacted as we are right now”. The following four phases are deceleration, control, elimination and eradication. “If you look at the history of infectious diseases, we’ve only eradicated one infectious disease in man, and that’s smallpox. That’s not going to happen with this virus,” Fauci said in reference to Covid-19. This article was amended on 27 January 2022 to clarify some of the statistics mentioned.Reporting by the Observer and Guardian journalist Carole Cadwalladr on the “covert relationship” between the multimillionaire Brexit backer Arron Banks and the Russian government was of the greatest public interest imaginable, her lawyer has told the high court. Banks, who donated a record £8m to the Leave.EU campaign group, is suing Cadwalladr for defamation over two instances – one in a Ted Talk and one in a related tweet – in which she said the businessman was lying about his relationship with the Russian state. In closing written submissions on Friday, Gavin Millar QC, for Cadwalladr, told the high court in London that Banks and his close associate Andy Wigmore, director of communications for Leave.EU, had given “contradictory and misleading accounts about his [Banks’s] meetings with Russian officials and the extent of his relationship with the Russian state” as well as who had initiated the contact with the Russian government and the reason for it. Millar said Cadwalladr’s reporting about weaknesses in rules governing campaign expenditure, and the lack of accountability in respect of social media targeting and advertising, raised issues that “threaten the integrity of our democratic processes”. He added: “The Ted Talk was unquestionably speech which addressed matters of the greatest possible importance to the organisation of the political life of the country. Indeed, it is difficult to conceive of matters in which the public interest in their being published and the subject of debate would be greater.” He said the action was based on “what amounts to one sentence in a talk”. At a preliminary hearing, the meaning of Cadwalladr’s words, which are the subject of the lawsuit, was determined by a judge to be that Banks lied about a secret relationship with the Russian government “in relation to acceptance of foreign funding of electoral campaigns in breach of the law on such funding”. Cadwalladr has said she did not intend to imply that Banks had received Russian money, nor lied about receiving Russian money, only about the extent of his contacts with Russia. Millar said: “The fact that the court determined a different meaning which the words complained of may bear for the hypothetical ordinary reasonable reader/viewer does not render the defendant’s belief unreasonable.” As well as relying on a public interest defence, Millar argued that Banks could not show “serious harm” as required by law because he had “a generally bad reputation in respect of the sector of his life with which this claim is concerned, namely his role as a funder/leader of Leave.EU”. In his written submissions, William McCormick QC, for Banks, told the court that the threshold of serious harm had been met in terms of damage to his client’s reputation, stressing that the Ted Talk had been viewed by a “new audience who were not likely (or less likely) to have heard about the allegations against C (the claimant)”. McCormick accused Cadwalladr of having “failed to exercise proper journalistic standards”. He said for her to suggest she had never intended to suggest Banks had received Russian money to fund the Brexit campaign was “unreal” and described references to a covert relationship as “ridiculous”. McCormick said: “What this action complains of is not D’s (the defendant’s) investigative work, but the fact that what she said in 2019 (and continues to say in 2022) makes a seriously defamatory allegation for which her investigation provides no proper basis.” He told the court that although Cadwalladr had accepted the court’s interpretation of the meaning of the words in the Ted Talk, she had failed to take steps to have the offending words removed or the video footnoted. “In this situation, there’s nothing else my client can do but seek the court’s assistance to have the situation remedied,” he said. Mrs Justice Steyn reserved judgment.Five of Britain’s leading business groups have demanded urgent and decisive government help to tackle the UK’s energy crisis, warning failure to act will result in lower investment, an increase in poverty and the risk of an inflationary spiral. In a letter to Rishi Sunak, the heads of the CBI, the British Chambers of Commerce, the Institute of Directors, Make UK and the Federation of Small Businesses said “rocketing” domestic and business bills would put the brake on economic recovery. “As a collection of business groups, we are writing to ask you to act urgently and decisively to support consumers with spiralling bills and help business manage inflated costs over the medium term,” the letter said. Sunak and the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, have been working on possible measures to soften the impact of an expected rise in energy bills of nearly 50% – amounting to £600 a year for the average household – when the price cap is lifted in April. Ofgem, the energy regulator, will announce the new price cap early next month, and Kwarteng said Sunak would use his spring statement on 23 March to outline a support package. In a reflection of the growing concern felt by companies of all sizes, the five business groups stressed the likely damage to household budgets if the government failed to act. They noted a rise in the average household energy bill to £2,000 a year would alone add 1-2 percentage points to the annual inflation rate – already at a 30-year-high of 5.4% – and force a further 2 million people into fuel poverty. “It will hurt low-income households most acutely, but these cost increases will have knock on impacts throughout the economy,” the letter said. “We therefore urge [the] government to take action to mitigate rising domestic bills and support the most vulnerable.” The letter said businesses had also been affected by steep rises in their energy bills, with further increases looming as fixed tariff contracts came to an end. “The scale of the crisis has left companies with little protection while they face dealing with soaring wage, shipping and tax costs. Small and medium-sized businesses are the most at risk. Many companies will be left with little other choice than to pass costs on to their customers, adding further inflationary pressure,” the groups said. Along with other countries, Britain has been affected by an increase in the global wholesale price of gas, in part triggered by higher demand as countries have emerged from the pandemic. The business groups said, however, the UK was facing a medium-term crisis rather than a short-term seasonal one. “To strengthen the UK energy system for the future, businesses support a regulatory approach that builds resilience in the domestic supplier base, drives competitiveness of UK industry and incentivises investment in the green economy,” they said. “Reducing energy demand with an ambitious programme for residential and business energy efficiency must be a core part of this strategy.” A government spokesperson said: “We understand the pressures people are facing with the cost of living and are providing support worth around £12bn over two years to help families. “Support is being targeted towards the lowest paid, and we are specifically helping households with their energy bills. In addition, the energy price cap is currently insulating millions of consumers from high global gas prices and we’ll continue to listen to consumers and businesses on how to manage the costs of energy.”Ralf Rangnick: should he stay in the Manchester United hot seat next season or should he go? This is the question the club will grapple with if the interim manager secures a top-four finish, claims (or just misses out on) FA Cup glory and shows well in the Champions League; basically, if he performs as an impressive mid-season Mr Fixit who deserves a chance to have a No 1’s contract drawn up. The German is open to the full-time job, so might United’s incoming CEO, Richard Arnold, be minded to keep him by mid-May? After the best part of two months and nine matches a picture is forming of Rangnick and his managerial smarts. Wednesday, at Brentford, was particularly instructive because, with United 2-0 up, the 63-year-old made Cristiano Ronaldo his fall guy and a 3-1 victory was the reward. It took the team to 35 points and maintained their status as back-runners hoping to overtake on the curve in the chase for a Champions League berth. So, rewind to the moment in west London when Rangnick assesses United’s 2-0 lead, Mason Greenwood’s strike having been initiated by Ronaldo’s clever chest-down pass, and decides the 36-year-old should be sacrificed for a back three to shut the shop in the way he failed to do at Aston Villa, when United slipped from 2-0 up to a careless 2-2 draw. Ronaldo, as is his modus operandi, is not happy at being hooked on 71 minutes and, as a man on £490,000 a week who is a five-times Ballon d’Or winner with 801 career goals, demands a reason. “Why me?” he asks. Moments after Marcus Rashford – brought on for Greenwood (who does not demand an explanation) – scores the third, Rangnick, in the heat of battle when he should be focusing on the field, decides to explain. Later he tells the media what he told Ronaldo: that “it was for the good of the team”. From here, zoom out to view the wider picture. The vignette at Brentford is a subplot, a two-man scene in the wider narrative of Rangnick, his style and what might become of him at the season end. For the moment, Rangnick is slated to move into a two-year, quasi-director of football role, as a “consultant”, to use United’s terminology. The thinking was that hiring Rangnick would allow United, led by Arnold, time to pursue the glitzier Paris Saint-Germain manager, Mauricio Pochettino, who has been to a Champions League final with Tottenham. Or maybe Erik ten Hag, of the Dutch champions, Ajax. Or Brendan Rodgers, who took Liverpool close to the 2013-14 title, made Leicester Cup holders and whose team allowed two 90-plus-minute Spurs strikes to lose 3-2 the same evening United beat Brentford. But how about the “godfather of pressing” as a candidate to be United’s fifth permanent manager since Sir Alex Ferguson retired? The man whose handling of Ronaldo suggests a spine for the job, as does a penchant for dropping casual media-conference bombs, such as the claim Anthony Martial refused to travel to Villa (the player denies this), or that the £73m signing Jadon Sancho is struggling “psychologically” to deal with playing for the world’s biggest club™. Or that Paul Pogba may be motivated to perform solely to attract suitors as his contract winds down. On the field, too, there are signs Rangnick is patching up the mess he walked into. His record stands at five victories, three draws and one defeat; United are alive in two cups – the Champions League last-16 clash with Atlético Madrid starts next month, and Middlesbrough are fourth-round Cup visitors next Friday; and, before that, the tilt at Champions League qualification continues at Old Trafford on Saturday against West Ham. Moyes’s fourth-placed side are the first of 17 Premier League opponents United need to take enough points from to force Rangnick’s paymasters to consider ending the search beyond the club for Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s full-time successor. If the Hammers are beaten, Rangnick’s side leapfrog them and go six points behind Thomas Tuchel’s flatlining Chelsea with a game in hand. It is not so simple, of course. Beyond having to win these matches – will the consistently inconsistent United ever be consistent? – there are Tottenham and Arsenal, too. They are ahead of United having played fewer games. These ifs, buts and maybes make the situation enticing. If Manchester City appear a shoo-in to retain the title, at least two Champions League places are in up-for-grabs-now territory. United, under Rangnick, may be stirring when required, with previously underwhelming footballers now awakening. Greenwood’s sustained-performance graph is still to surge up – as a lethal wide-man can he be United’s Mo Salah? – and the lesser-gifted Rashford has been lukewarm, but at Brentford each scored, as did Bruno Fernandes (twice) at Villa. Their form and that of other disappointments, who include Harry Maguire, Luke Shaw, Sancho and Pogba, will be vital for determining where United’s campaign ends and whether next season’s Rangnick is to be United’s upstairs or still-downstairs man.“Not too many,” Paul Townend said with a broad smile here on Friday when asked if he had spotted any weaknesses in Shishkin ahead of his long-awaited first meeting with Energumene in Saturday’s Clarence House Chase at Ascot. “I just see all the 1s alongside his name, so I’ll do a bit of homework tonight, ride the race another 20 times and hopefully we’re still finishing in front.” Nico de Boinville, Shishkin’s rider, had earlier used words like “fantastic” and “electric” to describe Energumene. If the race was a title fight in Vegas – and there are certainly some similarities – the promoter would be tearing his hair out at the lack of trash talk to shift the last few tickets. Not, of course, that there is any need for that here, as Saturday’s race is the most compelling head-to-head over jumps since Altior squared off against Cyrname, also at Ascot, in November 2019. Four runners are due to go to post for the Grade One contest, including First Flow, who won it 12 months ago, but for practical purposes, it is a match race between two potential superstars of the sport and perhaps the start of one of the great rivalries too. Some match races have a champion-and-contender dynamic, as a battle-hardened veteran tries to keep the ageing process at bay. Victory for the younger runner tends to hasten the runner-up towards retirement. But not this one: Shiskin and Energumene were foaled just over two months apart, in April and June 2014 respectively, and arrive at Ascot with near-identical profiles. Neither horse has tasted defeat over fences, both are in their second season as chasers and both are proven winners at Grade One level. All being well, this will be the first meeting of several, starting with a rematch at Cheltenham in March. “We were not probably expecting to have this dust-up quite so early in the year, but so be it, there we go,” Nicky Henderson, Shishkin’s trainer, said on Friday. “If there is anything less than five lengths in it, you are going to take each other on again at Cheltenham, as there is nothing else to do.” On the face of it, Saturday’s race is also another chapter in the Britain-versus-Ireland narrative over jumps, following Irish racing’s unprecedented shellacking of their British counterparts at Cheltenham last March. In the late absence of Energumene, Shishkin was one of just five British-trained winners in 28 races at the 2021 Festival, and he is currently one of just two British-trained favourites for a non-handicap at this year’s meeting. But it is more nuanced than that, as Shishkin is owned by Joe Donnelly, an Irish ex-bookie turned property speculator based in Paris, while Energumene runs in the colours of Tony Bloom, who also owns his home-town football team, Brighton &amp; Hove Albion. And he could, perhaps should, have been in the other camp, as Energumene won his sole point-to-point at Larkhill in Wiltshire, before being sold to race from Willie Mullins’s stable in County Carlow. “This is as exciting a race as there has been for a long time and like everyone, we can’t wait to find out,” Patrick Mullins, the trainer’s son and assistant, said on Friday. “Shishkin deserves to be favourite, he’s achieved more, he’s won a Supreme Novice and an Arkle. Our fella has to go and beat him, he has to step up, but he’s very unexposed and I don’t think anyone can have excuses. It should be lovely ground, it’s a very fair track and they’ve both had a run. May the best horse win.” Energumene value for Ascot showdown Energumene’s odds for his showdown with Shishkin in the Clarence House Chase at Ascot have tightened a little since the start of the week, but 13-8 is still a big price for Willie Mullins’s runner since all the available evidence suggests there will be very little to choose between the market leaders on Saturday. Energumene (3.35) is rated just 1lb behind Shishkin by Timeform and his Grade One-winning form in Ireland last season is a match for Shishkin’s performances at Cheltenham and Aintree, both in terms of his dominance and on the clock. Few contests have been so eagerly anticipated in recent years and either horse could produce a career-best performance and still finish second. At the current odds, however, there is only one to back. Haydock 1.25 Probably a race to swerve for betting purposes as Jonbon will be long odds-on to defy a penalty and extend his unbeaten sequence under Rules to four races. He has scarcely come off the bridle to date but this is the best field Jonbon has faced by some way and Might I for one could certainly force the favourite to dig a little deeper. Ascot 1.45 Several lightly raced and progressive handicappers in opposition here with Stellar Magic making most appeal at around 5-1 on just the fifth start of his career. He looked well ahead of his mark on his handicap debut at Haydock in December, when he finished within two lengths of the winner in a race run in a strong time. Haydock 2.00 Tommy’s Oscar has been the standard-bearer for Ann and Ian Hamilton’s remarkable six-horse stable this season and will be a popular choice to continue his rapid progress through the handicapping ranks as he steps into Grade Two company for the first time. Ascot 2.20 The tough and versatile Western Victory is the interesting one here on her debut for Emma Lavelle. The nine-year-old has several bits of form which puts her alongside or in front of Molly Ollys Wishes and My Sister Sarah, her main market rivals, and she may well get quite an easy time of it on the lead. Haydock 2.35 Royale Pagaille took this race apart 12 months ago and has his ideal conditions again but he has another half-stone on his back and looks short enough in the market at around 5-2. Kalooki, by contrast, can be backed at around 12-1 to follow up a career-best at Doncaster last month from a 5lb higher mark. He could easily find that and more in first-time cheekpieces and over a longer trip that promises to suit. Ascot 2.55 Fanion D’Estruval was a convincing winner at Newbury in November and can further improve Lucy Turner’s excellent strike-rate for the Venetia Williams yard (seven wins from 22 rides since the start of the 2020-21 season). Taunton 3.15 Time does not appear to be catching up with the 12-year-old Yala Enki just yet and he is poised to win this race for the third year running.Boris Johnson has told schools in England to end the wearing of face masks by pupils, as parents and teachers continued to report infections spreading within schools at a rapid rate. Johnson’s demand to “follow the latest guidance”, made through his No 10 spokesperson, came after headteachers at secondary schools across England said they would encourage their students to keep wearing masks despite the government withdrawing advice for them to be worn in classrooms. The prime minister’s spokesperson said: “Children have been one of the hardest hit as a result of the disruption throughout the pandemic and we recognise the impact it has had on their education. The prime minister believes it is vital that children are receiving face-to-face education and can enjoy a normal experience in the classroom and the prime minister also thinks that the schools should follow the latest guidance. “We’ve been clear that we removed the requirement for face masks to be worn in classrooms and we will remove advice for face masks to be worn in communal areas from 27 January.” Johnson’s intervention is likely to further confuse the issue, with school leaders pointing out that official guidance from the Department for Education (DfE) specifies that masks can still be required in schools. The DfE’s advice to parents, updated on Thursday, states: “Your nursery, school or college might advise you that face coverings should temporarily be worn in communal areas or classrooms (by pupils, staff and visitors, unless exempt).” Meanwhile, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, told Conservative MPs that he had agreed with directors of public health to consult with him over reintroducing face masks in schools in the event of “extraordinary” local outbreaks, “so that we can assess evidence and data to ensure any extra measures are proportionate”. The Welsh government said it intends to retain face masks in secondary schools and colleges for another month. Mark Drakeford, the first minister, said pupils in Wales are likely to wear masks in classrooms until at least the February half-term. The prime minister’s comments come as it was announced there were 95,787 new cases of Covid-19 reported in the UK on Friday, down from 107,364 the day before. A further 288 people have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19. But headteachers who spoke to the Guardian said that they were not seeing a drop in cases among students despite the improved picture nationally. Shuttleworth College in Burnley was among the schools that told parents they would be retaining masks owing to high numbers of Covid infections. Jonathan Hopkins, the head of Barton Court grammar school in Canterbury, told parents that pupils should continue wearing face masks for another week in order to protect staff from infections in every year group of pupils. Primary schools have been especially hard-hit, with the most recent data from the UK Health Security Agency showing new Covid cases among schoolchildren in England rose 41% in the space of a week, to 1,936 cases per 100,000 five- to nine-year-olds. Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said “simplistic” statements from the government could jeopardise efforts to tackle outbreaks in schools. “No one want to see masks worn in schools for longer than is necessary. But it is important to remember that some schools are still dealing with very high levels of Covid in their communities, which is in turn leading to high levels of pupil and staff absence,” Whiteman said. “Simplistic public messaging from the government really is not helping matters. As the government’s latest guidance makes clear, Covid measures may vary between regions and local public health directors have been given authority to reintroduce face masks in communal spaces when they feel that is required. The government has a duty to be clear with parents on this.” Johnson’s comments steered clear of any threats against schools that retained mask wearing for pupils, with the DfE having no obvious legal powers to enforce its guidance. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “The government’s own guidance says that directors of public health may advise that face masks are needed in classrooms in response to local circumstances, but schools are unlikely to have had any time in which to consult them, or in which to communicate the changes with parents and staff. “It is therefore not surprising if some schools have continued to use face masks for the time being while they resolve these issues.”And that’s it from me. Thanks for your company. Enjoy the weekend’s football wherever you are. Jamie Jackson runs the rule over Ralf Rangnick’s rule so far: There hasn’t been a huge amount of transfer action today but there have still been a few deals done. A Chelsea youngster has joined Charlton, a Manchester City winger has gone to Sunderland and yet another US prodigy has returned to the Bundesliga. All the details are right here: Harry Kane has been talking to Sky Sports this afternoon about Antonio Conte, among other things. “He’s one of the best managers in the world,” he said. “We’ve not really reached the heights we’ve wanted to as a club over the last couple of years. It’s a big opportunity now to take advantage of what we’ve got. “The fact is, in the Premier League especially, so many teams are so good and everyone’s building to try and break into that top six. There’s a good eight or nine teams who are fighting for those places. If you don’t get one or two things right then you can really fall behind the pack and that’s kind of happened to us. So we need to be careful that we don’t keep falling. We’re feeling confident that we can do that, especially since the manager’s come in.” And it may still be getting dark at 4pm and the road’s may still need gritting and you may not really want to go out without a hat but it’s also time to sound the starting pistol on the summer’s Kane-To-Manchester-City speculation. The England captain wouldn’t be drawn on the topic but was inevitably asked about his future. “I just want to be playing at the highest level possible,” he said. “My focus is fully on this season and trying to get as high up the league as possible. We’re still in the FA Cup and we’re trying to win a trophy. I’m not going to go into loads of detail about anything else going on. It’s just about working hard for the team and trying to improve.” A couple of match previews here to get your teeth into: Manchester United v West Ham: Cristiano Ronaldo is a doubt for the game due to a neck problem. “Cristiano is a question mark because he has a problem with his neck,” Ralf Rangnick told MUTV today. “He received treatment yesterday for two or three hours and we will have to wait to see how he feels today. “Edi [Cavani] hasn’t been training with the team yet and will hopefully resume training today and then we’ll take the final decision after the training session today, if he will be available for the game tomorrow.” Manchester United v West Ham: David Moyes says he is hopeful of signing at least two players before the end of the transfer window (and also shouts out the cost of living crisis): “Like everything else things are expensive in this world at the moment. Also, there’s not a great pool of the positions we are looking for. We have found them difficult to identify and maybe get ones who we think can come in and make a difference immediately. The last couple of January windows we have been able to do that. This window has felt a wee bit more difficult. But if things go right and we get a good run of things I am still hopeful that we will add a couple of players before the window closes.” Here’s Eddie Howe on Newcastle’s forthcoming trip to Saudi Arabia: Today’s Fiver is dropping in inboxes around the world as I type and today contains almost as much Meat Loaf as football. It’s also right here: And you can sign up for everyone’s favourite tea-time email here: Southampton v Manchester City: James Ward-Prowse has received quite the endorsement from Pep Guardiola: “He’s the best [free-kick] taker, right now, worldwide. There isn’t a better taker than Ward-Prowse. But he’s so good at it that maybe you miss his quality as a football player, and the football player is exceptional as well. “He is a guy who adapts in midfield positions, a team player who has great quality with or without the ball, and in understanding the game. But at free-kicks, set-pieces, corners he is exceptional and people pay most attention to that.” Antonio Conte + A Transfer Window – An Open Chequebook = Fun. The Italian is clearly keen for Spurs to bolster his squad this month. ““Honestly, I prefer to speak about this topic always with the club,” he said today when asked about the transfer situation. “For sure, I made evaluations about the squad but I have spoken with the club and I hope the club will listen to me.” As it’s Conte, it’s hard not hear a hint of threat in those last eight words … An interesting line here from the Press Association on the Derby County situation: Private investment firm Carlisle Capital have made a formal offer to the administrators of Derby to buy the Championship club, the PA news agency understands. Sources close to the firm say it has made a full asking price offer in the region of £28m. The bid, which is understood to be spearheaded by the firm’s vice-president Adam Binnie, has been made fully in the knowledge that the club could face additional liabilities if one or both of the claims against Derby from Middlesbrough and Wycombe are successful. It is understood the offer does not include the club’s Pride Park stadium, which is owned by the club’s former chairman Mel Morris. The group walked away after showing initial interest last year but have returned at a time when the club is facing the very real threat of liquidation, having entered administration last September. Duncan Ferguson has been making his presence felt with the Everton squad this week it seems … Leicester City v Brighton: Brendan Rodgers has backed Leicester to recover after their late nightmare against Tottenham. “There was a 12-second period which changed the narrative of the game,” he said. “At the end it’s managing that and that shows this group has so much improvement in them. You suffer when you have a loss like that, it’s painful, but that’s football. “We spoke about it and talked about moving on from it. We have shown after a disappointing result we can jump back up and continue to fight. We are honest with it and it always allows you to move on. We’re not trying to blindside anyone, we should have won the game. It was there for us to win but there’s a great lesson there. We have a mantra that everything is possible and that game typified that.” And Ben McAleer on very much the manager of the moment, Wolves’ Bruno Lage: Hello all. A couple of pieces to brighten up your afternoon to start with. Here’s our quiz of the week (a very middling 6/11 to beat): That’s all from me. Have a very nice weekend and I will leave you in the very capable hands of John Ashdown. Brentford v Wolves: Bruno Lage says he will “protect” Tottenham transfer target Adama Traore in the same way the London club dealt with Manchester City’s bid to sign Harry Kane. Wolves turned down a reported £15m bid for winger Traore earlier this week from Spurs, who refused to sell England skipper Kane to City for in excess of £100m in the summer. “We have a top player with us, a lovely guy,” said Lage. “Sometimes it’s about business. I remember how much Tottenham protected Harry Kane at the beginning of the season. “And we will protect our player because we believe a lot in Adama. That is business. It’s not my concern. But I will protect my players. The way they work, the value for me is very high.” Arsenal v Burnley: Sean Dyche expects Sunday’s match away to Arsenal to go ahead without any issues after a number of Burnley players returned to training following the club’s Covid-19 outbreak. Burnley had to request the postponement of their last two matches due to a shortage of players but Dyche said the situation had improved. “I would hope so,” he said when asked if the match would be played. “Looking at the group today we’ve got 16 out there today so at least we’re getting back to where the group wants to be. We should be fine.” Everton v Aston Villa: Everton caretaker manager Duncan Ferguson says he does not have the experience to currently take on the job permanently - but accepts a run of results could change that. The former Toffees striker has been placed in charge for “upcoming games” following the sacking of Rafael Benitez last weekend. In addition to Rooney, former Chelsea manager Frank Lampard and ex-Juventus and Real Madrid defender Fabio Cannavaro all appear to be contenders but Ferguson has the opportunity to make an impact on a temporary basis. “Maybe down the line, one day,” he said when asked whether he could become permanent manager. “I’ve always dreamed about becoming the Everton manager but I’ve not got the experience. My job is to take the upcoming games, steady the ship. The club will go through the process identifying the new manager and they’ll bring them in.” When it was suggested a good run of results could enhance his claims, he added: “You never know in football do you? What happens down the line will be down to the club. We’re always looking for the best managers in the world.” Southampton v Manchester City: Manchester City will not rush Riyad Mahrez back into club action following Algeria’s early exit from the Africa Cup of Nations. The forward is potentially available again for City after the defending champions were eliminated from the tournament in Cameroon at the group stage. Manager Pep Guardiola, however, has said the 30-year-old will now be given some time off and will not feature against Southampton in the Premier League on Saturday. “He has permission to have one week off and will come back with the team next week,” said Pep. Leicester City v Brighton: Brighton boss Graham Potter has tested positive for coronavirus and will miss his side’s Premier League game at Leicester on Sunday afternoon. Potter’s assistant, Billy Reid, took Albion’s pre-match press conference on Friday and will take charge of the team at the King Power Stadium on Sunday. “We’re not too sure how that will work yet but I will certainly be linked up to him at home,” said Reid. “Graham had a rough night last night and tested positive this morning so he didn’t take training. I was a manager in Scotland for eight years so I know what to expect. Nothing will change too much, we’ll try and keep things normal.” Everton v Aston Villa: This just in from our man on the Merseyside beat ... and it’s a belter. Manchester United: Further to that Victor Lindelof story, Ralf Rangnick has told reporters the Swedish defender will be unavailable for this weekend’s match against West Ham because he wants to spend time with his family after their trauma. “He said to me right now he needs to stay at home,” said Rangnick. “He doesn’t want to leave his wife and family on their own.” Manchester United: Manchester United are supporting Victor Lindelof and his family after their house was broken into during Wednesday’s Premier League match against Brentford. The Sweden international played the entirety of the 3-1 win, with wife Maja Nilsson Lindelof saying she hid in a room with her kids before they entered the house. “We can confirm that a break-in occurred at Victor Lindelof’s house during the away game against Brentford,” said a Manchester United statement issued to PA Media. “His family, who were at home at the time, were unhurt but clearly shaken. This was a distressing experience for them, and for Victor when he learned of it after the game, and the club is providing them with our full support. We encourage anyone with information about the crime to contact the police.” Newcastle United: Eddie Howe again declined to address Saudi Arabia’s dismal human rights record as he confirmed he would take his struggling Newcastle squad to the Gulf kingdom after Saturday’s game at Leeds. Louise Taylor reports ... Leeds v Newcastle: Patrick Bamford has suffered another injury setback, but Diego Llorente will return to bolster Leeds’ defence in their home game against Newcastle tomorrow. Bamford has sustained a foot problem, having recovered from successive ankle and hip problems, while Llorente missed last week’s win at West Ham through suspension. Forwards Joe Gelhardt (ankle) and Tyler Roberts (calf) could also return Roberts was also suspended last week - but midfielder Adam Forshaw and left-back Junior Firpo (both hamstring) have been added to Marcelo Bielsa’s long injury list. Newcastle wing-back Matt Richie is a doubt with a knee injury and will be assessed before head coach Eddie Howe names his team. Midfielder Jeff Hendrick and striker Dwight Gayle, who both missed last weekend’s 1-1 draw with Watford after Howe had revealed there were Covid-19 cases within the camp, have returned to training and Javier Manquillo is available following a one-match ban. Fellow full-back Jamal Lewis is also back on the training pitch following a hamstring injury, although the game could come too soon for him, but defender Federico Fernandez (thigh), midfielder Isaac Hayden (knee) and striker Callum Wilson (calf) are all out. Newcastle to visit Saudi Arabia: Amnesty International UK have warned that Newcastle’s controversial trip to the Gulf state could become “a glorified PR exercise for Mohammed bin Salman’s government”. “A training camp like this could easily turn into yet another PR opportunity for the Saudi authorities, who are clearly pursuing an aggressive policy of trying to sportswash their appalling human rights record,” said Amnesty UK CEO Sacha Deshmukh. “Under Mohammed bin Salman, the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia has become increasingly repressive with government critics, women’s rights campaigners, Shia activists and human rights defenders harassed and jailed, often after blatantly unfair trials. “The closed-door trial of Jamal Khashoggi’s alleged killers was little more than a whitewash and Saudi Arabia is implicated in an entire catalogue of crimes under international humanitarian law in the long-running conflict in Yemen. “Newcastle players, the manager and all backroom staff ought to be prepared to speak out about human rights while in Saudi Arabia. Doing so will be a powerful sign of support for Saudi Arabia’s beleaguered human rights community. “If the Newcastle training camp becomes a glorified PR exercise for Mohammed bin Salman’s government, it will prove once again that sportswashing human rights crimes is the name of the game here, not football.” Arsenal v Burnley: Thomas Partey admits he needs to be “more intelligent” after he was sent off during Arsenal’s Carabao Cup semi-final defeat to Liverpool, PA Media reports. Diogo Jota’s brace sealed a 2-0 win for the Reds, who will face Chelsea in the final at Wembley on 27 February. Partey flew back from the Africa Cup of Nations following Ghana’s early exit and landed in London on the afternoon of the Liverpool clash, declaring himself available as he was named on the Arsenal bench. He came on with the game in the balance but, after Jota had struck again, the combative midfielder was booked twice in quick succession and received his marching orders just 16 minutes after his introduction. “I am responsible for anything that happened and will take all the critiques, I should be more intelligent not to get in a challenge already booked. But this is my personality I like to fight for every ball,” Partey wrote on his Instagram stories. “I love this club and I love my country even though things sometimes don’t happen how I wanted, I would continue to work harder and make things right. I came back with the mentality to make myself available for team (sic) to get to the final but it did not happen as planed (sic). “I will continue to give my all when I am on the field of play because this is my life and this is what I chose to do. I’m not happy with all that happened yesterday and at the Afcon but I understand only with hard work things will change so I will continue to work hard to change this. Thanks.” Partey’s dismissal was the 14th red card issued to an Arsenal player under Mikel Arteta’s tenure, six more than any other Premier League side across all competitions in that time. It was also the third sending off in Arsenal’s last four matches. Aston Villa: Following hot on the heels of the news that Hugo Lloris has inked a new deal with Tottenham, his fellow goalkeeper Emiliano Martinez has signed a new contract until 2027. The Argentina international, who joined from Arsenal from Villa in 2020, has signed a three-year extension, with his previous deal expiring in 2024. England news: England will play their first senior fixture against Cote d’Ivoire in a friendly this March. Gareth Southgate’s side are preparing for the winter World Cup in Qatar and have lined-up two Wembley friendlies. England will face Switzerland on 26 March and will then host the two-time African champions on 29 March. They have never played the Ivorians at senior level and the friendly marks the first time they have faced non-European opposition since November 2018. The FA describes the match as “an important test for the Three Lions on the road to this year’s 2022 Fifa World Cup”. England are scheduled to play four Nations League fixtures in June, then complete Group A3 in September - the final international meet-up before the tournament in Qatar. Brentford v Wolves: Thomas Frank has said his Brentford squad is strong enough to remain competitive in the Premier League without bringing in any January recruits. Brentford have been linked with a move for former Tottenham midfielder Christian Eriksen, who is looking for a route back into football following his cardiac arrest at Euro 2020. But Frank remains coy on those rumours and believes that even if he adds no new faces this month, Brentford can still enjoy a successful season. Wednesday’s 3-1 defeat by Manchester United was a fifth loss in six outings but Frank’s side remain a healthy 10 points clear of the relegation zone. “I think we have a strong enough squad to compete in the Premier League,” said Frank. “I do think a player or two would bring extra energy to the squad but I don’t think it’s essential. But we are always in the market and if a player comes up we will do it. “I think it can be more difficult [in January] depending on where players are coming from. If you are coming from the Championship there is less adaptation, players are fully fit and up to pace. But for some players to adapt can still take weeks, months. “If you come from abroad you need to get up to speed to your new team, tactics, crazy ideas from the head coach! So there’s a risk that it can take a longer time to adapt.” Everton v Aston Villa: Steven Gerrard believes Rafael Benitez’s failed appointment at Everton was unique and warned his Aston Villa side to expect a reaction. Villa go to Goodison Park tomorrow to play Everton, who sacked Benitez on Sunday following their defeat at the hands of NOrwich City. Gerrard played under Benitez for six years at Liverpool and admitted he was surprised the Spaniard wanted to manage Everton in the first place. “I’m disappointed for Rafa because I’ve got a relationship with him and an awful lot of respect for him,” said Gerrard. “I have to be honest, I thought it was a unique appointment at the time. “I was surprised and shocked Rafa wanted to go and have a go at that job, with his legacy and his relationship with Liverpool. It hasn’t worked out for whatever reason, you have to be inside the club to know why and what’s gone on. Big Dunc [Ferguson] will take the reins for this game and it’s quite obvious what type of reaction he’ll get.” Premier League rescheduling: Burnley’s Premier League match at home to Watford has been rescheduled for 5 February with a 6pm kick-off time, the Premier League has announced. The fixture was postponed for a second time earlier this week. It was originally due to be played on December 15 but was called off due to Covid-19 cases within the Watford squad before an outbreak at Burnley forced the postponement of the rearranged match on 18 January. With both sides having already been knocked out of the FA Cup, it has been rescheduled for 5 February on the weekend of the fourth-round fixtures. Eddie Howe has confirmed Newcastle will embark on a potentially controversial trip to Saudi Arabia after their Premier League game at Leeds on Saturday. Newcastle, who are 80 per cent owned by the Gulf state’s Public Investment Fund, will head off for a warm weather training camp at the weekend, although head coach Howe has insisted the focus will be entirely on football amid accusations of “sportswashing”. “It’s a football decision,” said Eddie Howe, repeating the same phrase he used at his unveiling upon being asked if he had any concerns about taking the Newcastle job. “We’re doing it for the benefit of the players, the group, in our fight to stay in the division, and that’s my only thought. “The facilities and everything around the trip are going to be first-class. We will train and we will train hard and we will train in preparation for our next game, so that’s always going to be my only focus.” Staff and PA Media. Everton co-owner Farhad Moshiri has ploughed another £100m into the club after increasing his stake to 94 per cent, according to PA Sport. The Iranian businessman, who has already spent over half-a-billion pounds on transfers since his £200m takeover in 2016, is converting loans from his Blue Heaven Holdings into equity. Last February 100,000 new shares were issued and he has purchased the final third of those, having already acquired 66 per cent 12 months ago. The move, announced in a letter to fans, provides a much-needed boost to Everton’s finances, having posted a combined £265m loss for the last three financial years. “I write to you to assure you that my commitment remains strong and focused,” he said in his letter. “The club has announced today the conversion of a £100m loan to the club into equity which is a clear demonstration of my commitment and greatly strengthens the balance sheet. “I am a private man and I do not speak publicly very often. But I promise you that my determination to deliver for Everton will not waiver.” Watford v Norwich City (Friday 7.30pm GMT) Everton v Aston Villa (Sat 12.30pm) Brentford v Wolves (3pm) Leeds United v Newcastle United (3pm) Manchester United v West Ham (3pm) Southampton v Manchester City (5.30pm) Crystal Palace v Liverpool (Sunday 2pm) Arsenal v Burnley (2pm) Leicester City v Brighton (2pm) Chelsea v Tottenham Hotspur (4.30pm) The World Cup-winning France goalkeeper has signed a new two-and-a-half year deal that will keep him at the club until 2024, it was revealed this morning. With less than six months left on his original deal, the 35-year-old had been free to discuss terms with foreign clubs this month, but has instead agreed to sign an extension. “We are delighted to announce that Hugo Lloris has signed a new two-and-a-half-year contract with the club, which will run until 2024,” purred a club statement. “Captain of club and country, World Cup and Uefa Nations League winner with France, Hugo, 35, has racked up 395 appearances since his arrival from Lyon in August, 2012. “Already 14th in our all-time appearance list, he will soon become only the 12th player to make 400-plus appearances for us in all competitions. Only two goalkeepers – all-time greats Pat Jennings (590) and Ted Ditchburn (452) – have played more for us. “Outstanding since returning from a dislocated elbow suffered in October, 2019, Hugo is ever-present in the Premier League this season, and on a run of 67 successive starts in the league going back to the 1-1 draw at Burnley in March, 2020.” Welcome one and all to another Friday countdown to the weekend’s top flight action. Watford and Norwich City get proceedings under way later this evening in what promises to be a tense six-pointer, with Everton and Aston Villa taking up the cudgels tomorrow in a lunchtime meeting that pits Duncan Ferguson and Steven Gerrard agaoinst each other for the first time since March 2006. Leeds United, Manchester United and Brentford are all at home for the day’s three o’clock kick-offs, hosting Newcastle, West Ham and Wolves respectively, before Southampton welcome Manchester City to St Mary’s. Sunday’s four games are bookended by Crystal Palace v Liverpool and an intriguing match-up between Chelsea and Tottenham Hotspur. With no shortage of managers ready to face the press today, we’ll bring you team and transfer news, along with any other major talking points that may crop up throughout the day. The first? Hugo Lloris has signed a new and presumably improved two-and-a-half-year contract with Tottenham Hotspur, which will run until 2024.Conservative ministers and whips began spreading rumours about Christian Wakeford’s personal life minutes after the MP defected to Labour, it has been alleged amid growing concerns over dirty tactics in politics. The Guardian has been told that senior members of the government spread the rumours in parliament after the MP for Bury South crossed the floor on Wednesday. On Friday night it was reported that the senior Tory MP William Wragg would meet a detective from Scotland Yard next week to discuss what he claimed was attempted blackmail and intimidation of some colleagues suspected of opposing Boris Johnson. He told the Telegraph that he was speaking to police as he wanted to leave any investigation of these claims “to the experts” rather than No 10. Johnson has said he had “seen no evidence” of such threats. A Labour source said the party had prepared Wakeford before his defection for the possibility of the Tories or hostile media trying to dig around in his private life. Asked about the allegation that there was an attempt to smear Wakeford, a government source said: “It would be unacceptable. The chief whip [Mark Spencer] wouldn’t condone that behaviour at all. It’s not a practice that would be employed at all. It’s true there was shock and disappointment at a defection but that doesn’t ever cross into smearing other people.” Since defecting, Wakeford has also alleged that party whips told him he would lose funding for a new high school in his constituency if he did not vote with the government. There were also reports on Thursday that rebel Tory MPs were considering releasing details of text messages and a recording of their dealings with the party’s whips. Following the spotlight on the tactics of the whips, Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, said allegations of blackmail by government whips against Tory rebels needed to be investigated – but were unlikely to be true. Speaking to Sky News, Kwarteng said: “Any form of blackmail and intimidation of that kind simply has no place in British politics.” He added: “We need to get to the bottom of the matter. I’d find it very unlikely that these allegations are true.” But one Tory MP said: “Blackmail is not just about money for constituencies, it’s tittle tattle, personal things, affairs or who’s been to a lockdown party. At the far end it’s corruption and misconduct in a public office – on the other it’s a breach of the ministerial code. Either way it’s a resignation issue. “The culture comes from the top – it’s learned, bullying behaviour. Unless you stand up to bullies, they carry on.” Another MP from the 2019 intake also stepped forward anonymously to say they felt they had been threatened and bullied when they rebelled in a vote last spring. They said that threats about ministerial careers were perfectly normal but that they were told “it would be a shame” if their constituency did not get the towns’ funding it had asked for. “I complained to another MP, they said that’s outrageous – the whips have no such powers, it’s just one of their tactics.” The MP said they did not think Johnson was to blame and that it was not widely known about, but a tactic employed by some individual whips, adding: “They’re empty threats, but it is unacceptable – it’s a form of bullying.”It may be a little early to be thinking about spring, but the publication of the first-class cricket fixtures hints that it is not too far away. They have been more eagerly awaited than usual this year because the implosion of the England men’s team in the Ashes suggested there was something rotten in the state of the domestic game. Publication was delayed while different interest groups argued over what structure the sport should have. Do we like our cricket in two-and-a-half-hour, made-for-TV dollops, or played out slowly over four or five days? Naturally, that question was not resolved. The result, when the fixtures were finally announced this week, was the usual dog’s dinner. In deference to the new orthodoxy that long-form cricket has been marginalised, two four-day championship matches have shifted to June and July, but half the games will be played in April and May when conditions tend to favour the sort of county “trundler” who is unlikely to turn an Ashes match on its head on an easy-paced pitch in Melbourne. Neil Snowball, of the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB), said further rebalancing was possible in 2023 if all “stakeholders” could agree. No jokes please about the chances of Mr Snowball making that happen. The ECB is trying to shoehorn four men’s competitions into a packed summer: the championship; a 50-over cup; the 20-over Blast; and its new invention, the Hundred, designed for fans who find 20-over cricket unduly labyrinthine. The Hundred will occupy most of August and means no championship cricket will be played in what used to be considered high summer. It is also played by franchises, with unlovely names such as Northern Superchargers and Trent Rockets, rather than the traditional counties, and the conundrum few seem willing to address is that counties and franchises just can’t coexist in the long term. In the wake of the Ashes debacle, BBC cricket correspondent Jonathan Agnew argued that franchises should call the shots, but imagined the counties carrying on in some lesser form, without saying who would finance this lower-grade cricket or bother to watch. Even the would-be revolutionaries balk at killing off the counties. Will the men’s game in the end have to follow the women’s, now essentially franchise-based and committed to short-form cricket? While the Hundred has been largely destructive for men’s cricket, forcing eyes to be taken off the red ball, it has been beneficial for the women’s game, giving it previously undreamt of amounts of TV time. Let’s hope the women prove more competitive than the men in the current Ashes series. The ECB has to stop pretending that the championship and the Hundred, counties and franchises, traditional and modern can be reconciled. The brutal truth is that one of the models has to go for the men’s game to have any coherence. A new cricketing structure is struggling to be born, and Gramsci (admittedly not a noted cricket fan) was right that, in the gap between the death of the old and the birth of the new, “morbid symptoms” appear. You couldn’t, after all, get any more morbid than that England collapse on the third evening of the Hobart Test.For Mea Walton, the new year began with something akin to disbelief. About to take a flight to LA, she took a PCR test to check for Covid – and it came back positive. But it wasn’t her first infection, or even her second. Walton had tested positive for the fourth time. “I thought, surely, I could never get it again,” she said. The 20-year-old student nurse in the north-east of England caught her first infection in September 2020, shortly before she left for university. “This was the point where everyone knew someone who knew someone who knew someone who had Covid,” she said. “But no one knew someone that had Covid … It was kind of like, no one believed in it, because everyone was like, ‘Well, I’ve never seen anyone [with it].’” At the time, Walton was working in a pub and wearing a face mask. “I hadn’t left the house other than to go to work because I was working nine hours every day, coming home, getting up, going back to work,” she said. “I started to feel a tiny bit rundown, runny nose, and stuff – but I have allergies anyway. So I assumed it was an allergy.” Walton was persuaded by her mother to take a PCR test. The result was positive. “I just isolated in my room,” she said. At the end of January 2021, both of Walton’s parents caught Covid. She took care to avoid contact, leaving takeaways just inside their front door, but a few days later she had to take a Covid test before starting her nursing placement. The PCR came back positive. The third infection came several weeks later. When a family friend fell very ill with Covid in Brussels in February that year, Walton flew out to help with childcare. On leaving the UK she had a negative PCR test. But her return was delayed. “I went to get my PCR to go home and it came back positive,” she said. While Walton didn’t feel unwell for her second and third infections, bar a bit of a runny nose the second time, the fourth infection was different, bringing flu-like symptoms a couple of days after testing positive. Walton, who is double-vaccinated and awaiting her booster, suggested there is an irony to her story. “The funniest thing about it all, really, is every time I’ve had it I’ve never been near a hospital. But all the time I’ve been working with Covid patients I’ve never got it,” she said.NHS waiting lists are out of control. Around 7.5 million people are queueing for hospital treatment in the UK, around 6 million of them in England, where this is the highest number since records began in 2007. In Wales, more than a fifth of the population is waiting for treatment. There are differences in the policies adopted by the devolved administrations to reduce backlogs. In England, it is clear that an increased role for the private sector is the government’s plan. The details of the recovery plan promised by ministers are still being finalised, with NHS bosses resisting what they regard as unrealistic targets. Finding a way to increase surgical capacity, so that more operations can happen more quickly, is the priority. The impact of delays is both social and economic: people waiting for cataracts can’t see properly; people who need joint replacements may struggle to walk. But there are worrying signs that any new contracts will tip the system’s overall balance further in favour of for-profit providers, and away from the NHS. The unprecedented pressure that the NHS is under ought to lead the government to invest in it, not compel it to rely on businesses to do its work. Yet as with education, where the government chose to buy a package of pandemic catch-up tuition from outside partners rather than funding schools themselves, ministers are opting to meet the additional health needs of the population through the private sector. Earlier this month, Amanda Pritchard, the chief executive of NHS England, warned the health secretary, Sajid Javid, that she does not believe the latest three-month deal with private hospitals represents value for public money. She was overruled, with Mr Javid ordering her to accept it despite her warning that the NHS could end up paying for care that is not provided. The role of the private sector in carrying out operations on behalf of NHS England is well established. Labour’s health spokesman, Wes Streeting, has said he would use private firms to reduce waiting lists. Outsourcing also happens in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales, although to a lesser extent. But by forcing NHS England to continue to rely on private sector backup, while refusing to commit to long-term workforce planning as advocated by the former health secretary Jeremy Hunt, among others, the government is deliberately expanding the role of the market. New research from the Centre for Health and the Public Interest reveals that hundreds of NHS consultants have become shareholders in private ventures. MPs and regulators should examine the financial incentives and potential for conflicts of interests that such arrangements may create, and whether there is a risk of harm to NHS patients. The number of staff absences due to illness has thankfully fallen sharply from the high of 46,000 earlier this month. But if the government sticks to plans to dismiss all those who remain unvaccinated, with letters due to go out next month, the staffing situation in some trusts is expected to get worse. Ministers should consider postponing the deadline, to give a further opportunity for trusts to address vaccine hesitancy in the workforce. Additional NHS funding from higher national insurance should help ease pressures. But the problems in some areas are chronic, long predating the pandemic, and a worsening staffing crisis in the social care sector is already having knock-on effects. Of course, ministers continue to declare their support for the NHS, which they know is valued highly by a public that sees clearly how much worse people fare under for-profit healthcare systems such as in the US. But their actions in beefing up the role of private providers, while refusing to take the steps that would help to secure the NHS’s long-term future, speak louder than their words – or indeed their claps.With normality returning, many people are now regretting their lockdown purchases. But the end of home confinement is leaving some wincing at the fanciful, if well-meaning, acquisitions gathering dust in a cupboard. As many wannabe lockdown Leonard Cohens and Laura Marlings have long abandoned their musical ambitions, a new initiative is making sure unwanted instruments find the right home. Ronnie Scott’s jazz club in Soho, central London, is hosting a musical instrument amnesty this Saturday for celebrities and the public to donate their forlorn flutes, untouched ukuleles and surplus saxophones. All instruments will be serviced before being distributed across the UK and beyond to those less able to receive musical education. Donors will get a tracking number so they can follow their instrument’s journey and see first-hand where in the world it will find its second lease of life. Past amnesties organised by Ronnie Scott’s Charitable Foundation (RSCF) have seen more than 750 instruments and pieces of sound equipment delivered to children and young people in schools across the country and as far afield as South Africa and Uganda. But organisers are expecting the post-pandemic musical disillusionment to lead to a surge in donations this year. “We are expecting turnout this year to be the biggest yet,” said Adaze Ologbosere, head of the RSCF. “If the number of calls we’ve had with people asking how they can donate is anything to go by, we expect the club to be full to the rafters on Saturday.” Instruments collected in the amnesty are increasingly in demand from schools after the government’s plans to halve future funding for music in higher education, a move labelled “catastrophic” by members of the Musicians’ Union and other creatives, industry organisations, higher education institutions and trade unions who have expressed horror at the cuts. It was during lockdown that Shay Levi decided it was time to fulfil her lifelong ambition to play the keyboard. “The second lockdown was pretty much screaming potential and doom all at once,” she said. “I have always wanted to accompany my vocals with piano but never really had the time or motivation to manifest it.” But the fascination didn’t last long. “My motivation began to wane after a few sessions,” she admitted. “I’m definitely more of a hands-on learner but at the time face to face teaching wasn’t even an option.” Gordon Downs had the same musical arc from enthusiasm to ennui. “I took up the guitalele at the beginning of the second lockdown after I found it sitting collecting dust in a local charity shop,” he said. “I’m 70 and wanted to prove that old dogs can learn new tricks but this instrument was too good for me: she’s a beauty and she needs someone with far more experience than I to do her justice.” Rob Folkes, a professional musician who took up the acoustic guitar last January – and put it down for good six months later – said even such a short time playing an instrument was rewarding. “I can’t say I achieved my original goal – I am not currently on a world tour playing a sellout show – but I certainly took something away from it,” he said. “The experience made me remember that there is a lot of joy and pleasure to be found from making music on a new instrument. I hope to do that again in the near future, be that with the guitar or something else.”Today might come to be seen as something of a lull in the storm as Westminster quietened down following a tumultuous week, and geared up for the anticipated publication of civil servant Sue Gray’s investigation into the Downing Street parties next week. Here’s what happened: In the morning, business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng told broadcasters that he expected an investigation would take place “if it’s not being so already”. He said said blackmail and intimidation “has no place in British politics”. However No 10 said it would only launch an investigation if evidence was found. Overnight in Australia, foreign secretary Liz Truss affirmed that the prime minister had her “100% support”. Wales’ first minister Mark Drakeford launched a volley of accusations at Boris Johnson, who he said would “never escape the damage to his reputation”. Meanwhile polling in Scotland suggested that most Scots, including half of Scottish Tory voters, think Johnson should resign. Former Attorney General Dominic Grieve told Sky News the government “should not be handing out money for projects in constituencies because they happen to be held by a Conservative member of parliament”. Former Tory MP Ben Howlett said he received threats by a then-whip that funds would be withheld from his constituency if he did not support the government in Brexit votes. Downing Street intervened in the row over mask-wearing classrooms, urging teachers to follow government guidance and end their use. The Telegraph published new details of the Downing Street parties based on eyewitness reports. There’s not much that’s new, but we did learn that there was lots of music, drinking, pizza and enjoyment of Wilf’s slide. Conservative ministers and whips began spreading rumours about Christian Wakeford’s personal life minutes after the MP defecting to Labour, it has been alleged The live blog is now closing – for coronavirus updates - please follow the global Covid live blog Conservative ministers and whips began spreading rumours about Christian Wakeford’s personal life minutes after the MP defecting to Labour, it has been alleged amid growing concerns over dirty tactics in politics. Rowena Mason, Aubrey Allegretti and Heather Stewart report: The Guardian has been told that the rumours were spread in parliament by senior members of the government after the MP for Bury South crossed the floor on Wednesday. It comes after the senior Tory MP William Wragg urged MPs to report government ministers, whips and advisers to the Speaker – and even the Metropolitan police – for what he claimed was attempted blackmail of some colleagues suspected of opposing Boris Johnson. Johnson said he had “seen no evidence” of such threats. For full details: In a coruscating editorial in the Financial Times, former Conservative cabinet minister Rory Stewart writes: Boris Johnson is a terrible prime minister and a worse human being. But he is not a monster newly sprung from a rent between this world and the next. Twenty years have passed since the Conservative party first selected him as a candidate. Michael Howard and David Cameron made him a shadow minister, and Theresa May gave him the Foreign Office. Thirty years of celebrity made him famous for his mendacity, indifference to detail, poor administration, and inveterate betrayal of every personal commitment. Yet, knowing this, the majority of Conservative MPs, and party members, still voted for him to be prime minister. He is not, therefore, an aberration, but a product of a system that will continue to produce terrible politicians long after he is gone. MPs selected him because they would not risk the possibility of a smaller majority under a better leader. Winning mattered more than governing well. And the public often seems to share this indifference The Telegraph has just published some more details from the parties involving about 30 people that took place in the basement of Downing Street the night before Prince Philip’s funeral. These come from witness reports, and are confirmed through text messages and photos. Here are the key details: Downing Street staff partied from around 6pm until 1am in a seven-hour drinking session, text messages seen by the Telegraph indicate. People were served wine and spirits with mixers in plastic disposable cups, with alcohol at one point getting spilled on an office printer The people at the parties played loud music on a laptop and ordered four large takeaway pizzas. A photograph seen by the Telegraph showed No 10 staff - some with drinks - gathered in the Downing Street basement, backing up accounts published earlier this month. The existence of photographs could become a point of focus for Sue Gray’s investigation. The Telegraph has opted not to publish these for source protection. Some attendees are alleged to have gone down a child slide belonging to Wilf Johnson, Boris Johnson’s son. It has previously been reported that Wilf’s swing was broken that night. A former adviser who spoke to the paper said the basement was an unusual choice of venue given No 10’s range of function suites, and was likely selected “to hide the party”. First the Westminster drama cut through to Saturday night prime-time TV when partygate was referenced by Ant and Dec on I’m a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here, now it’s a marketing ploy for popcorn. Butterkist have erected a billboard outside Downing Street with the slogan “here for the drama” emblazoned on it, arguably reflecting the fact the furore over parties, cover-ups and blackmail is all anybody is talking about. The MP for Brecon and Radnorshire Fay Jones has said she does not recognise the blackmail allegations. She told Sky News: It really isn’t an experience I have been through, in the couple of years I have been in parliament the whips have been extremely fair to deal with, easy to deal with. Their job is to get government business through but some of the reports that have been made, some of the allegations that have been made, really just don’t ring true to me. So I’m a bit confused, to be honest. Jones added that nobody has “come forward with any evidence”. Nobody who I work with is able to stand any of these claims up so I really don’t recognise the picture that is trying to be painted here. I have been relying on the whips’ office for the last couple of months because I have a bit of a family issue at the moment and they have been nothing but kind and supportive and helpful. I really don’t understand where these allegations are coming from and I’d like to see their evidence if there is any. Boris Johnson has waded in to the furore over mask-wearing in classrooms after teachers insisted they would ignore the change in government guidance and ask pupils to continue wearing masks. A spokesperson for the prime minister said “children have been one of the hardest hit as a result of the disruption throughout the pandemic”, adding that Johnson “believes it is vital that children are receiving face-to-face education and can enjoy a normal experience in the classroom”. He added: The prime minister also thinks that the schools should follow the latest guidance. We’ve been clear that we removed the requirement for face masks to be worn in classrooms and we will remove advice for face masks to be worn in communal areas from 27 January.” The Guardian’s full report on the skirmish is here: Guardian reporter Steven Morris reports on the response to Wales’ first minister Mark Drakeford’s comments earlier. The Tories in Wales are furious at the first minister Mark Drakeford’s comments on Boris Johnson. Drakeford has claimed the easing of restrictions in England is a tactic to distract from the Downing Street parties scandal. Welsh Conservative Senedd leader, Andrew RT Davies MS said: These are completely unnecessary and inappropriate comments by the first minister and is further proof that it’s always been about the politics, and not the science, for his Labour administration in Cardiff Bay. Davies suggested that Drakeford’s comments were themselves a ploy. “They are a straightforward deflection tactic from a government that has punished Welsh families and businesses with the harshest restrictions in the UK throughout the pandemic.” Wales’ first minister Mark Drakeford said he was not surprised the prime minister found himself embroiled in partygate, PA reports. He said: If I’m truthful about it, the prime minister is someone who’s been sacked from two previous jobs for not telling the truth I think The Times wrote an editorial on the eve of the December 2019 election pointing to the many flaws in the prime minister’s record and in many ways, I think what you see is his history catching up with him. Drakeford also criticised the decision taken by the UK government to lift the restrictions in England - accusing them of seeking to distract the public’s attention from Downing Street parties. Everything that goes on in Whitehall and Westminster at the moment for the UK government is seen exclusively through the lens of ‘how does this make a difference to the efforts that are being made to shore up the position of the prime minister? This is a Government that at the moment is simply not capable of doing the ordinary business of government in a competent and sensible way because it is overwhelmed by the headlines that surround a dreadful events that went on in Downing Street. Rachel Hall here back on the blog - if you’d like to get in touch I’m at rachel.hall@theguardian.com. The London mayor’s office said the decision to stand down the major incident declared in London last month comes following the gradual improvement in the number of cases in the capital, the pressures on critical services delivery reducing to manageable levels and a significant improvement in staff absences. Khan said wearing of masks remained a condition of carriage on TfL The Omicron variant was still with us, and daily infection rates are still too high, he said. Wearing a face covering remains one of the single most important and easiest things we can all do to prevent the spread of Covid-19 and that’s why I’m renewing my calls for the government to rethink their plans and keep legislation in place to make them mandatory on public transport. They still have a huge role to play in keeping our city open and our friends, family and communities protected. Covid-19 continues to pose a significant threat and our hospitals remain under pressure. That’s why it’s crucial that Londoners test regularly and report their results, come forward for vaccination and continue to wear a face covering when travelling on TfL services, where it remains a condition of carriage. The major incident declared in London last month as Omicron spread across the capital has been stood down. Mayor of London Sadiq Khan took the decision on December 18 to declare a major incident due to the spread of the variant, a rise in patients in London hospitals and the impact of staff absences in frontline services. Khan said he is standing down the major incident status but warned the city will remain on high alert. Downing Street was resisting opening an investigation into allegations of Tory MPs being blackmailed into supporting prime minister Boris Johnson as he faces a threat to his leadership, despite a cabinet minister saying they needed to be looked at. Business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng disputed the allegation first made by a senior Conservative, but told Sky News if true it would be “completely unacceptable” and ministers “need to get to the bottom of the matter”. But No 10 suggested on Friday that an investigation would only be launched “if there was any evidence” to support the claims, despite calls from Labour and Tory MPs. A spokesman for the prime minister said: “We’re not aware of any evidence to support what are clearly serious allegations. “If there was any evidence to support it, it would of course be looked at.” Wales has passed the peak of Omicron infections, according to the first minister, Mark Drakeford. Drakeford told a Welsh government briefing: After many difficult and worrying weeks, I’m very pleased to say the situation has improved significantly. We can say confidently today that we have passed this peak of the Omicron wave and the incredibly high levels of infections we have seen across Wales. It is all your hard work and the ongoing success of our fantastic vaccination programme has helped us through this very challenging period. He said cases peaked at just over 2,300 per 100,000 people in early January before falling back to around 500 cases per 100,000. These are similar to the levels we were experiencing just before the Omicron variant arrived in Wales. But coronavirus is still circulating at high levels in our communities. He added that Office for National Statistics figures suggest “Wales had a lower rate of infection than anywhere else in the UK”, with just one in 25 people infected compared to around one in 20 in the other three nations. Once again, you can clearly see the gap between Wales and Scotland – where there were increased levels of protections – and in England. No 10 has insisted the inquiry being carried out by senior official Sue Gray into gatherings across Whitehall during Covid-19 restrictions is independent. Gray’s investigation has consistently been described as “independent” despite her being a senior civil servant. A spokesman for the prime minister said: It is for that inquiry, that team, to establish the facts, we’ve said before ... it’s an independent investigation team, I think we’ve set that out from the start. The former Tory MP Ben Howlett said he received threats by a then-whip that funds would be withheld from his constituency if he did not support the government in Brexit votes. Howlett, the MP for Bath between 2015 and 2017, told BBC News: I was campaigning for a range of different things for my constituents, particularly my constituents will remember my campaign on link road. There were some very dicey votes for the government and I was campaigning to receive government funding, and of course one of the tactics used to make sure I fell into line on some of the Brexit rebellions was to threaten the withholding of money to pay for an investigation into whether or not this link road would have been built. Following on from the piece from Conservative Home’s Paul Goodman arguing that there have been rumours of an insidious culture of blackmail among whips for some time, Jim Pickard, the chief political correspondent at the Financial Times, writes on Twitter: The whips threatening to cancel new funding in the constituencies of rebel Tory MPs is the thin end of the wedge. This administration has embraced pork barrel politics more broadly. He cites earlier reporting from March, in which the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is asked why 40 out of 45 towns receiving £1bn through new “town deals” happen to have Conservative MPs and why affluent Richmondshire (his seat) is designated as “priority one” in the separate levelling-up fund while places like Barnsley are priority two. Sunak responded that it was all fair and that there was an index of economic need. The former Attorney General Dominic Grieve has told Sky News the government “should not be handing out money for projects in constituencies because they happen to be held by a Conservative member of parliament”. He said: The remarkable thing is that this allegation is the whips then tried to say we are going to withdraw from funding and I think, William Wragg is absolutely right, this is a form of blackmail and is completely improper if it took place. Of course, the whips are going to arm-twist. They are going to say to people, if you aren’t loyal you won’t be promoted within the party, your chances of ministerial office won’t be good, they will appeal to people’s sense of loyalty as well. But to stray into the path of saying they are going to regulate government funds... so if you don’t conform to the government’s view and you don’t support the prime minister you won’t get funds for projects in your constituencies is an outrageous act. He added there are “wider issues” about the PM’s leaderships besides from partygate. One piece that is gaining a lot of traction on Twitter today is this column by former MP and Conservative Home editor Paul Goodman. His piece argues that there is “no reason to doubt Wragg’s claims”, and that the questions surrounding them likely reflect differing definitions of blackmail. While he’s sceptical that this is ever explicit, he argues it is widely used in subtler ways, enabling whips to evade the scrutiny of the court. He adds that these allegations have not completely come out of nowhere: there were previously rumours that the towns fund was used by the Treasury to pressure “recalcitrant backbenchers” into voting with the government. He writes that Wragg’s allegations are likely the result of a shifting political culture: The dumping of the whips’ dirty linen in TV reports and on front pages would have been unthinkable even a few years ago. But the culture of celebrity is extinguishing the old culture of discretion. He worries that this “culture of celebrity” may end up engulfing the whole party in scandal. Noting that Wragg is known as “serious person”, he writes: Wragg was throwing the dice when he urged his colleagues to go to the police if necesssary. That his decision will have an effect on the Conservative leadership turmoil scarcely needs saying. Parts of the north-east, which are some of the worst affected areas by the Omicron wave, are reporting Covid-related fire service staff shortages. In Cleveland there should be 18 fire engines available for use at any one time, but at the moment there are typically levels of only 12-15. In Tyne and Wear, 11% of fire and rescue service staff are off on sick leave, according to the latest figures from the Fire Brigades Union. Staffing levels are also said to be affected in Teeside and County Durham Fire Brigades Union regional secretary for the North East Brian Harris said: Covid is hitting the fire and rescue service hard, with fire engines left out of use in their stations – but this is entirely avoidable. A fire and rescue service with sufficient levels of staffing and decent levels of resilience would be able to continue past these challenges. But across the country we’ve had one in every five firefighters cut since 2010 as financial constraints have hit, so we aren’t in that position. It’s entirely unclear how the government thinks it is acceptable to have a fire and rescue service with such a low level of resilience. In addition to the impact of Covid, fire and rescue services are struggling with 13.8% cuts to government funding - £140 million - between 2016-17 and 2021-22. This has resulted in staffing cuts, with some areas worse affected than others. Cleveland and Tyne and Wear each lost one in three (34%) of their firefighters between 2010 and 2021. The full report of Kwasi Kwarteng’s comments this morning is here, from Guardian reporter Matthew Weaver. He writes: The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, has said allegations of blackmailing by government whips against Tory rebels need to be investigated but are unlikely to be true. Speaking to Sky News, Kwarteng said: “Any form of blackmail and intimidation of that kind simply has no place in British politics.” He added: “We need to get to the bottom of the matter. I’d find it very unlikely that these allegations are true.” Scotland correspondent Libby Brooks reports: Almost four in five Scots think Boris Johnson should resign over the ongoing Downing Street party revelations, according to a new poll in the Scotsman this morning. Half of those who voted Scottish Conservative in last May’s Holyrood elections also believe he should quit, although the newspaper cautions that this is a smaller and less reliable sub-sample. 54% of respondents also believe that the scandals have hurt the case for the Union, according to the Savanta ComRes poll. In the first test of Scottish public opinion since the allegations emerged of late night partying the day before Prince Philip’s funeral, the polling also suggests that the scandals have not impacted significantly on people’s support for independence, with Yes and No camps evenly split at 50%, meaning that Yes is up two points up from October, excluding don’t knows, and both Yes and No sitting at 46% when 8% don’t knows are taken into account. Wales first minister Mark Drakeford said Boris Johnson will “never escape the damage to his reputation” over lockdown-breaking parties at No 10. Speaking to Sky News, he said: Conservative MPs have been fighting each other like ferrets in a sack this week, and it’s very hard to see how the prime minister survives. Even if he were to survive, he will just limp on because he’s never going to escape the damage that this week has done to his reputation.” From my point of view, the thing that worries me the most is the fact that the UK government is frozen by the impact of what has happened to them. They’re just not able to make the sorts of decisions you’d expect the government to make, because everything is seen through this lens, the attempt to try and shore up the prime minister to protect him from the attacks that his own side are making on him. That means it’s a government that’s turned in on itself and isn’t capable of doing the job that it was elected to do. Good morning. It’s going to be another busy and tumultuous day in Westminster as fears mount inside 10 Downing Street about the contents of civil servant Sue Gray’s report on partygate, while the fallout of yesterday’s blackmail and bullying disclosures continues. Things kicked off this morning with comments from Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, who said blackmail and intimidation “has no place in British politics”. He told Sky News: As far as the specific allegation about whips withholding funds, I think that’s completely unacceptable. I think any form of blackmail and intimidation of that kind simply has no place in British politics. I don’t think it’s something that I’ve ever heard of, I don’t think this would happen. Kwarteng added that he expected an investigation would take place “if it’s not being so already”. However he added that in 12 years as an MP he had “never heard anything like this” and speculated that the allegations could be intended to “discredit” the government. Sky News also reported this morning that there is nervousness in No 10 that the investigation has unearthed damaging evidence and that the report is unlikely to exonerate the prime minister. The report is rumoured to be published as early as Monday. A damning conclusion is likely to spark further calls for Johnson to go, yet close allies of Johnson insist that he will be able to ride out the storm. One of these is Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, who emphatically told a press conference in Sydney: The prime minister has my 100% support. He is doing an excellent job. I want the prime minister to continue as long as possible in his job. He is doing a fantastic job. Our full report is here: I’ll be keeping you updated on the key happenings in Westminster over the course of the day, including any major coronavirus-related developments. For more on that, you can check out our global blog: Do drop me a message if there’s anything I’ve missed, you can reach me at rachel.hall@theguardian.com. Have a good day!An astrophysicist from Surrey has died after being hit by a stray bullet while lying in bed during a trip to Atlanta. Dr Matthew Willson, 31, from Chertsey, was shot in the early hours of Friday when a weapon was discharged by a group of individuals from a neighbouring block of flats in the suburb of Brookhaven. No suspects have been arrested. According to reports, several residents had phoned the emergency services at about 2am and police attended after multiple shots were fired. Willson was believed to have been visiting his girlfriend in Georgia, having flown to the US last week. He was taken to hospital, but died from a gunshot to the head, police said. His death is being investigated as a homicide. It is understood he died after a single bullet passed through the bedroom wall as he slept in bed. Police said they believed the incident was a random act involving individuals participating in the reckless discharge of firearms, local TV reported. Sgt Jacob Kissel from Brookhaven police told WSB-TV: “This was a senseless act – this was an innocent victim. She and her boyfriend were laying in bed. He was here visiting from England. He was visiting a loved one. He had just flown in to the Atlanta area. “We lean on the public to understand that this is a tragic event, and we hope that they may come forward with any information they may have.” Kissel told BBC Radio Surrey that the location of the shooting was “a generally safe area”. He said that officers “immediately responded to the priority call of someone being shot and that’s where they met with a female caller who was rendering aid to her boyfriend who had been shot dead”. He said: “We are asking for our public’s help in assisting us with this investigation. Our investigators are currently following up on all leads to include potential video, eyewitness accounts as well as the evidence that was left on scene.” Willson had worked as a postdoctoral researcher at Georgia State University for two years, having also worked at the University of Liège in Belgium, MailOnline reported. He had recently been living back in Britain. His family requested privacy after their son’s tragic death. Kate Easingwood, his sister, who is a molecular biology PhD student based in Sweden, posted a tribute to him on Instagram today, saying: “The world is so unfair.” A Foreign Office spokesperson said: “We are supporting family of a British man following his death in the US, and are in contact with US authorities.”The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, has launched a fierce attack on Boris Johnson, claiming “his history is catching up with him” and suggesting the easing of Covid restrictions in England is designed to distract attention from the crisis the prime minister is facing. In sustained criticism of Johnson, Drakeford highlighted that Johnson had twice been sacked from previous jobs for lying and said he believed that everything the Conservative UK government was currently doing was about protecting his position. Speaking at a press conference in Cardiff, Drakeford, who leads a Labour administration, said: “The prime minister is someone who’s been sacked from two previous jobs for not telling the truth.” He flagged up a newspaper editorial on the eve of the December 2019 election that spelled out Johnson’s flaws, adding: “In many ways, I think what you see is his history catching up with him.” It is believed he was referring to a Sunday Times editorial that said Johnson had an “on-off relationship with the truth” and often preferred “bluster to grasp of detail”. In 2004 Johnson was fired by the then Tory leader, Michael Howard, from positions as shadow arts minister and party vice-chair for lying about an extramarital affair. In the late 1980s, Johnson was sacked by the Times over a front-page article in which he allegedly invented a quote. Drakeford claimed the decision this week to lift coronavirus restrictions in England was about distracting the public’s attention from the scandal engulfing Johnson. “Everything that goes on in Whitehall and Westminster at the moment for the UK government is seen exclusively through the lens of: how does this make a difference to the efforts that are being made to shore up the position of the prime minister? “This is a government that at the moment is simply not capable of doing the ordinary business of government in a competent and sensible way because it is overwhelmed by the headlines that surround dreadful events that went on in Downing Street.” Drakeford said Wales had passed the peak of the Omicron storm and more restrictions such as limits on sporting events have been lifted. The country is due to return to alert level 0 – under which more restrictions are eased – on 28 January as long as the situation continues to improve. The first minister’s attack on Johnson was in turn strongly criticised by the Tories, who accused him of playing politics and trying to distract people from the ongoing restrictions in Wales. The Welsh Conservative Senedd leader, Andrew RT Davies, said: “These are completely unnecessary and inappropriate comments by the first minister and is further proof that it’s always been about the politics, and not the science, for his Labour administration. “They are a straightforward deflection tactic from a government that has punished Welsh families and businesses with the harshest restrictions in the UK throughout the pandemic.”Leaked photographs have confirmed details of a luxurious £1bn palace allegedly built for Vladimir Putin’s personal use, Russian anti-corruption activists have said. The trove of nearly 500 photographs of “Putin’s palace”, published by Alexei Navalny’s Anti-Corruption Fund, show that the palatial mansion on Russia’s Black Sea coast has a vast marble swimming pool decorated with busts of Greek gods, a hookah lounge with a pole for dancing, a wine cellar, theatre, and other gaudily decorated amenities. The photographs also showed that the mansion was decorated with hundreds of gilded double-headed eagles, the symbol of the Russian state. The activists have alleged that the residence was built for Putin’s personal use, a claim that the Russian president has denied. The new photographs appear to refute claims by state media that Navalny’s team invented details of the palace in a blockbuster report last year that included computer-generated renderings of the mansion’s interiors that detractors likened to “cartoons”. While the original report was based on leaked floor plans and contracts for the residence, the new report showed photographs that the Anti-Corruption Fund says were taken during the building’s construction. The Navalny team did not say how they received the photographs. “Surprisingly, Putin is even worse than we expected,” said Georgy Alburov, a researcher for the Anti-Corruption Foundation. “If it seemed to you that we went too far in the film with the interiors, exaggerated and embellished [them], then you were mistaken. Life, as it happens, exceeded any of our expectations.” He compared the residence’s furnishings to the “spirit of Louis XIV”. The original report was published shortly after Navalny was arrested by Russian authorities after returning to the country last January. He was sentenced to three-and-a-half years in prison on fraud charges that he has said are politically motivated. Putin and other senior government officials refuse to use Navalny’s name in public. The original exposé on the residence showed that the opposition leader remained dangerous to the Kremlin even after his arrest. A video of the investigation became the most popular Russian YouTube video of 2021, earning more than 121m views on the video hosting website. And the accusations of elite corruption helped spark rare protests in Moscow and other cities, despite a broad crackdown on Russia’s opposition. Arkady Rotenberg, a Russian billionaire and close associate of Putin, said last year that he was the owner of the residence and was planning to use it as a hotel.Never mind Partygate, soaring energy prices and hundreds of Covid deaths a day. Grant Shapps has got his priorities right. What could be more important than cutting train announcements (Train passengers in England to be given break from ‘endless’ announcements, 21 January)? Sue Ward Newcastle upon Tyne • At a grammar school in the 1980s, we held fortnightly departmental meetings in a local pub (Letters, 20 January). The headmaster would plead with us not to all travel in the same car. He didn’t want the whole of his maths department to be wiped out in one go. John McCrae Herne Bay, Kent • Working as a bus conductor in the 1970s, I remember that whenever a management meeting was held in the lounge bar of a local pub, a union meeting was arranged in the adjacent public bar. Apparently the tipsy managers never twigged that they were also picking up the tab for the thirsty workers. Tim Barker Eastington, Gloucestershire • As every owner of a smaller dog knows, being a “big dog” is all about attitude, not size (Letters, 20 January). Ian Grieve Gordon Bennett, Llangollen Canal • Joyce Turcotte praises masks for covering up wrinkles (Letters, 16 January), but I find them useful for covering up my yawning in face-to-face meetings. Tim Martineau Wirral • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Charlotte Higgins offers a reasoned and appropriate discussion as to the absence of new written tragedies (In times as troubled as these, can we still believe in tragedy?, 15 January). I have every confidence that playwrights such as David Hare will be plundering the treasure trove of current sociopolitical disasters to produce new masterpieces. In the interim, in the era of Donald Trump and Boris Johnson, is the time not ripe for a new production of Bertolt Brecht’s 1941 play, The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui? Perhaps we need reminding of the real dangers of failing to appreciate that laughing at the buffoons in Act 1 may result in assaults on democracy in subsequent acts when those buffoons come to take power? Dr Jonathan Punt Isle of Dogs, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Those who have misinterpreted my evidence to the House of Lords’ communications committee and fear that the BBC’s airwaves are about to feature legions of flat-Earthers may be disappointed (Letters, 14 January). That is not about to happen. Nor, on the rare occasions in which they feature, are their views about to be given equivalence with the science which proves the Earth is spherical. Nonetheless, the BBC’s impartiality does require that we will feature views that not all Guardian readers would approve of and that may, occasionally, not always have scientific proof on their side. And that is not just because people of all views and none pay for the BBC, and audiences should expect their views to be represented – even minimally – somewhere and to some extent. The BBC’s editorial guidelines’ requirement to give “due weight” to opinions will mean that the more extensively views are held the more they should addressed by the BBC. But addressing them is not the same as endorsing them, and unscientific or unevidenced claims will continue to be challenged or contextualised with the scientific and factual evidence. David Jordan Director, editorial policy and standards, BBC • What is the reason for the visceral hostility of many Conservatives towards the BBC (BBC funding ‘up for discussion’, says Nadine Dorries, as licence fee frozen, 17 January)? Government ministers are continually harping on about Britain being a world-beating this and a world-beating that, yet this country’s one undisputed global leadership is in broadcasting, where the BBC sets the standard. However, what many Tories cannot stomach is that the BBC is a triumph of public enterprise, not private ownership. Jeremy Mitchell Edinburgh • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Sam Bowman (The big idea: could fixing housing fix everything else, too?, 17 January) is quite right in pointing out that one social problem – the housing shortage – lies at the root of many other problems, and he provides a pretty full list of what those problems are. As he says, it is not the cost of bricks and mortar that has sky-rocketed, but the cost of land. We face not a housing crisis, but a land crisis. It is clearly wrong that when the state – in the guise of the local planning authority – grants permission for development on an area of land, the enormous increase in its value is largely pocketed as unearned income by the landowner, rather than going to the community whose needs and whose taxes that have paid for local infrastructure give value to land in the first place. Bowman blames the shortage on the scarcity of permissions to build, but Julia Kollewe (Report, 8 May 2021) told us that since 2010-11, permission for 2.78m houses has been given but only 1.6m have been built in the same period, prompting the suspicion that developers are holding land unused while speculating on further increase in its value, and therefore in their profits. Bowman considers various ways to fix this modern ill, but fails to mention the best one: a revenue-neutral reform of the tax system so that tax is increased on the unearned income from land, ignoring improvements, and reduced on earned income and consumption. Such a land value tax would be levied on unused land as well as other land and so would put a stop to land speculation. There would be a strong incentive to develop, the cost of land and therefore of houses would reduce, leading to real affordability, as well as to solutions of all the problems he identifies as stemming from our housing crisis. Dr Justin Robbins Yealmpton, Devon • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Keir Starmer gave Simon Hattenstone several encouraging insights into his political beliefs and intentions (‘Stop talking about the problem – fix the bloody thing!’ Keir Starmer on Boris Johnson’s parties and his plan to win power, 19 January). The interview did, however, refer to one elephant-in-the-room contradiction. Many who would like to vote Labour will disagree with him when he says there is “no case for rejoining” the EU, “we’re out and we’re staying out”, and Brexit must be “made to work from the outside”. Does Starmer not read the opinion polls on Brexit? He says that rather than talking about problems, he identifies what they are and then fixes them. One might have expected that after several years of shadowing Brexit secretaries, he would have identified the inevitable failure of a hopelessly undefined Brexit constrained by Theresa May’s red lines. How does he think he’s going to “fix” this still-open wound which is causing more and more damage to British life and young people’s prospects every day? He cannot and must not be allowed to shrug off the negative impacts of Brexit – as Boris Johnson would like him to. Brexit must be addressed honestly and positively. Labour’s electability is at stake. Graham Webb Saint-Mandé, France • Keir Starmer explicitly rules out rejoining the European single market or customs union, thereby ruling out the most realistic solution to Brexit-related problems with import costs, export barriers, food supplies, energy costs, skills shortages and the Northern Ireland protocol, while also ensuring continued long-term economic damage to the UK. The mood music may vary, but in practice Labour’s rightwing EU policy remains fully aligned with the Tories, the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) and Ukip (and its successors), as it has been for the last five years. If Labour manages to win the next election, it will find itself committed to pursuing a destructive Tory hard Brexit policy, long after the people who wanted it have died off or changed their minds. Chris Webster Gümligen, Switzerland • Surely, I cannot be the only one who thinks that the defection of Christian Wakeford from the Conservatives (Report, 20 January), just over 24 months since standing on their manifesto, and his warm welcome by Keir Starmer says as much about the rightward drift of the Labour party as it does about the chaotic nature of this reactionary and incompetent government? John Richardson Clyro, Powys • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A former employee of Qatar’s 2022 World Cup organising committee, jailed on contested corruption charges, faces fresh legal action after his former bosses withheld his severance pay meaning he will default on a loan, his family say. Abdullah Ibhais, a former media manager, was last year given a three-year sentence for misappropriating state funds – a charge that he insists was concocted as punishment for him criticising the handling of a migrant workers’ strike. Now Ibhais faces the prospect of a new lawsuit, and possibly a further prison sentence, relating to a bank loan that he can no longer service because money owed to him at the end of his employment was not paid. Ibhais and his family claim that withholding funds amounts to applying financial pressure, as he continues to claim his imprisonment stemmed from his views on the treatment of migrant labourers. The case has attracted widespread international attention since Ibhais, a Jordanian national, was found guilty of corruption last August. It has also shone a fresh light on the conditions faced by workers who have built Qatar’s World Cup stadiums over the past six years. Ibhais lost an appeal against his conviction in December and has continued to protest his innocence. A Qatari judge claimed Ibhais received a bribe when offering a tender for a social media contract. However, no evidence was submitted to the court that found him guilty. The evidence supporting his conviction was a confession made by Ibhais, which he has since retracted. Qatari officials deny any political element to the verdict and claim due process was followed in the trial and that more evidence exists that has been tabled in court. Documents obtained by the Dutch newspaper NRC show that the governing body of the 2022 World Cup, the Supreme Committee for Delivery and Legacy, wrote to Ibhais when he was fired in June 2020 claiming that his termination benefits would be paid. His family told the newspaper that is yet to happen. “They punished him because he did not want to cover up the misery of migrant workers,” said his brother, Ziyad Ibhais. Ten months earlier, Ibhais had been asked to add his weight to the claim that a strike by 5,000 migrant workers over unpaid salaries was not related to World Cup preparations. However, he demurred, and refused mounting pressure throughout the day to make a statement putting distance between organisers and the strike. He was arrested three months later and taken to a criminal investigation headquarters. Despite attempts to overhaul safety and labour conditions for the workforce that has prepared Qatar’s stadiums, human rights organisations say a raft of legislative changes are yet to lead to tangible improvements. Around 90% of Qatar’s population of 2.6 million is made up of foreigners, many of them labourers who have toiled for more than five years, often in blistering heat, to finish the stadiums and supporting infrastructure in time for the World Cup that starts on 21 November.Hundreds of letters of support have poured in for a nun in Kerala after a court acquitted a bishop accused of raping and abusing her over two years, in the first case of its kind to hit the Indian Catholic church. The handwritten letters from activists, artists, journalists, film-makers and fellow nuns across India have expressed outrage at last week’s court verdict that cleared Bishop Franco Mulakkal of all charges of sexual abuse after the judge said the victim, a 50-year-old nun, was not a “sterling witness”. Mulakkal, who headed the Roman Catholic diocese of Jalandhar, was accused of raping the nun on 13 occasions at the Missionaries of Jesus convent in Kottayam, Kerala, between 2014 and 2016. The nun took her case to police in June 2018, and in 2019 Mulakkal was formally charged with wrongful confinement, rape, unnatural sex and criminal intimidation, becoming the first Indian bishop to be arrested in connection with sexual abuse. Mulakkal denied all allegations. The landmark case exposed deep divisions and systemic flaws within the Indian Catholic church when it came to addressing allegations of sexual assault. It was only taken seriously after fellow nuns protested in support of the alleged victim. The trial, which began in 2020, lasted almost two years, and last Friday Judge G Gopakumar found Mulakkal not guilty of all charges. Gopakumar questioned why it had taken the nun so long to report the full extent of the alleged sexual abuse and expressed doubts over her testimony and motives. Gopakumar said there had been “exaggerations and embellishments” in the nun’s witness statement, and that she had been “swayed under the influence of others who had vested interests in the matter” and “made every attempt to hide certain facts”. “The in-fight and rivalry and group fights of the nuns, and the desire for power, position and control over the congregation, is evident in the case,” wrote the judge. “The claim of the victim that she was raped on 13 occasions under duress cannot be taken reliance on the basis of her solitary testimony. There is no consistency in the statement of the victim.” B Kemal Pasha, a former judge at the Kerala high court, called the verdict a miscarriage of justice, adding that a “delay in reporting such a case cannot be the reason for the acquittal”. S Harisankar, the police chief who oversaw the case, said he had “fully expected a conviction” and the verdict would “send a wrong message to society”. In an effort to show widespread support for the nuns who have been fighting the case and urging them not to be disheartened by the verdict, a letter-writing campaign began in India this week. Hundreds of handwritten letters to the nuns have been posted on social media expressing solidarity. The actor Geetu Mohandas wrote a “note of gratitude, of thanks, for standing tall to tell your story where many have been silenced.” Another actor, Rima Kallingal, spoke of how she had been inspired and strengthened by the sisters. “I will never be able to thank you enough for this new chapter for Kerala,” she wrote. The film-maker Leena Manimekalai, who is fighting her own #MeToo case of sexual harassment, wrote: “Your voice is ours, your strength is our lantern.” The film critic Anna MM Vetticad, wrote: “I stand with you in your battle for justice within an indifferent church establishment and an Indian justice system that has chosen to shame you.” The Kerala government has said it will appeal against the verdict. Sister Anupama, one of the nuns who had been the public face of the campaign, told reporters outside the court that they would “continue this fight until the day our fellow sister gets justice”.Chile’s millennial president-elect, Gabriel Boric, has named a progressive cabinet, with a ministerial team which for the first time anywhere in the Americas is dominated by women. Boric, a 35-year-old former student leader, will replace the billionaire rightwing president Sebastián Piñera on 11 March as he becomes the youngest president in Chile’s history. Fourteen women and 10 men – with an average age of 49 – were named as ministers on Friday, in a cabinet which combines experienced moderates with former leaders from the 2011 education protest movement where Boric forged his political ideals. “We have put together this group of people who are well-prepared, who have knowledge and experience, who are committed to the programme of changes that the country needs, and have the capacity to combine viewpoints, different perspectives and new visions,” said Boric at a ceremony outside Santiago’s natural history museum. As Boric sets about healing the wounds of Chile’s incomplete transition to democracy after Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship, his ministerial picks reflect his aim to build a fairer, more inclusive country. Chile’s new defence minister is the granddaughter of the socialist president Salvador Allende, who was deposed in Pinochet’s bloody 1973 coup d’état. Maya Fernández, 50, will preside over long-overdue reforms of the military that overthrew Chile’s democracy. The cabinet also includes two prominent former student protest leaders: Giorgio Jackson, 34, Boric’s political campaign adviser, will be secretary general, and Camila Vallejo, 33, a Communist party politician who preceded Boric as the leader of the University of Chile’s student union, will be the government’s spokesperson. Dr Izkia Siches, 35, the popular former head of the national medical union, will be the first woman ever to preside over Chile’s interior ministry. At 32, the new minister for women and gender equality, Antonia Orellana, is the youngest member of the cabinet. Among the moderate voices is the former Socialist party politician and current central bank chief Mario Marcel, a 62-year-old educated at the University of Cambridge, who has been named finance minister. Marcela Ríos, 55, a sociologist who has worked for the United Nations Development Programme for the majority of her career, will become justice minister. Boric’s sports minister, Alexandra Benado, 45, is a former national team footballer whose mother was murdered by state agents while she was a member of the Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR). She is the first openly lesbian minister in Chile’s history. She is the coordinator of the Londres 38 memorial, housed in a discreet townhouse in central Santiago used as a torture and execution centre by Gen Pinochet’s secret police, the Dina. Boric will be sworn in as president on 11 March.We Don’t Talk About Bruno, from the animated film Encanto, has become the first original Disney song to reach No 1 in the UK charts. Written by Hamilton creator Lin-Manuel Miranda, it has taken over the lives of children – and their parents – in much the same way as Let It Go, from Disney film Frozen, did nearly a decade ago. The ensemble song, telling the story of the mysterious uncle Bruno in Miranda’s typically rhythmic and loquacious style, is performed by Rhenzy Feliz, Adassa, Stephanie Beatriz, Mauro Castillo, Diane Guerrero and Carolina Gaitán. Another song from the soundtrack, Surface Pressure – performed by Jessica Darrow – is at No 5 this week, while The Family Madrigal, a song that introduces the rural Colombian world of the film, is at No 15. Gareth Gates, the singer who came to fame on 2002’s Pop Idol before having four UK No 1s, might argue that he had the first Disney song to reach No 1. His recording of Elvis Presley’s Suspicious Minds, one half of a double A-side single with Pop Idol winner Will Young in 2002, was included on the soundtrack to Disney film Lilo &amp; Stitch. We Don’t Talk About Bruno is therefore – strictly speaking – the first original Disney song to reach the top. The quick and explosive popularity of We Don’t Talk About Bruno, abetted by its viral manifestation on TikTok, where fans act out various characters, means it has become a chart success in a way that other Disney songs have not previously managed. The ubiquitous Let It Go was more of a slow-burn success, reaching a high of No 11 in its 70 weeks on the UK chart, beginning in 2013. Celine Dion earned her first UK Top 10 hit with her title ballad from 1992’s Beauty and the Beast, which reached No 9, while Elton John had two Top 20 hits with songs from The Lion King in 1994: Circle of Life and Can You Feel the Love Tonight. The big ballad from Aladdin, A Whole New World, reached No 12 in 1994, performed by Peabo Bryson – also Dion’s duet partner on Beauty and the Beast – and Regina Belle. It’s the biggest success yet for Miranda during his tenure at Disney, where he has frequently acted and contributed songs, beginning with 2016’s animated fable Moana. He has acted in the studio’s Mary Poppins Returns and DuckTales, written music for the final Star Wars film trilogy, and collaborated with longtime Disney songwriter Alan Menken on songs for the forthcoming live action remake of The Little Mermaid, to be released in 2023. Miranda also wrote 11 songs and provided voice acting for the Sony Pictures Animation film Vivo, released in July 2021. We Don’t Talk About Bruno knocks last week’s No 1, the sweary teen angst anthem ABCDEFU by 17-year-old singer Gayle, to No 2. Adele’s Easy on Me spends its 14th week on the chart at No 3, and Nigerian vocalist Fireboy DML’s track Peru, assisted by Ed Sheeran on a remix, rises to No 4. In the album chart, indie-poppers the Wombats earn their first No 1 with their fifth LP, Fix Yourself, Not the World.It was the week Tonga disappeared. Riveted by the shocking satellite images of the eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano and subsequent tsunami, the eyes of the world turned to the South Pacific island country, home to about 100,000 people, on Saturday. But just as the world was desperate for news from Tonga, it went dark. Damage to the undersea cable that supplies Tonga’s internet and much of its communication infrastructure has meant the extent of the damage there, and the death toll, has, for many days, gone largely unknown. Even the smallest slivers of information have been seized upon by the Tonga diaspora, desperate for news of their loved ones. The Tongan government, when it was finally able to broadcast a statement to the world three days after the disaster, announced that Tonga had suffered an “unprecedented disaster”; that the waves from the tsunami reached 15m high on some islands, and that at least three people had died. Almost one week on, much is still unknown. Calls to Tonga still do not connect, or if they do, drop out after just seconds. The internet is still almost impossible to access. And while some aid has finally landed, this is also not without its complications: with fears that aid workers could bring Covid-19 to a country that has recorded just a single case throughout the entire pandemic. This is how Tonga’s week of disaster unfolded: Saturday 15 January: ‘It was raining stones’ The air across Tonga smelled like sulphur, as it had done for weeks due to the active Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano, which lies 65km from Tonga’s capital of Nuku’alofa. At 5.10pm local time, four loud volcanic explosions rocked the country. The blasts from the volcano could be heard in Fiji and Vanuatu, where people shared videos of their homes shaking for hours. It was also felt in New Zealand, more than 2,000km away. The eruption prompted a tsunami. Later the government of Tonga would announce that on some islands, the waves were up to 15m high. Branko Sugar and his son were spearfishing on an outer reef when the volcano erupted and tsunami waves came. “We stopped the boat and just looked. Then we saw the wave coming towards us. The biggest wave I’ve ever seen,” Sugar told Reuters. Sugar turned his boat, a 400-horsepower 27-foot (8 metre) World Cat catamaran, and accelerated toward deep water near Eueiki Island. “That’s what saved us, the power of the boat,” he said. “I shouldn’t be alive.” “The wave came past us and hit the main island, and then we knew we’d managed to get away. But then the rocks started raining. It was raining stones,” he recalled. The sky turned to total darkness, as ash enveloped everything. Ash and rocks rained from the sky. Iliesa Tora, a journalist based in the capital of Nuku’alofa, who contributes to the Guardian, did a Facebook Live from his car as he was stuck in a long line of traffic trying to get to higher ground in Nuku’alofa, the capital. He turned the camera to show the darkness and falling rocks outside his car. “Pray for Tonga,” he said. Sunday 16 January: ‘Nuku’alofa is covered in thick plumes of volcanic dust’ On Sunday, there was silence. Almost all communication was shut off, as it became clear that damage had been done to Tonga’s all-important undersea communications cable. Jacinda Ardern, the prime minister of New Zealand, told a news conference that contact had not been established with coastal areas beyond the capital, Nuku’alofa. “Nuku’alofa is covered in thick plumes of volcanic dust but otherwise conditions are calm and stable,” Ardern said. Meanwhile, the volcano was making itself felt around the world. Large waves and strong currents were recorded in many coastal areas globally. Two people drowned off a beach in the Lambayeque region of Peru, after unusually high waves were recorded there. Monday 17 January: The first death The ash cloud lifted across Tongatapu, the main island of Tonga, for the first time since Saturday and blue skies were seen again. Dr Faka’iloatonga Taumoefolau, a project coordinator for the Tonga Parliament Buildings Project, tweeted a thread of images and videos on Thursday, when he was able to get a brief spot of internet. One video, taken on 17 January, showed the streets covered in ash. “I took this video because up until this point it was almost as if I had forgotten what a day was like with sunlight,” he wrote. “Heading to work for the first time after the calamity, had to help. You start to see more visibly the scale of the damage. Even the top of Mala’e Aloa [a cemetery in Nuku’alofa] wasn’t spared and fences – be it wood, plants, or brick cement – just brushed away like it was nothing.” Tongans around the world waited desperately for news. It was confirmed the communications cable was broken in two places and it could be weeks before normal services resume. “We’ve heard nothing at all,” said Seini Taumoepeau, a Tongan-Australian artist and activist based in Sydney. “I would say I’ve had four hours [of sleep each night] at the most.” News emerged on Monday of the first death from the disaster – a 50-year-old British woman named Angela Glover. Her brother described in an interview with the Guardian how Glover and her husband were swept away by the tsunami. Her husband was able to cling to a tree, but she was not. Her body was found late on Monday. Tuesday 18 January: ‘An unprecedented disaster’ The first official update from the Tongan government was published. The government called the incident an “unprecedented disaster” and confirmed three deaths: Briton Angela Glover, a 65-year-old woman from Mango island and 49-year-old man from Nomuka island, whose names have not been released. The government expressed serious concerns about water supplies being affected by volcanic ash. Meanwhile, aerial photographs were leaked from a surveillance mission undertaken by the New Zealand defence force. The images showed for the first time the scale of the damage across the islands, with some areas unaffected but for ash covering all surfaces, whereas other areas suffer from “catastrophic damage”. There were particular concerns for the remote islands of Mango, where all houses were destroyed, and Fonoifua, where just two houses remained. But the images also showed people already at work cleaning the debris and ash. One image, taken of the south-eastern runway of the Fua’amotu International Airport, showed a group of people with shovels and wheelbarrows clearing the runway, to make it safe for planes to land. Wednesday 19 January: Fears of a ‘tsunami of Covid’ The first aid shipments left for Tonga from New Zealand, amid fears that relief efforts could bring a “tsunami of Covid” to the Covid-free nation and more images begin to emerge of the damage. Some contact was restored and Pacific social media filled with relieved tweets and posts from people who have finally been able to make contact with loved ones. “I can finally get some good rest after hearing both my parents’ voices this evening,” tweeted Sera Lenora Lala. Another person tweeted: “I missed a call because I thought it was a reporter but it was my dad,” with sobbing emojis. “He left a voicemail, thank God for that! Sitting here replaying it gives me so much comfort.” Thursday 20 January: A miracle The miraculous story of Lisala Folau emerged from Tonga. Lisala Folau, a retired disabled carpenter, told Tongan radio station Broadcom FM that he swam and floated from his island of Atata via two other uninhabited islands to eventually reach the main island of Tongatapu, a total distance of around 13 kilometres. Folau’s remarkable story, which included him hearing his son call to him from the shore after he had been swept into the night but deciding not to respond because he didn’t want his son to risk his life by coming in after him, and of seeing a police rescue boat and frantically waving at it, but it not seeing him, captured global attention. People got out to the streets to assist with cleanup efforts: clearing roads of debris and ash. There were reports of people collecting the volcanic ash to use as fertiliser on their plantations, and also of people making it into speed humps on the road to encourage people to drive more slowly, so their cars would not spray ash onto people’s homes. Friday 21 January: ‘Ofa atu’ As more power was restored around the country and satellite links were established, more images and video emerged, showing the scale of the destruction and the huge rebuilding effort ahead. Roughly 20% of Tongans live below the poverty line, and the country’s GDP per capita sits at just above US$5,000. Much of the economy of the country is based on remittances, with Tongans overseas sending money back to the islands. Families in the Tonga diaspora in Australia, New Zealand and the US were already raising funds for recovery efforts and preparing for rebuilding, which is expected to take years. “Thanks for all the messages. Can’t get through them all. Limited network,” tweeted Ana Tupou Panuve, a senior economist with the National Reserve Bank of Tonga. “Country in recovery mode. ‘Ofa atu (love you).”On the wild and remote west coast of New Zealand’s South Island, an old dame is getting a hot-pink makeover, with all the synthetic flowers, coloured beads and glitter she can take. Her name is Gloria, and she is an 83-year-old church, on her way to becoming a public sculpture and “queer beacon” for the local community. “I didn’t grow up in the church, I grew up in a Jewish household, but mostly I grew up making things, and in recent years I’ve become more and more excited about queer celebration,” says poet and artist Sam Duckor-Jones. Gloria, built in 1939, was formerly the St Andrew’s Anglican Church in Greymouth, a town of roughly 14,000 people, on the map more for its mining history than mardi gras. When Duckor-Jones felt ready to move from his home north of Wellington two years ago, but struggled to find an affordable home in the capital city, he searched the internet for “the cheapest house in New Zealand”. The church, which had been unused since 2000, popped up, and Duckor-Jones promptly fell in love. He immediately set out to convert it into a “queer place of worship”, a sculpture (“not a renovation”) with 50 larger-than-life papier-mache congregation members. He will live there until the sculpture is finished, which he anticipates will take five years. What people choose to worship, or how the public wishes to use the space, is entirely up to them, but creating a place for rural queerness to thrive is top of mind. “I really want them to feel some ownership for Gloria and feel like it’s their space they can come and hang out in or keep adding to after I move on.” Gloria’s name was chosen as a hat-tip to Christian hymns, disco and a make-believe character Duckor-Jones and his brother created when they were children. “I put play at the very very top of everything that is important in the world.” And playful it is – a campy pink wonderland with tinsel curtains and a neon “Gloria” sign. “I’ve always really enjoyed pink. Also, I like pushing a little bit of pink on the world. It’s not subtle – it says, ‘look at me’. It’s got its whole history with queerness, pride, gay liberation and gender. It is really powerful that people have strong feelings about pink, like they have about no other colour.” When Duckor-Jones speaks of Gloria, he does so with the same reverence held for an elder, or a person with a character of their own. “I’m a nice, warm person but I’ve never been very good at participation in the community. But Gloria just wouldn’t have a bar of that attitude. People are just coming from far and wide and want to celebrate her with me.” Since embarking on the project, local residents have been popping by, offering tools, relaying local history and embracing the bright queer beacon emerging on their quiet street. “I wanted Gloria to belong to the community, because I thought, at some point someone will do something stupid, like tag it or burn it down, and I want the community to be as outraged as well,” he says with a laugh. Reclamation of traditional spaces and practices by queer communities has a long history, as does the collision of rural locales and queerness in popular culture. Duckor-Jones’ project has already drawn parallels with the English artist Derek Jarman’s Dungeness home, the gay activist group Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence and the cult drag film Priscilla Queen of the Desert. “I like promoting a kind of quiet fabulosity,” Duckor-Jones says. “I really like sitting by myself crocheting but wearing, you know, a pink silk gown with some mascara, listening to Judy [Garland].” “Gloria is kind of a representation of that – of being glittery and ridiculous and over the top, in small town New Zealand, in a quiet little corner where it rains a lot. Take that, Sydney.” This article was amended on 27 January to correct the original name of the church to St Andrew’s Anglican Church.